VILLAGE OF MAHOMET, ILLINOIS
CODE OF ORDINANCES
2025 S-12 Supplement contains:
Local legislation current through Ord. 25-11-01, passed 11-25-2025
State legislation current through 2024 Illinois Legislative Service Pamphlet #5
 
Published by:
American Legal Publishing
525 Vine Street, Suite 310
Cincinnati, Ohio 45202
1-800-445-5588  www.amlegal.com 
ADOPTING ORDINANCES
ORDINANCE NO. 11-03-01
AN ORDINANCE ADOPTING THE VILLAGE CODE OF ORDINANCES OF THE VILLAGE OF MAHOMET,
ILLINOIS
   BE IT ORDAINED by the President and Board of Trustees of the Village of
Mahomet, Champaign County, Illinois, as follows:
   Section 1. From and after the date of passage of this Ordinance, the Village
Code of the Village of Mahomet, Illinois (the "Village Code") prepared by
American Legal Publishing Corporation, containing the compilation of all
ordinances of a general nature together with the changes made to said
ordinances, under the direction of the governing body of the Village, shall be
accepted in all courts without question as the official code and law of the
Village as enacted by the President and Board of Trustees.
   Section 2. There is hereby adopted, as a method of perpetual codification,
the loose-leaf type of binding together with the continuous supplement service,
provided by American Legal Publishing Corporation, whereby each newly adopted
ordinance of a general and permanent nature amending, altering, adding or
deleting provisions of the official Village Code is identified by the proper
catchline and is inserted in the proper place in each of the official copies,
one copy of which shall be maintained in the office of the Village Clerk,
certified as to correctness and available for inspection at any and all times
that said office is regularly open.
   Section 3. All ordinances of a general nature included in this official
Village Code shall be considered as a continuation of said ordinance provision
and the fact that some provisions have been deliberately eliminated by the
governing body shall not serve to cause any interruptions in the continuous
effectiveness of ordinances included in said official Village Code. All
ordinances of a special nature, such as tax levy ordinances, bond ordinances,
franchises, vacating ordinances and annexation ordinances shall continue in
full force and effect unless specifically repealed or amended by a provision of
the Village Code. Such ordinances are not intended to be included in the
official Village Code.
   Section 4. It shall be unlawful for any person, firm, or corporation to
change or amend by additions or deletions, any part or portion of such Village
Code, or to insert or delete pages or portions thereof, or to alter or tamper
with such Village Code in any manner whatsoever which will cause the law of the
Village to be misrepresented thereby.
   Section 5. Any other ordinances or portion thereof which may be inconsistent
or in conflict with this ordinance are hereby repealed. If any of the
provisions of this ordinance shall be held to be invalid, it shall not be
construed to invalidate the other provisions of this ordinance.
   Section 6. This ordinance shall be in full force and effect immediately
after its passage, approval and publication as required by law. This ordinance
shall be published in pamphlet form as provided by state statute.
   Upon motion by Trustee DeReus, seconded by Trustee Cook, PASSED by the
President and Board of Trustees of the Village of Mahomet, Illinois this 22nd
day of March, 2011, by roll call vote, follows:
      Voting "aye" (names):    6
      Voting "nay" (names):    0
      Abstained (names):      0
                     APPROVED this 22nd day of March, A.D. 2011.
                                    /s/ Debra Braunig
                                    Village President
(SEAL) Attest:
/s/ Cheryl Sproul
Village Clerk
TITLE I: GENERAL PROVISIONS
   Chapter
      
10.   GENERAL CODE CONSTRUCTION; GENERAL PENALTY
CHAPTER 10: GENERAL CODE CONSTRUCTION; GENERAL PENALTY
Section
   
10.01   Title of code
   
10.02   Definitions
   
10.03   Section headings
   
10.04   Rules of construction
   
10.05   Official time
   
10.06   Revivor; effect of amendment or repeal
   
10.07   Reference to other sections
   
10.08   Conflicting provisions
   
10.09   Amendments to code
   
10.10   Severability
   
10.11   Reference to public office or officer
   
10.12   Errors and omissions
   
10.13   Ordinances repealed
   
10.14   Ordinances unaffected
   
10.15   Ordinances saved
   
10.16   Technical codes
   
10.17   Historical and statutory references
 
   
10.99   General penalty
§ 10.01 TITLE OF CODE.
   This codification by and for the Village of Mahomet shall be designated as
the code of Mahomet, and may be so cited.
§ 10.02 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this code, the following definitions shall apply unless
the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ANOTHER. When used to designate the owner of property which is the subject
of an offense, includes not only natural persons but also every other owner of
property.
   BOARD OF TRUSTEES or VILLAGE BOARD. The Board of Trustees of the village.
   COUNTY. Champaign County, Illinois.
   COUNTY BOARD. The County Board of Champaign County, Illinois.
(ILCS Ch. 5, Act 70, § 1.07)
   COURT. Construed to mean any court of competent jurisdiction.
   DECREE. Synonymous with JUDGMENT.  
(ILCS Ch. 5, Act 70, § 1.24)
   ELECTORS. Persons qualified to vote for elective officers at municipal
elections.
(ILCS Ch. 65, Act 5, § 1-1-2)
   EXECUTIVE OFFICER. Words used for an executive or ministerial officer may
include any deputy or other person performing the duties of that officer,
either generally or in special cases.
(ILCS Ch. 5, Act 70, § 1.08)
   HERETOFORE or HEREAFTER.  HERETOFORE means any time previous to the day on
which the ordinance, resolution or statute takes effect; HEREAFTER means at any
time after that date.
(ILCS Ch. 5, Act 70, § 1.17)
   HIGHWAY, ROAD or STREET. May include any road laid out by authority of the
United States, or of this state, or of any town or county of this state, and
all bridges thereupon.
(ILCS Ch. 5, Act 70, § 1.16)
   ILCS. Illinois Compiled Statutes, 1992, as heretofore and hereafter amended.
   KEEPER or PROPRIETOR. Includes all persons, whether acting by themselves, or
as a servant, agent or employee.
   LAND or REAL ESTATE. Includes rights and easements of an incorporeal nature.
   MAY. The act referred to is permissive.
   MAYOR. The President of the Village of Mahomet.
   MONTH. A calendar month.
(ILCS Ch. 5, Act 70, § 1.10)
   MUNICIPAL CODE. The Illinois Municipal Code, ILCS Ch. 65, Act 5.
   OATH. Includes affirmation, and SWEAR includes affirm.
(ILCS Ch. 5, Act 70, § 1.12)
   OWNER. When applied to property, includes any part owner, joint owner,
purchaser and seller under a contract and/or deed, or tenant in common of the
whole or part of the property, and includes any beneficiary of a land trust
which owns property.
   PERSON. Any legal person; includes associations, partnerships, corporations,
joint ventures and bodies politic and corporate as well as individuals.
(ILCS Ch. 5, Act 70, § 1.05)
   PERSONAL PROPERTY. Includes all property except real.
   POLICE OFFICERS. Police officers employed and in the service of the Village
of Mahomet. POLICE FORCE shall be construed to include those persons in the
employ of a village as members of the Department of Police, who are or shall
hereafter be appointed and sworn as POLICE OFFICERS.
(ILCS Ch. 5, Act 70, § 1.20)
   PREMISES. As applied to property, includes land and buildings.
   PROPERTY. Includes real, personal, mixed estates and other interests.
   PUBLIC AUTHORITY. Includes school districts; units of legal government; the
village, county, state or federal governments, officers and agencies thereof,
or any commissions or committees thereof; or any duly authorized public
official.
   PUBLIC PLACE. Includes any street, sidewalk, park, cemetery, school yard,
body of water or watercourse, public conveyance or any other place for the sale
of merchandise, public accommodation or amusement.
   REAL PROPERTY. Includes lands, tenements and hereditaments.
   REGISTERED MAIL. Includes certified mail and CERTIFIED MAIL includes
registered mail.
   SHALL. The act referred to is mandatory.
   SIDEWALK. The portion of the street between the curb lines, or the lateral
lines of a roadway, and the adjacent property lines, intended for use of
pedestrians.
(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-188)
   SPECIAL DISTRICTS. The meaning ascribed in Article VII of the Constitution
of the State of Illinois of 1970.
(ILCS Ch. 5, Act 70, § 1.29)
   STATE. The State of Illinois.
   STREET. Where the context admits, includes alleys, lanes, courts,
boulevards, squares and other public thoroughfares.
   TENANT or OCCUPANT. As applied to premises, includes any person holding a
written or oral lease, or who actually occupies the whole or any part of the
premises, alone or with others.
   THIS CODE or THIS CODE OF ORDINANCES. The village code hereby adopted, and
as hereinafter modified by amendment, revision and by the adoption of new
titles, chapters or sections.
   UNITS OF LOCAL GOVERNMENT. The meaning established in § 1 of Article VII of
the Constitution of the State of Illinois of 1970.
(ILCS Ch. 5, Act 70, § 1.28)
   WEEK. Seven consecutive days.
   VILLAGE. The Village of Mahomet.
   WHOEVER. Includes all persons, natural and artificial; partners; principals,
agents and employees; and all officials, public or private.
   WRITTEN or IN WRITING. May include printing, electronic, and any other mode
of representing words and letters; but when the written signature of any person
is required by law on any official or public writing or bond, required by law,
it shall be (1) the proper handwriting of such person or, in case he is unable
to write, his proper mark or (2) an electronic signature as defined in the
Uniform Electronic Transactions Act, except as otherwise provided by law.
(ILCS Ch. 5, Act 70, § 1.15)
   YEAR. A calendar year unless otherwise expressed; and the word YEAR alone is
equivalent to the expression “Year of Our Lord”.
(ILCS Ch. 5, Act 70, § 1.10)
§ 10.03 SECTION HEADINGS.
   Headings and captions used in this code are employed for reference purposes
only and shall not be deemed a part of the text of any section.
§ 10.04 RULES OF CONSTRUCTION.
   (A)   Words and phrases shall be read in context and construed according to
the rules of grammar and common usage. Words and phrases that have acquired a
technical or particular meaning, whether by legislative or judicial definition
or otherwise, shall be construed accordingly.
   (B)   As used in this code, unless the context otherwise requires, the
following rules will be followed.
      (1)   The singular shall include the plural, and the plural shall include
the singular.
(ILCS Ch. 5, Act 70, § 1.03)
      (2)   Words of one gender shall include the other genders.
(ILCS Ch. 5, Act 70, § 1.04)
      (3)   Words in the present tense shall include the future.
(ILCS Ch. 5, Act 70, § 1.02)
      (4)   AND may be read OR, and OR may be read AND, if the context admits.
   (C)   The time within which any act provided by law is to be done shall be
computed by excluding the first day and including the last, unless the last day
is Saturday or Sunday or is a holiday as defined or fixed in any statute now or
hereafter in force in this state, and then it shall also be excluded. If the
day succeeding Saturday, Sunday or a holiday is also a holiday or a Saturday or
Sunday, then the succeeding day shall also be excluded.
(ILCS Ch. 5, Act 70, § 1.11)
   (D)   When the law requires an act to be done which may by law as well be
done by an agent as by the principal, the requirement shall be construed to
include all the acts when done by an authorized agent.
   (E)   Words purporting to give joint authority to three or more municipal
officers or other persons shall be construed as giving authority to a majority
of the officers or persons.
(ILCS Ch. 5, Act 70, § 1.09)
   (F)   These rules of construction shall not apply to any provision of this
code which shall contain any express provision excluding that construction, or
when the subject matter or context of this code may be repugnant thereto.
   (G)   All general provisions, terms, phrases and expressions shall be
liberally construed in order that the true intent and meaning of the President
and Board of Trustees may be fully carried out.
(ILCS Ch. 5, Act 70, § 1.01)
   (H)   The provisions of any ordinance, in so far as they are the same as
those of any prior ordinance, shall be construed as a continuation of the prior
provisions, and not as a new enactment.
(ILCS Ch. 5, Act 70, § 2)
§ 10.05 OFFICIAL TIME.
   The official time for the village shall be as set by federal law.
§ 10.06 REVIVOR; EFFECT OF AMENDMENT OR REPEAL.
   (A)   The repeal of a repealing ordinance does not revive the ordinance
originally repealed, nor impair the effect of any saving clause therein.
   (B)   The reenactment, amendment or repeal of an ordinance does not do any
of the following, except as provided in division (C) of this section:
      (1)   Affect the prior operation of the ordinance or any prior action
taken thereunder;
      (2)   Affect any validation, cure, right, privilege, obligation or
liability previously acquired, accrued, accorded or incurred thereunder;
      (3)   Affect any violation thereof or penalty, forfeiture or punishment
incurred in respect thereto, prior to the amendment or repeal; or
      (4)   Affect any investigation, proceeding, or remedy in respect of any
privilege, obligation, liability, penalty, forfeiture or punishment. The
investigation, proceeding or remedy may be instituted, continued or enforced,
and the penalty, forfeiture or punishment imposed, as if the ordinance had not
been repealed or amended.
   (C)   If the penalty, forfeiture or punishment for any offense is reduced by
a reenactment or amendment of an ordinance, the penalty, forfeiture or
punishment, if not already imposed, shall be imposed according to the ordinance
as amended.
§ 10.07 REFERENCE TO OTHER SECTIONS.
   (A)   Wherever in a penalty section reference is made to a violation of a
section or an inclusive group of sections, the reference shall be construed to
mean a violation of any provision of the section or sections included in the
reference.
   (B)   References in this code to action taken or authorized under designated
sections of this code include, in every case, action taken or authorized under
the applicable legislative provision which is superseded by this code.
   (C)   Whenever in one section reference is made to another section hereof,
the reference shall extend and apply to the section referred to as subsequently
amended, revised, recodified or renumbered unless the subject matter is changed
or materially altered by the amendment or revision and the context clearly
indicates that the reference to the section as amended or revised was not
intended.
§ 10.08 CONFLICTING PROVISIONS.
   If the provisions of different codes, chapters or sections of these codified
ordinances conflict with or contravene each other, the provisions bearing the
latest passage date shall prevail. If the conflicting provisions bear the same
passage date, the conflict shall be construed so as to be consistent with the
meaning or legal effect of the questions of the subject matter taken as a
whole.
§ 10.09 AMENDMENTS TO CODE.
   All ordinances passed subsequent to this code which amend, repeal or in any
way affect this code may be numbered in accordance with the numbering system of
this code and printed for inclusion herein, or in the case of repealed
chapters, sections and divisions, or any part thereof, by subsequent
ordinances, the repealed portions may be excluded from the code by the omission
from reprinted pages affected thereby, and the subsequent ordinances as
numbered and printed or omitted, in the case of repeal, shall be prima facie
evidence of subsequent ordinances until this code of ordinances and subsequent
ordinances numbered or omitted are readopted as a new code of ordinances by the
Board of Trustees.
§ 10.10 SEVERABILITY.
   If any provisions of a section of these codified ordinances or the
application thereof to any person or circumstance is held invalid, the
invalidity shall not affect other provisions or applications of the section or
related sections which can be given effect without the invalid provision or
application, and to this end the provisions are severable.
§ 10.11 REFERENCE TO PUBLIC OFFICE OR OFFICER.
   Reference to a public office or officer shall be deemed to apply to any
office, officer or employee of the village exercising the powers, duties or
functions contemplated in the provision, irrespective of any transfer of
functions or change in the official title of the functionary. These references
shall also include the designee or agent of the officer or office, unless the
law or the context clearly requires otherwise.
§ 10.12 ERRORS AND OMISSIONS.
   If a manifest error is discovered consisting of the misspelling of any word
or words, the omission of any word or words necessary to express the intention
of the provisions affected, the use of a word or words to which no meaning can
be attached, or the use of a word or words when another word or words was
clearly intended to express the intent, the spelling shall be corrected, and
the word or words supplied, omitted or substituted as will conform with the
manifest intention, and the provision shall have the same effect as though the
correct words were contained in the text as originally published. No alteration
shall be made or permitted if any question exists regarding the nature or
extent of the error.
§ 10.13 ORDINANCES REPEALED.
   This code, from and after its effective date, shall contain all of the
provisions of a general nature pertaining to the subjects herein enumerated and
embraced. All prior ordinances pertaining to the subjects treated by this code
shall be deemed repealed from and after the effective date of this code of
ordinances.
§ 10.14 ORDINANCES UNAFFECTED.
   All ordinances of a temporary or special nature (including but not limited
to tax levy ordinances; appropriation ordinances; ordinances relating to
boundaries and annexations; franchise ordinances and other ordinances granting
special rights to persons or corporations; contract ordinances and ordinances
authorizing the execution of a contract or the issuance of warrants; salary
ordinances; ordinances establishing, naming or vacating streets, alleys or
other public places; improvement ordinances; bond ordinances; ordinances
relating to elections; ordinances relating to the transfer or acceptance of
real estate by or from the village; and all special ordinances) as well as any
other ordinances pertaining to subjects not enumerated and embraced in this
code of ordinances, shall remain in full force and effect unless herein
repealed expressly or by necessary implication.
§ 10.15 ORDINANCES SAVED.
   Whenever an ordinance by its nature either authorizes or enables the Board
of Trustees or a certain village officer or employee to make additional
regulations for the purpose of carrying out the intent of the ordinance, all
regulations of a similar nature serving that purpose effected prior to the
codification and not inconsistent thereto, shall remain in effect and are
saved.
§ 10.16 TECHNICAL CODES.
   Whenever any technical codes are incorporated herein by reference, any
subsequent amendments or revisions to the technical codes shall automatically
become a part of this code and shall be made available for public inspection by
the village. Further, to the extent of any conflict between the technical
provisions of this code and any technical codes adopted by reference, the most
restrictive provision shall prevail.
§ 10.17 HISTORICAL AND STATUTORY REFERENCES.
   (A)   As histories for the code sections, the specific number and passage
date of the original ordinance, and amending ordinances, if any, are listed
following the text of the code section. Example: (Ord. 10, passed 5-13-1960;
Ord. 15, passed 1-1-1970; Ord. 20, passed 1-1-1980; Ord. 25, passed 1-1-1985)
   (B)   An “ILCS” cite included in the history indicates that the text of the
section reads either verbatim or substantially the same as the statute.
Example:
(ILCS Ch. 65, Act 5, § 3.1-2-1)
   (C)   An “ILCS” cite set forth as a “statutory reference” following the text
of the section indicates that the reader should refer to that statute for
further information. Example:
   § 38.04 PUBLIC RECORDS AVAILABLE.
      The village shall make available to any person for inspection or copying
all public records, as provided in the Illinois Freedom of Information Act.
   Statutory reference:
      Freedom of Information Act, see ILCS Ch. 5, Act 140, §§ 1 et seq.
§ 10.99 GENERAL PENALTY.
   Whoever violates any provision of this code or other ordinance of this
village for which another penalty is not specifically provided shall be fined
not more than $750 for each and every violation thereof, and every day the
violation continues shall constitute a separate offense.
Statutory reference:
   Authority to imprison for certain ordinance violations, see ILCS Ch. 65, Act
5, § 1-2-1.1
   Limitations on penalties and collection upon default in payment, see ILCS
Ch. 65, Act 5, § 1-2-1
TITLE III: ADMINISTRATION
   Chapter
      
30.   GENERAL PROVISIONS
      
31.   VILLAGE OFFICIALS
      
32.   TAX AND FINANCE
      
33.   VILLAGE ORGANIZATIONS
      
34.   VILLAGE POLICIES
      
35.   MINIMUM FINE SCHEDULE
CHAPTER 30: GENERAL PROVISIONS
Section
   
30.01   Village logo
 
   
30.99   Penalty
§ 30.01 VILLAGE LOGO.
   (A)   The foregoing recitals are incorporated herein as findings of the
Board of Trustees.
   (B)   (1)   The official village logo (“village logo”) shall consist of a
capital letter “M” with a river running through the middle of the “M” to
represent the Sangamon River which is surrounded by green to represent the
city’s green space and recreational aspects of the community, and two white
strips at the base of the “M” to represent the village’s proximity to
Interstate Highways 72 and 74.
      (2)   Variations of the village logo may appear (e.g., in square or
shield outlines) with the name and slogan of the department or organization so
authorized to use it.
   (C)   The village logo shall be used only for the official business of the
village and its various departments, except that the village logo, or a
variation thereof, may be used for the official business of the Village Area
Chamber of Commerce, Mahomet Public Library, Mahomet Seymour Community Unit
School District (CUSD) No. 3 or other department, organization or entity
granted prior written approval by the Village Administrator.
(Ord. 08-06, passed 6-24-2008) Penalty, see §
30.99
§ 30.99 PENALTY.
   Any person or entity using the village logo, or a variation thereof, in a
manner inconsistent with §
30.01(C) shall be subject to a minimum mandatory fine of not less than $100 or
more than $750 per day. Each day that the unauthorized use continues shall
constitute a separate and distinct violation or offense.
(Ord. 08-06, passed 6-24-2008)
CHAPTER 31: VILLAGE OFFICIALS
Section
   
31.01   Deputy Clerk
   
31.02   Village Clerk
   
31.03   Village Collector
   
31.04   Village Administrator
   
31.05   Village Planner; creation and nature of position
   
31.06   Village President and Board of Trustees
   
31.07   Chief of Police
   
31.08   Deputy Chief of Police
   
31.09   Planner II; creation and nature of position
   
31.10   Finance and Human Resource Director
    
31.11   Electronic attendance
   § 31.01 DEPUTY CLERK.
   (A)   Under and pursuant to ILCS Ch. 65, Act 5, § 3.1-30-10, the Village
Clerk is hereby authorized to appoint one Deputy Clerk.
   (B)   The Deputy Clerk so appointed by the Village Clerk shall have the
powers of a Deputy Clerk set forth in ILCS Ch. 65, Act 5, § 3.1-30-10, to be
exercised only in the absence of the Village Clerk from the place where the
Village Clerk’s office is maintained, and only when either written direction
has been given by the Village Clerk to the Deputy to exercise the power, or the
village’s corporate authorities have determined by resolution that the Village
Clerk is temporarily or permanently incapacitated to perform the function, as
follows: the Deputy Clerk shall have the power and duty to execute all
documents required by any law to be executed by the Village Clerk, and affix
the seal of the Village Clerk thereto wherever required, and in signing any
document, the Deputy Clerk shall sign the name of the Village Clerk followed
with the word “By” and the Deputy Clerk’s own name and the words “Deputy
Clerk”.
   (C)   The execution of any document described in division (B) above shall be
conclusive evidence that the Village Clerk was absent from the place where the
Village Clerk’s office is maintained and that the Deputy Clerk has been given
written direction from the Village Clerk to exercise the power of a Deputy
Clerk to execute the document.
(Ord. 86-5-1, passed 5-3-1986)
§ 31.02 VILLAGE CLERK.
   (A)   Pursuant to provisions of § 3-5-9, Chapter 24, Ill. Rev. Stat. (1987)
the Village Clerk shall be appointed by the Village President with the
concurrence of the Village Board.
   (B)   The Village Clerk shall serve a one-year term, or until his or her
successor is appointed and qualified, as provided by statute.
   (C)   The Village Clerk shall have duties as the Board of Trustees shall
from time to time provide in accordance with applicable statutes, and the
following duties:
      (1)   Keep accounts showing all monies received by him or her and the
source and disposition thereof and other accounts as may be required by statute
or ordinance, and further he or she shall turn over the monies received by him
or her on behalf of the village to the Village Treasurer promptly upon receipt
of same and, with monies, he or she shall give a statement as to the source
thereof;
      (2)   Keep a register of all licenses and permits issued and payments
thereon; a record showing all of the officers and regular employees of the
village; and other records as may be required by the Board of Trustees;
      (3)   Seal and attest all village contracts, licenses, permits and other
documents as shall require this formality;
      (4)   File the minutes and records of the Board of Trustees and its
committees and subcommittees proceedings; and
      (5)   Other duties and functions as may be required by statute or
ordinance.
   (D)   The salary for the Village Clerk shall be fixed by the Village Board
of Trustees as per the annual appropriations ordinance.
(Ord. 88-12-02, passed 12-21-1988)
§ 31.03 VILLAGE COLLECTOR.
   (A)   Pursuant to provisions of §§ 3-4-19 and 3-11-28, Chapter 24, Ill. Rev.
Stat. (1987), the Village Clerk shall be appointed Village Collector by the
Village President with the advice and consent of the Village Board.
   (B)   The Village Collector shall serve a one-year term, or until his or her
successor is appointed and qualified, as provided by statute.
   (C)   The Village Collector shall have duties as the Board of Trustees shall
from time to time provide in accordance with applicable statutes, and the
following duties:
      (1)   Compute, bill and collect all water usage statements for the
village;
      (2)   Compute, bill and collect all garbage collection fees for the
village;
      (3)   Compute, bill and collect all sewerage usage statements for the
village;
      (4)   File all liens for unpaid water, sewerage usage statements and
garbage collection fees;
      (5)   Act as Secretary of the Public Works Hearing Committee;
      (6)   Maintain and keep up-to-date records of the village’s water and
sewerage usage statements and garbage collection fees;
      (7)   To attend meetings of the Public Works Committee as requested and
provide the Committee with assistance and information as necessary; and
      (8)   Other duties as from time to time may be mutually agreed upon by
the Board of Trustees and the Village Collector.
   (D)   The salary for the Village Collector shall be fixed by the Village
Board of Trustees as per the annual appropriations ordinance.
(Ord. 88-12-03, passed 12-21-1988)
§ 31.04 VILLAGE ADMINISTRATOR.
   (A)   Creation and nature of position.
      (1)   There is hereby created the position of Village Administrator. The
Village Administrator shall be appointed by the President, by and with the
advice and consent of the Board of Trustees pursuant to § 3.1-30-5 of the
Illinois Municipal Code. The Village Administrator shall have qualifications
substantially equivalent to those of a city manager, including educational and
professional training and/or experience in administrative and management
principles and procedures. The statutory provisions of § 3.1-35-10 of the
Illinois Municipal Code are hereby made expressly applicable to the position of
Village Administrator.
      (2)   The Village Administrator shall receive compensation as shall be
fixed from time to time by ordinance or resolution.
   (B)   Duties generally. The duties of the Village Administrator shall be:
      (1)   To aid and assist the President and Board of Trustees in the
formulation and development of policies, programs and procedures, as
established by the President and Board of Trustees and to supervise and
administer the implementation of the policies, programs and procedures;
      (2)   To recommend to the President and Board of Trustees the appointment
of heads of all departments and divisions subject to appointment by the
President and Board of Trustees and to supervise the work of the department or
division heads and all other employees of the village;
      (3)   To serve as Budget Director, as those duties may be provided for by
ordinance or resolution;
      (4)   To provide for the development and dissemination of sufficient
information relating to the business of the village;
      (5)   To direct the general operations and business of all departments
and divisions of the village, and to provide for communications within the
village among the various departments and divisions, and to provide for
coordinated planning of the various activities and duties thereof, provided
that nothing herein shall be construed to remove direction and supervision
vested in the Village Treasurer or Village Clerk by statute or ordinance, nor
shall this chapter be construed as altering the lawful powers and duties of the
President and Board of Trustees;
      (6)   To assist the President and Board of Trustees in the enforcement of
all laws and ordinances within the municipality; and
      (7)   To perform other duties as may be directed by the President and
Board of Trustees.
(Ord. 00-8-6, passed 8-29-2000)
§ 31.05 VILLAGE PLANNER; CREATION AND NATURE OF POSITION.
   There is hereby created the position of Village Planner. The Village Planner
shall be employed as a department head and shall be appointed by the President,
with the advice and consent of the Board of Trustees pursuant to §
31.04. The Village Planner shall have qualifications substantially equivalent
to those of a city planner, including, but not limited to, educational and
professional training and/or experience in planning, plan review and land use
principles and procedures.
(Ord. 07-10-01, passed 10-16-2007)
§ 31.06 VILLAGE PRESIDENT AND BOARD OF TRUSTEES.
   Effective for new terms in April, 2009, the salaries of certain elected
officials of the village shall be as follows.
   (A)   President. The salary of the President shall be in a monthly sum to be
determined by the Board of Trustees from time to time, plus an amount per month
for expenses.
   (B)   Trustees. The salary of members of the Board of Trustees shall be in a
monthly sum to be determined by the Board of Trustees from time to time, plus
an amount per month per attended Board Study Session.
(Ord. 08-10-01, passed 10-28-2008)
§ 31.07 CHIEF OF POLICE.
   (A)   Creation and nature of position.
      (1)   There is hereby created the position of Chief of Police. The Chief
of Police shall be appointed by the President, by and with the advice and
consent of the Board of Trustees pursuant to § 3.1-30-5 of the Illinois
Municipal Code. Any such appointment of the Chief of Police shall not be made
by the Board of Fire and Police Commissioners pursuant to § 10-2.1-4 of the
Illinois Municipal Code. The statutory provisions of § 3.1-35-10 of the
Illinois Municipal Code are hereby made expressly applicable to the position of
Chief of Police.
      (2)   The Chief of Police shall receive such compensation as shall be
fixed from time to time by ordinance or resolution.
   (B)   Duties generally. The duties of the Chief of Police shall be:
      (1)   To direct the general operations and business of the Police
Department of the village;
      (2)   To enforce all laws and ordinances within the village;
      (3)   To keep such records and make such reports concerning the
activities of the Police Department as may be required by law or by ordinance;
      (4)   To perform such other duties as may be directed by the President
and Board of Trustees and the Administrative Officer.
(Ord. 13-04-01, passed 4-30-2013)
§ 31.08 DEPUTY CHIEF OF POLICE.
   There is hereby created the position of Deputy Chief of Police. The Deputy
Chief of Police will be responsible for those duties as assigned by the Chief
of Police, as well as, supervision and management of the police department in
the absence of the Chief of Police.
(Ord. 17-02-01, passed 2-28-2017)
§ 31.09 PLANNER II; CREATION AND NATURE OF POSITION.
   There is hereby created the position of Planner II. The Planner II will be
responsible for researching, analyzing, and preparing reports and planning
graphics; preparing meeting agendas and case materials; developing
recommendations for zoning and land use development cases; participating in
public meetings held by village boards and commissions; drafting ordinance
changes; producing graphics and map exhibits; inputting, analyzing and using
GIS based data; and, serving as the initial point of contact on zoning and
compliance inquiries.
(Ord. 16-12-01, passed 12-21-2016)
§ 31.10 FINANCE AND HUMAN RESOURCE DIRECTOR.
   There is hereby created the position of Finance and Human Resource Director
who shall be appointed by and report to the Village Administrator. The Finance
and Human Resource Director will be responsible for activities related to
financial matters including professional accounting, payroll, debt management
and administration, budgeting, forecasting, auditing, financial planning, risk
management and human resource functions and other duties as may be assigned by
the Village Administrator.
(Ord. 18-02-06, passed 2-27-2018)
§ 31.11 ELECTRONIC ATTENDANCE.
   (A)   Rules statement. It is the decision of the village that the President
and any member of the Board of Trustees of the village ("Board") may attend any
open or closed meeting of the Board via electronic means (such as by telephone,
video or internet connection) provided that such attendance is in compliance
with these rules and any applicable laws.
   (B)   Prerequisites. A member of the Board may attend a meeting
electronically if the member meets the following conditions:
      (1)   The member should notify the Village Clerk at least three hours
before the meeting, unless impractical, so that necessary communications
equipment can be arranged. Inability to make the necessary technical
arrangements will result in denial of a request for remote attendance.
      (2)   The member must assert one of the following four reasons why he or
she is unable to physically attend the meeting:
         (a)   The member cannot attend because of personal illness or
disability;
         (b)   The member cannot attend because of employment purposes or the
business of the village;
         (c)   The member cannot attend because of a family or other emergency;
or
         (d)   The member cannot attend because of unexpected childcare
obligations.
   (C)   Authorization to participate.
      (1)   The Village Clerk, after receiving the electronic attendance
request, shall inform the Board of the request for electronic attendance.
      (2)   After establishing that there is a quorum physically present at a
meeting where a member of the Board desires to attend electronically, the
presiding officer shall state that: (i) a notice was received from a member of
the Board in accordance with these rules; and (ii) the member will be deemed
authorized to attend the meeting electronically unless a motion objecting to
the member's electronic attendance is made, seconded and approved by two-thirds
of the members of the Board physically present at the meeting. If no such
motion is made and seconded or if any such motion fails to achieve the required
vote by the members of the Board physically present at the meeting, then the
request by the member to attend the meeting electronically shall be deemed
approved by the Board and the presiding officer shall declare the requesting
member present. After such declaration by the presiding officer, the question
of a member's electronic attendance may not be reconsidered.
   (D)   Adequate equipment required. The member participating electronically
and other members of the Board must be able to communicate effectively, and
members of the audience must be able to hear all communications at the meeting
site. Before allowing electronic attendance at any meeting, the Board shall
provide equipment adequate to accomplish this objective at the meeting site.
   (E)   Minutes. Any member attending electronically shall be considered an
offsite attendee and counted as present electronically for that meeting if the
member is allowed to attend. The meeting minutes shall also reflect and state
specifically whether each member is physically present or present by electronic
means.
   (F)   Rights of remote member. 
      (1)   A member permitted to attend electronically will be able to express
his or her comments during the meeting and participate in the same capacity as
those members physically present, subject to all general meeting guidelines and
procedures previously adopted and adhered to. The member attending
electronically shall be heard, considered, and counted as to any vote taken.
Accordingly, the name of any member attending electronically shall be called
during any vote taken, and his or her vote counted and recorded by the Village
Clerk and placed in the minutes for the corresponding meeting. A member
attending electronically may leave a meeting and return as in the case of any
member, provided the member attending electronically shall announce his or her
leaving and returning.
      (2)   If the President is attending the meeting electronically, a member
who is physically present shall be chosen by a majority of the corporate
authorities attending the meeting to preside over the meeting. Such member
shall have only the rights and duties of a presiding officer, not Mayor Pro
Tem, and shall be entitled to vote only as a member. The mayor shall retain his
right to vote as provided by applicable law.
   (G)   Committees, Boards and Commissions. These rules shall apply to all
committees, boards and commissions established by authority of the Board.
(Ord. 22-11-08, passed 11-22-2022; Ord. 23-09-02, passed 9-26-2023)
CHAPTER 32: TAX AND FINANCE
Section
Municipal Utility Tax
   
32.01   Title
   
32.02   Definitions
   
32.03   Imposition
   
32.04   Exemptions to tax
   
32.05   Tax in addition to other municipal taxes or fees
   
32.06   Taxpayer’s return
   
32.07   Collection of tax to be paid by purchasers
   
32.08   Effective date
Miscellaneous Taxes
   
32.20   Hotel rooms tax
   
32.21   Telecommunications tax
   
32.22   Cable and video service provider fee
   
32.23   Grocery tax
 
   
32.99   Penalty
MUNICIPAL UTILITY TAX
§ 32.01 TITLE.
   This subchapter shall be known and cited as the “Mahomet Utility Tax
Ordinance”. The tax imposed by this subchapter shall be known as the “Municipal
Utility Tax” and is imposed in addition to all other taxes imposed by the
village, the state or any other municipal corporation or political subdivision
thereof.
(Ord. 98-7-1, passed 7-28-1998)
§ 32.02 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ACT. Section 8-11-2 of the Illinois Municipal Code (ILCS Ch. 65, Act 5, § 8-
11-2).
   CORPORATE AUTHORITIES. The President and Board of Trustees of the village.
   GROSS RECEIPTS. The consideration received for distributing, supplying,
furnishing or selling gas or electricity for use or consumption and not for
resale, as the case may be, and for all services rendered in connection
therewith valued in money, whether received in money or otherwise, including
cash, credit, services and property of every kind and material and for all
services rendered therewith; and shall be determined without any deduction on
account of the cost of the service, product or commodity supplied, the cost of
materials used, labor or service cost, or any other expense whatsoever. For the
purposes of this subchapter, GROSS RECEIPTS shall not include charges added to
customer’s bills in respect of other taxes under § 9-222 of the Public
Utilities Act (ILCS Ch. 220, Act 5, § 9-222), as supplemented and amended.
   PERSON. Any natural individual, firm, trust, estate, partnership,
association, joint stock company, joint adventure, corporation, municipal
corporation or political subdivision of the state, or a receiver, trustee,
conservator or other representative appointed by order of any court.
   PERSON MAINTAINING A PLACE OF BUSINESS IN THIS STATE OF ILLINOIS. Any person
having or maintaining within the state, directly or by a subsidiary or other
affiliate, an office, generation facility, distribution facility, transmission
facility, sales office or other place of business, or any employee, agent or
representative operating within the state under the authority of the person or
its subsidiary or other affiliate, irrespective of whether the place of
business or agent or other representative is located in the state permanently
or temporarily, or whether the person, subsidiary or other affiliate is
licensed or qualified to do business in the state.
   PURCHASE AT RETAIL. Any acquisition of electricity by a purchaser for
purposes of use or consumption, and not for resale, but shall not include the
use of electricity by a public utility (as defined in § 3-105 of the Public
Utilities Act (ILCS Ch. 220, Act 5, § 3-105), including alternative retail
electric suppliers as defined in § 16-102 thereof (ILCS Ch. 220, Act 5, § 16-
102) directly in the generation, production, transmission, delivery or sale of
electricity.
   PURCHASER. Any person who uses or consumes, within the corporate limits of
the village, electricity acquired in a purchase at retail.
   TAXPAYER. A person that individually, or through its agents, employees or
permittees, engages in any act, occupation or privilege specified in §
32.03(A)(1) and (A)(2)(a) and who incurs a tax liability under this subchapter.
   VILLAGE. The Village of Mahomet, Champaign County, Illinois.
(Ord. 98-7-1, passed 7-28-1998)
§ 32.03 IMPOSITION.
   (A)   A tax is imposed on all persons engaged in the following occupations
or privileges:
      (1)   Persons engaged in the business of distributing, supplying,
furnishing or selling gas for use or consumption within the corporate limits of
the village, and not for resale, at the rate of 5% of the gross receipts
therefrom; and
      (2)   (a)   Persons engaged in the business of distributing, supplying,
furnishing or selling electricity for use or consumption within the corporate
limits of the village, and not for resale, at the rate of 5% of the gross
receipts therefrom; provided, however, that:
            1.   Effective August 1, 1998, the tax imposed pursuant to this
division (A)(2) with respect to gross receipts received from residential
customers shall be superseded and replaced with the tax imposed pursuant to
division (A)(2)(b) below; and
            2.   Effective upon the first bill issued for delivery services in
accordance with § 16-104 of the Public Utilities Act (ILCS Ch. 220, Act 5, §
16-104), as supplemented and amended, but in no case later than the last bill
issued before December 31, 2000, the tax imposed pursuant to this division (A)
(2) with respect to gross receipts received from any nonresidential customers
shall be superseded and replaced with the tax imposed pursuant to division (A)
(2)(b) below.
         (b)   The privilege of using or consuming electricity acquired in a
purchase at retail and used or consumed within the corporate limits of the
village at the following rates, calculated on a monthly basis for each
purchaser:
            1.   For the first 2,000 kilowatt-hours used or consumed in a
month: 0.5458 cents per kilowatt-hour;
            2.   For the next 48,000 kilowatt-hours used or consumed in a
month: 0.3579 cents per kilowatt-hour;
            3.   For the next 50,000 kilowatt-hours used or consumed in a
month: 0.3221 cents per kilowatt-hour;
            4.   For the next 400,000 kilowatt-hours used or consumed in a
month: 0.3131 cents per kilowatt-hour;
            5.   For the next 500,000 kilowatt-hours used or consumed in a
month: 0.3042 cents per kilowatt-hour;
            6.   For the next 2,000,000 kilowatt-hours used or consumed in a
month: 0.2863 cents per kilowatt-hour;
            7.   For the next 2,000,000 kilowatt-hours used or consumed in a
month: 0.2818 cents per kilowatt-hour;
            8.   For the next 5,000,000 kilowatt-hours used or consumed in a
month: 0.2774 cents per kilowatt-hour;
            9.   For the next 10,000,000 kilowatt-hours used or consumed in a
month: 0.2729 cents per kilowatt-hour; and
            10.   For all electricity used or consumed in excess of 200,000,000
kilowatt-hours in a month: 0.2684 cents per kilowatt-hour.
   (B)   The tax rates imposed upon the kilowatt-hour categories set forth in
division (A)(2)(b) above are hereby found and determined by the corporate
authorities to have the same proportional relationship to the maximum rates
specified in the Act and are not in excess of rates reasonably calculated to
produce revenues that equal the maximum total revenues the village could have
received under division (A)(2)(b) above in calendar year 1997, provided that
this finding and determination shall not be a limitation on the amount of tax
revenues actually collected by the village.
(Ord. 98-7-1, passed 7-28-1998) Penalty, see §
32.99
§ 32.04 EXEMPTIONS TO TAX.
   No tax is imposed by this subchapter with respect to any transaction in
interstate commerce or otherwise to the extent to which the business may not,
under the constitution and statutes of the United States, be made subject to
taxation by the state or any political subdivision thereof; nor shall any
persons engaged in the business of distributing, supplying, furnishing or
selling gas or electricity be subject to taxation under the provisions of this
subchapter for the transactions as are or may become subject to taxation under
the provisions of the Municipal Retailers’ Occupation Tax Act (ILCS Ch. 65, Act
5, §§ 8-11-1 et seq.); nor shall any tax authorized by this subchapter be
imposed upon any person engaged in a business or on any privilege unless the
tax is imposed in like manner and at the same rate upon all persons engaged in
businesses of the same class in the village, whether privately or municipally-
owned or operated, or exercising the same privilege within the village. The
village shall be exempt from the taxes imposed by this subchapter.
(Ord. 98-7-1, passed 7-28-1998; Ord. 15-09-01, passed 9-22-2015)
§ 32.05 TAX IN ADDITION TO OTHER MUNICIPAL TAXES OR FEES.
   The tax imposed under this subchapter shall be in addition to the payment of
money, or value of products or services furnished, to the village by any person
as compensation for the use of its streets, alleys or other public places, or
installation and maintenance therein, thereon or thereunder of poles, wires,
pipes or other equipment used in the operation of any like person’s business.
(Ord. 98-7-1, passed 7-28-1998) Penalty, see §
32.99
§ 32.06 TAXPAYER’S RETURN.
   (A)   On or before September 30, 1998, each taxpayer shall make a return to
the Village Treasurer for the month of August, 1998, stating:
      (1)   Its name;
      (2)   Its principal place of business;
      (3)   Its gross receipts during the month upon the basis of which the tax
is imposed;
      (4)   Amount of tax; and
      (5)   Other reasonable and related information as the Village Treasurer
may require.
   (B)   On or before the last day of every month thereafter, each taxpayer
shall make a like return to the Village Treasurer for the month preceding.
   (C)   The taxpayer making the return herein provided for shall, at the time
of making the return, pay to the Village Treasurer the amount of tax herein
imposed; provided that in connection with any return the taxpayer may, if the
taxpayer so elects, report and pay an amount based upon the taxpayer’s total
billings of business subject to the tax during the period for which the return
is made (exclusive of any amounts previously billed) with prompt adjustments of
later payments based upon any differences between the billings and the taxable
gross receipts.
   (D)   If it shall appear that an amount of tax based upon gross receipts has
been paid which was not due under the provisions of this subchapter, whether as
the result of a mistake of fact or an error of law, then the amount shall be
credited against any tax due, or to become due, under this subchapter from the
taxpayer who made the erroneous payment; provided that no amounts erroneously
paid more than three years prior to the filing of a claim therefor shall be so
credited.
(Ord. 98-7-1, passed 7-28-1998) Penalty, see §
32.99
§ 32.07 COLLECTION OF TAX TO BE PAID BY PURCHASERS.
   (A)   (1)   Any person maintaining a place of business in the state who
delivers electricity to any purchaser shall collect the tax imposed under §
32.03(A)(2)(b) from the purchaser by adding the tax to the gross charge for
delivering the electricity, and, when collected, shall remit the tax to the
Village Treasurer as provided by division (C) below.
      (2)   Any tax required to be collected pursuant to §
32.03(A)(2)(b) and any tax collected by a person delivering electricity shall
constitute a debt owed to the village by the person delivering electricity,
provided, however, that the person delivering electricity shall be allowed a
credit for the tax related to deliveries of electricity, the charges for which
are written off as uncollectible, and provided further, that if the charges are
thereafter collected, the person delivering electricity shall be obligated to
remit the tax. (Any partial payment not specifically identified by the
purchaser shall be deemed to be for the delivery of electricity.)
      (3)   The tax imposed under §
32.03(A)(2)(b) shall constitute a debt of the purchaser to the person who
delivers the electricity to the purchaser until paid and, if unpaid, is
recoverable in the same manner as the original charge for delivering
electricity.
   (B)   Any person delivering electricity may retain 3% of the tax which the
person delivering electricity collects pursuant to §
32.03(A)(2)(b) in order to reimburse itself for expenses incurred in connection
with keeping records, billing customers, preparing and filing returns,
remitting the tax and supplying data to the village upon request.
   (C)   On or before the last day of each calendar month, every person
maintaining a place of business in the state shall file with the Village
Treasurer a remittance return and remit all applicable tax for the preceding
calendar month. The return shall be filed on a form substantially similar to
that prescribed in §
32.06, except that the return shall state the kilowatt-hours used or consumed
during the month upon the basis of which the tax is imposed and include other
information as the Village Treasurer may reasonably require.
   (D)   If the person delivering electricity fails to collect the tax imposed
by §
32.03(A)(2)(b) from a purchaser, as required by division (A) above, then the
purchaser shall pay the tax directly to the Village Treasurer.
      (1)   On or before the last day of each calendar month, every purchaser
that has not paid the tax imposed by this subchapter to the person delivering
electricity shall file with the Village Treasurer a return and pay the tax upon
the gross charge for electricity that the purchaser paid to the person
delivering the electricity during the preceding calendar month.
      (2)   The return shall be filed on a form substantially similar to that
prescribed in division (C) above and include other information as the Village
Treasurer may reasonably require.
(Ord. 98-7-1, passed 7-28-1998) Penalty, see §
32.99
§ 32.08 EFFECTIVE DATE.
   The provisions of this subchapter shall become effective immediately upon
its passage, approval and publication as required by law; provided, however,
that the tax imposed by this subchapter shall become effective and apply to all
gross receipts or gross charges for electricity billed on and after August 1,
1998.
(Ord. 98-7-1, passed 7-28-1998)
MISCELLANEOUS TAXES
§ 32.20 HOTEL ROOMS TAX.
   (A)   There is hereby imposed a tax upon all persons (meaning any natural
individual, firm, partnership, association, joint stock company, joint venture,
public or private corporation, or a receiver, executor, trustee, guardian or
other representative appointed by order of any court) engaged in the Village of
Mahomet, Illinois, in the business of renting, leasing or letting rooms in a
hotel, as defined in the “Hotel Operators' Occupation Tax Act,” 35 ILCS Ch. 35,
Act 145, §§ 1 et seq.
   (B)   Said tax is hereby imposed at a rate of 5% on the gross rental
receipts from such renting, leasing or letting, excluding however, from gross
rental receipts, the proceeds of such renting, leasing or letting to permanent
residents of that hotel.
   (C)   For purpose of this subchapter, a HOTEL means any building or
buildings in which the public may, for a consideration, obtain living quarters,
sleeping or housekeeping accommodations. The term includes inns, motels,
tourist homes or courts, lodging houses, rooming houses, apartment houses and
bed and breakfast facilities.
   (D)   All taxes collected pursuant to this ordinance shall be expended by
the Village of Mahomet solely to promote tourism and conventions within Mahomet
or otherwise to attract non-resident overnight visitors to Mahomet. No tax
receipts under this ordinance shall be used to advertise for or otherwise
promote new competition in the hotel business.
   (E)   All persons engaged in said business shall furnish to the Mahomet
Village Clerk on a monthly basis, by the 10th day of the following month, a
report of total gross rental receipts for such period(s) on forms, if any,
furnished by the village. If no forms are provided, the hotel operator shall
report on such periodic basis the number of rooms rented each day and the gross
rental receipts received each day, and the 5% tax due the Village of Mahomet
thereon. The hotel operator shall furnish any additional necessary records and
documentation as reasonably required to enable the Village to administer this
subchapter.
   (F)   The hotel operator shall pay the tax monthly to the Village of Mahomet
by the tenth day of the following month with each monthly report.
   (G)   The Village Clerk may allow hotel operators to coincide its reports
and tax payments with said operators' state hotel tax reporting and payment. If
any person subject to the imposition of this tax does not file the required
return and/or pay the required tax, the village may take legal action against
said operator to enforce the terms of this ordinance, and said person shall be
liable to the village for its reasonable attorney fees and costs incurred in
enforcing this chapter.
   (H)   This chapter shall be effective upon its passage and publication as
required by law and shall apply to gross rental receipts for renting, leasing
or letting such rooms on and after January 1, 2003.
(Ord. 93-11-1, passed 11-23-1993; Ord. 02-07-07, passed 7-23-2002)
§ 32.21 TELECOMMUNICATIONS TAX.
   (A)   A simplified municipal telecommunications tax is hereby imposed upon
the act or privilege of originating in the municipality or receiving in the
municipality intrastate or interstate telecommunications by a person under the
provisions of the Simplified Municipal Telecommunication Tax Act, P.A. 92-
0526, at a rate of 6% of the gross charges for such telecommunications
purchased at retail from a retailer.
   (B)   The tax hereby imposed shall be collected and enforced by the
Department of Revenue of the State of Illinois. The Illinois Department of
Revenue shall have full power to administer and enforce the provisions of this
section.
   (C)   This section shall be in full force and effect from and after its
passage and approval and publication in pamphlet form as required by law,
provided, however, that division (A) of this section shall take effect for all
gross charges billed by telecommunications retailers on and after the first day
of July, 2004. The Village Clerk is hereby directed to file a certified copy of
the section with the Illinois Department of Revenue prior to March 20, 2004.
(Ord. 04-02-05, passed 2-24-2004)
§ 32.22 CABLE AND VIDEO SERVICE PROVIDER FEE.
   (A)   Definitions. The following terms shall have the following meanings.
      CABLE SERVICE. That term as defined un 47 U.S.C. § 522(6).
      COMMISSION. The Illinois Commerce Commission.
      GROSS REVENUES. All consideration of any kind or nature, including,
without limitation, cash, credits, property, and in-kind contributions received
by the holder for the operation of a cable or video system to provide cable
service or video service within the holder’s cable service or video service
area within the village.
         (a)   GROSS REVENUES shall include the following:
            1.   Recurring charges for cable or video service.
            2.    Event-based charges for cable service or video service
including, but not limited to, pay-per-view and video-on-demand charges.
            3.   Rental of set top boxes and other cable service or video
service equipment.
            4.   Service charges related to the provision of cable service or
video service, including but not limited to activation, installation, and
repair charges.
            5.    Administrative charges related to the provision of cable
service or video service, including but not limited to service order and
service termination charges.
            6.   Late payment fees or charges, insufficient funds check
charges, and other charges assessed to recover the costs of collecting
delinquent payments.
            7.   A pro rata portion of all revenue derived by the holder or its
affiliates pursuant to compensation arrangements for advertising or for
promotion or exhibition of any products or services derived from the operation
of the holder’s network to provide cable service or video service within the
village. The allocation shall be based on the number of subscribers in the
village divided by the total number of subscribers in relation to the relevant
regional or national compensation arrangement.
            8.    Compensation received by the holder that is derived from the
operation of the holder’s network to provide cable service or video service
with respect to commissions that are received by the holder as compensation for
promotion or exhibition of any products or services on the holder’s network,
such as a “home shopping” or similar channel, subject to subsection (a)9 of
this definition.
            9.   In the case of a cable service or video service that is
bundled or integrated functionally with other services, capabilities, or
applications, the portion of the holder’s revenue attributable to the other
services, capabilities, or applications shall be included in the gross revenue
unless the holder can reasonably identify the division or exclusion of the
revenue from its books and records that are kept in the regular course of
business.
            10.   The service provider fee permitted by ILCS Ch. 220, Act 5, §
21-801(b).
         (b)   GROSS REVENUES do not include any of the following:
            1.   Revenues not actually received, even if billed, such as bad
debt, subject to ILCS Ch. 220, Act 5, § 21-801(c)(l)(vi).
            2.   Refunds, discounts, or other price adjustments that reduce the
amount of gross revenues received by the holder of the State-issued
authorization to the extent the refund, rebate, credit, or discount is
attributable to cable service or video service.
            3.   Regardless of whether the services are bundled, packaged, or
functionally integrated with cable service or video service, any revenues
received from services not classified as cable service or video service,
including, without limitation, revenue received from telecommunication
services, information services, or the provision of directory or Internet
advertising, including yellow pages, white pages, banner advertisement, and
electronic publishing or any other revenues attributed by the holder to
noncable service or nonvideo service in accordance with the holder’s books and
records and records kept in the regular course of business and any applicable
laws, rules, regulations, standards, or orders.
            4.   The sale of cable services or video services for resale in
which the purchaser is required to collect the service provider fee from the
purchaser’s subscribers to the extent the purchaser certifies in writing that
it will resell the service within the village and pay the fee permitted by ILCS
Ch. 220, Act 5, § 21-801(b) with respect to the service.
            5.   Any tax or fee of general applicability imposed upon the
subscribers or the transaction by a city, village state, federal, or any other
governmental entity and collected by the holder of the state-issued
authorization and required to be remitted to the taxing entity, including sales
and use taxes.
            6.   Security deposits collected from subscribers.
            7.   Amounts paid by subscribers to “home shopping” or similar
vendors for merchandise sold through any home shopping channel offered as part
of the cable service or video service.
         (c)   Revenue of an affiliate of a holder shall be included in the
calculation of gross revenues to the extent the treatment of the revenue as
revenue of the affiliate rather than the holder has the effect of evading the
payment of the fee permitted by ILCS Ch. 220, Act 5, § 21-801(b) which would
otherwise be paid by the cable service or video service.
      HOLDER. A person or entity that has received authorization to offer or
provide cable or video service from the Commission pursuant to ILCS Ch. 220,
Act 5, § 21-401.
      SERVICE. The provision of “cable service” or “video service” to
subscribers and the interaction of subscribers with the person or entity that
has received authorization to offer or provide cable or video service from the
Commission pursuant to ILCS Ch. 220, Act 5, § 21-401.
      SERVICE PROVIDER FEE. The amount paid under this section and ILCS Ch.
220, Act 5, § 21-801 by the holder to a village for the service areas within
its territorial jurisdiction.
      VIDEO SERVICE. Video programming and subscriber interaction, if any, that
is required for the selection or use of such video programming services, and
which is provided through wireline facilities located at least in part in the
public right-of-way without regard to delivery technology, including Internet
protocol technology. This definition does not include any video programming
provided by a commercial mobile service provider defined in 47 U.S.C. § 332(d)
or any video programming provided solely as part of, and via, service that
enables users to access content, information, electronic mail, or other
services offered over the public Internet.
   (B)   Cable/video service provider fee imposed.
      (1)   Fee imposed. A fee is hereby imposed on any holder providing cable
service or video service in the village.
      (2)   Amount of fee. The amount of the fee imposed hereby shall be 5% of
the holder’s gross revenues derived from the provision of cable or video
service to households located within the village.
      (3)   Notice to the village. The holder shall notify the village at least
ten days prior to the date on which the holder begins to offer cable service or
video service in the village.
      (4)   Holder’s liability. The holder shall be liable for and pay the
service provider fee to the village. The holder’s liability for the fee shall
commence on the first day of the calendar month following 30 days after receipt
of the ordinance adopting this section by the holder. The ordinance adopting
this section shall be sent by mail, postage prepaid, to the address listed on
the holder’s application notice sent pursuant to ILCS Ch. 220, Act 5, § 21-401
(b)(6) to the village.
      (5)   Payment date. The payment of the service provider fee shall be due
on a quarterly basis, 45 days after the close of the calendar quarter. If
mailed, the fee is considered paid on the date it is postmarked. Each payment
shall include a statement explaining the basis for the calculation of the fee.
      (6)   Exemption. The fee hereby imposed does not apply to existing cable
service or video service providers that have an existing franchise agreement
with the village in which a fee is paid.
      (7)   Credit for other payments. An incumbent cable operator that elects
to terminate an existing agreement pursuant to ILCS Ch. 220, Act 5, § /21-301
(c) with credit for prepaid franchise fees under that agreement may deduct the
amount of such credit from the fees that operator owes under division (B)(2) of
this section.
   (C)   Applicable principles. All determinations and calculations under this
Section shall be made pursuant to generally accepted accounting principles.
   (D)   No impact on other taxes due from holder. Nothing contained in this
section shall be construed to exempt a holder from any tax that is or may later
be imposed by the village, including any tax that is or may later be required
to be paid by or through the holder with respect to cable service or video
service. A state-issued authorization shall not affect any requirement of the
holder with respect to payment of the village’s simplified municipal
telecommunications tax or any other tax as it applies to any telephone service
provided by the holder. A state-issued authorization shall not affect any
requirement of the holder with respect to payment of the local unit of
government’s 911 or E911 fees, taxes or charges.
   (E)   Audits of cable/video service provider.
      (1)   Audit requirement. The village will notify the holder of the
requirements it imposes on other cable service or video service providers to
submit to an audit of its books and records. The holder shall comply with the
same requirements the village imposes on other cable service or video service
providers in its jurisdiction to audit the holder’s books and records and to
recompute any amounts determined to be payable under the requirements of the
village. If all local franchises between the village and cable operator
terminate, the audit requirements shall be those adopted by the village
pursuant to the Local Government Taxpayers’ Bill of Rights Act, ILCS Ch. 50,
Act 45, §§ 1 et seq. No acceptance of amounts remitted should be construed as
an accord that the amounts are correct.
      (2)   Additional payments. Any additional amount due after an audit shall
be paid within 30 days after the municipality’s submission of an invoice for
the sum.
   (F)   Late fees/payments. All fees due and payments which are past due shall
be governed by ordinances adopted by this municipality pursuant to the Local
Government Taxpayers’ Bill of Rights Act, ILCS Ch. 50, Act 45, §§ 1 et seq.
(Ord. 18-02-03, passed 2-27-2018)
§ 32.23 GROCERY TAX.
   (A)   Municipal grocery retailers' occupation tax imposed. A tax is hereby
imposed upon all persons engaged in the business of selling groceries at retail
in this municipality at the rate of 1% of the gross receipts from such sales
made in the course of such business while this section is in effect. The
imposition of this tax is in accordance with and subject to the provisions of §
8-11-24 of the Illinois Municipal Code (65 ILCS 5/8-11-24).
   (B)   Municipal grocery service occupation tax. A tax is hereby imposed upon
all persons engaged in this municipality in the business of making sales of
service, who, as an incident to making those sales of service, transfer
groceries as an incident to a sale of service. The rate of this tax shall be
the same rate identified in division (A), above. The imposition of this tax is
in accordance with and subject to the provisions of § 8-11-24 of the Illinois
Municipal Code (65 ILCS 5/8-11-24).
   (C)   Illinois Department of Revenue to administer both taxes. The taxes
hereby imposed, and all civil penalties that may be assessed as an incident
thereto, shall be collected and enforced by the Department of Revenue of the
State of Illinois. The Illinois Department of Revenue shall have full power to
administer and enforce the provisions of this section.
(Ord. 25-04-01, passed 04-22-2025)
§ 32.99 PENALTY.
    (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which no
specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to §
10.99.
   (B)   Any person who fails to make a return, or who makes a fraudulent
return, or who willfully violates any other provision of §§
32.01 through
32.08 is guilty of an offense and, upon conviction thereof, shall be fined not
less than $100 nor more than $500 and in addition shall be liable in a civil
action for the amount of tax due. Each day that any failure or violation
continues shall be deemed a separate offense.
(Ord. 98-7-1, passed 7-28-1998)
CHAPTER 33: VILLAGE ORGANIZATIONS
Section
Plan and Zoning Commission
   
33.01   Creation
   
33.02   Term
   
33.03   Organization
   
33.04   Powers
   
33.05   Subdivision plats
   
33.06   Records
   
33.07   Meetings
Police Pension Fund Board of Trustees
   
33.20   Establishment
   
33.21   Definitions
   
33.22   Powers and duties of Board
   
33.23   Members; administration
PLAN AND ZONING COMMISSION
§ 33.01 CREATION.
   (A)   There is hereby created a Plan and Zoning Commission for the village,
which shall consist of seven members to be appointed by the Village President
with the review, consent and approval of the Village Board of Trustees.
   (B)   All members shall reside within the village or within the territory
contiguous to the village and not more than one and one-half miles beyond the
corporate limits of the village and not included within any other municipality;
provided, however, not more than one of those members shall reside outside of
the corporate limits of the village.
(Ord. 06-01-05, passed 1-24-2006)
§ 33.02 TERM.
   The terms of the members of the Plan and Zoning Commission shall be one
year.
(Ord. 06-01-05, passed 1-24-2006)
§ 33.03 ORGANIZATION.
   The Plan and Zoning Commission shall elect its own Chairperson, Vice-
Chairperson and other officers as it may deem necessary. Each member of the
Plan and Zoning Commission shall receive compensation for service. The Village
Administrator shall be the Secretary of the Plan and Zoning Commission. The
Village Board of Trustees may establish a compensation for the Secretary of the
Plan and Zoning Commission and may provide technical and other services to the
Plan and Zoning Commission as may be needed from time to time.
(Ord. 06-01-05, passed 1-24-2006)
§ 33.04 POWERS.
   The Plan and Zoning Commission shall have powers and exercise duties as are
provided for in Division 12 of Article 11 of the Illinois Municipal Code, being
ILCS Ch. 65, Act 5. To exercise those other powers germane to the powers
granted by this act, as may be conferred by the Village Board of Trustees.
(Ord. 06-01-05, passed 1-24-2006)
§ 33.05 SUBDIVISION PLATS.
   No map or plat of any subdivision presented for record affecting land within
the corporate limits of the village and in contiguous territory outside and
distant not more than one and one-half miles from the limits of the village,
after the adoption of the Official Plan, shall be entitled to record or shall
be valid unless the subdivision, thereon shown conforms with the applicable
provisions of the Official Plan and the applicable requirements of the village
subdivision ordinance and other ordinances.
(Ord. 06-01-05, passed 1-24-2006)
§ 33.06 RECORDS.
   The Plan and Zoning Commission shall keep written records of its proceedings
which shall be open to inspection by the Village Board of Trustees at all
times.
(Ord. 06-01-05, passed 1-24-2006)
§ 33.07 MEETINGS.
   The Plan and Zoning Commission shall meet at a time as it may, by majority
vote, determine upon as regular meeting dates; or at any time upon call by the
Chairperson thereof or by any three members thereof.
(Ord. 06-01-05, passed 1-24-2006)
POLICE PENSION FUND BOARD OF TRUSTEES
§ 33.20 ESTABLISHMENT.
   There is hereby created and established a Police Pension Fund in and for the
village in accordance with Article 3 of the Illinois Pension Code (ILCS Ch. 40,
Act 5, §§ 3-101 et seq.).
(Ord. 11-12-02, passed 12-20-2011)
§ 33.21 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purposes of this subchapter the terms BOARD, POLICE OFFICER, and
BENEFICIARY are defined in Article 3 of the Illinois Pension Code at ILCS Ch.
40, Act 5, §§ 3-105, 3-106, and 3-108.3, respectively.
(Ord. 11-12-02, passed 12-20-2011)
§ 33.22 POWERS AND DUTIES OF BOARD.
   The rights, powers, duties, and functions of said Board and the members
thereof, and the rights and benefits of the various beneficiaries thereto,
shall be and are hereby declared to be in accordance with the laws of the
state, particularly of Article 3 of the Illinois Pension Code and all
amendments thereof.
(Ord. 11-12-02, passed 12-20-2011)
§ 33.23 MEMBERS; ADMINISTRATION.
   The Board shall be appointed and elected as therein provided; shall exercise
such powers and perform such duties that shall be required of them by law. All
monies and securities belonging to said fund shall be held by the Village
Treasurer subject to the order of the Board of Trustees of the Police Pension
Fund. An annual list of beneficiaries and report of funds shall be made as
required by law. Members of the Board of Trustees of the Police Pension Fund
shall serve without compensation.
(Ord. 11-12-02, passed 12-20-2011)
CHAPTER 34: VILLAGE POLICIES
Section
   
34.01   Service charge for NSF checks
Administrative Procedure for Assessing
and Determining Claims under PSEBA
   
34.15   Purpose
   
34.16   Definitions
   
34.17   Application procedure
   
34.18   Administrative composition
   
34.19   Administrative hearing
§ 34.01 SERVICE CHARGE FOR NSF CHECKS.
   (A)   Effective March 1, 1988, the village shall assess a service charge of
$10 against the account of any person, firm or corporation which draws or
endorses a check to the village which is returned unpaid or dishonored by the
depository due to insufficient funds, account closed, or other reason.
   (B)   This section shall become effective ten days after its passage and
publication on February 8, 1988 as required by law.
(Ord. 88-2-1, passed 2-8-1988)
ADMINISTRATIVE PROCEDURE FOR ASSESSING AND
DETERMINING CLAIMS UNDER PSEBA
§ 34.15 PURPOSE.
   The purpose of this subchapter is to provide a fair and efficient method for
determining the eligibility of a full-time employee for the benefits enumerated
under PSEBA through an administrative process, including if necessary, an
administrative hearing.
(Ord. 17-11-07, passed 11-28-2017)
§ 34.16 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following terms will have the
following meanings. These definitions are derived from the federal Public
Health and Welfare Act, which was enacted in 1944 and amended in 1984 to
define, by inclusion or reference, the following terms. For use in this
subchapter, provisions containing the words “mayor,” “commissioner,”
“alderman,” or “city council” also apply to the president, trustee,
councilmember and boards of trustees so far as the provisions are applicable to
them.
   CATASTROPHIC INJURY. An injury, the direct and proximate consequences of
which permanently prevent an individual from performing any gainful work.
   GAINFUL WORK. Full-or part-time activity that actually is compensated or
commonly is compensated.
   INJURY. A traumatic physical wound (or traumatized physical condition of the
body) directly and proximately caused by external force (such as bullets,
explosives, sharp instruments, blunt objects, or physical blows), chemicals,
electricity, climatic conditions, infectious disease, radiation, virii, or
bacteria, but does not include:
      (1)   Any occupational disease; or
      (2)   Any condition of the body caused or
occasioned by stress or strain.
(Ord. 17-11-07, passed 11-28-2017)
§ 34.17 APPLICATION PROCEDURE.
   As noted by the Court in Englum, “while the [Act] contained substantive
requirements for section 10 eligibility, the [Act] contained no procedural
requirements for determining whether a former employee met the substantive
criteria.”. This subchapter and the application procedure of this section
establishes guidance on the proper procedural requirements for Public Safety
Officers seeking PSEBA benefits in the village.
   (A)   Public Safety Officers, or family member(s) of an injured or deceased
Public Safety Officer, (“Applicant”) must file a full and complete PSEBA
application in writing within 30 days of filing a pension claim with the
village or within 30 days of the date of the adoption of this subchapter in the
event that an applicant has filed for a pension or PDEBA claim prior to the
date of adoption of this subchapter, whichever is later, if the applicant is
seeking benefits under PSEBA. The village shall notify applicant if the PSEBA
application is Incomplete and applicant shall have five days to remedy their
application. Failure to timely file the full and complete application shall
result in a forfeiture of the benefits under PSEBA by failure to properly
submit a complete application.
   (B)   A complete PSEBA application includes the following:
      (1)   The name of the applicant, date of hire, detailed information
regarding the incident, including information relating to how the injury was
sustained in the line of duty (date, time, place, nature of injury, and other
factual circumstances surrounding the incident giving rise to said claim);
      (2)   The applicant’s firsthand knowledge explaining to the village’s
satisfaction, how the injury/death directly resulted from:
         (a)   Response to fresh pursuit;
         (b)   Response to what is reasonably believed to be an emergency;
         (c)   Response to an unlawful act perpetrated by another; or
         (d)   Participation during the investigation of a criminal act;
      (3)   A signed PSEBA medical authorization release which authorizes the
collection of information related to the incident including, but not limited
to, disability pension proceedings, worker’s compensation records, and medical
records and specifies the name and address for pertinent health care provider
(s);
      (4)   A signed PSEBA general information release specifying the name and
signature of the Applicant or her/his authorized representative along with
legal proof of said representation and name and signature of witness
authorizing the collection of information pertinent to the incident review
process;
      (5)   The name(s) of witnesses to the incident;
      (6)   The name(s) of witnesses the Applicant intends to call at the PSEBA
hearing;
      (7)   Information and supporting pension documentation filed with the
appropriate pension board;
      (8)   Information supporting the PSEBA eligibility requirements; and
      (9)   Other sources of health insurance benefits currently enrolled in or
received by the Applicant and/or family members of the Applicant is deceased.
   (C)   The PSEBA application must be submitted to the Chief of Police in its
entirety.
   (D)   The PSEBA application must be sworn and notarized to certify the
truthfulness of the content of the information. A review of the application
shall not occur until the application is complete.
   (E)   On the date that the PSEBA application is deemed complete by the
village, the completed application shall then be submitted to the village as
the preliminary record, and a copy of the same shall be date stamped and
provided to the applicant.
   (F)   Upon receipt of a complete application for PSEBA benefits, the village
shall set the matter for an administrative hearing before a hearing officer to
make a determination on whether to grant the Applicant PSEBA benefits based on
the result of the administrative hearing.
   (G)   The applicant will be given written notice of the date for the
scheduled administrative hearing to be served not less than ten days prior to
the commencement of the hearing. If the Applicant, upon receiving written
notice of the administrative hearing, cannot attend said date, the applicant
must contact the hearing officer in writing within seven days after being
served. The hearing officer shall establish an alternative hearing date which
is within 30 days of the original hearing date. Failure to appear at the
administrative hearing shall result in denial of PSEBA benefits.
(Ord. 17-11-07, passed 11-28-2017)
§ 34.18 ADMINISTRATIVE COMPOSITION.
   The administrative hearing shall be scheduled and conducted by a hearing
officer whose authority and limitations are as follows:
   (A)   Authority of the hearing officer. The hearing officer shall have all
of the authorities granted to her/him under common law relative to the conduct
of an administrative hearing, including the authority to:
      (1)   Preside over village hearings involving PSEBA;
      (2)   Administer oaths;
      (3)   Hear testimony and accept evidence that is relevant to the issue of
eligibility under PSEBA;
      (4)   Issue subpoenas to secure attendance of witnesses and the
production of relevant papers or documents upon the request of the parties or
their representatives;
      (5)   Rule upon objections in the admissibility of evidence;
      (6)   Preserve and authenticate the record of the hearing and all
exhibits in evidence introduced at the hearing; and
      (7)   Issue a determination based on the evidence presented at the
hearing, the determination of which shall be in writing and shall include a
written finding of fact, decision and order.
   (B)   Hearing officer. The Village President, with the advice and consent of
the Board of Trustees, is hereby authorized to appoint a person to hold the
position of hearing officer for each hearing on PSEBA benefits that shall come
before this village. In making said selection, the following information should
be considered, at a minimum:
      (1)   The individual’s ability to comply with the job description as set
forth herein; and
      (2)   The individual must be an attorney licensed to practice law in the
State of Illinois and have knowledge of and experience in employment and labor
law, general civil procedure, the rules of evidence, and administrative
practice.
(Ord. 17-11-07, passed 11-28-2017)
§ 34.19 ADMINISTRATIVE HEARING.
   The system of administrative hearings for the determination of eligibility
for benefits under PSEBA shall be initiated either by the village or by the
applicant after the submission of a full and complete PSEBA application. An
administrative hearing shall be held to adjudicate and determine whether the
applicant is eligible for benefits under PSEBA. If the applicant is found
eligible, the benefits shall be consistent with the Act.
   (A)   Record. The village shall ensure that all hearings are attended by a
certified court reporter and a transcript of all proceedings shall be made by
said certified court reporter and a copy be provided to the applicant within 28
days of the date of the administrative hearing.
   (B)   Procedures. The village and the applicant shall be entitled to
representation by counsel at said administrative hearing and present witnesses,
testimony and documents, may cross-examine opposing witnesses, and may request
the issuance of subpoenas to compel the appearance of relevant witnesses or the
production of relevant documents.
   (C)   Evidence. The Illinois Rules of Evidence shall apply to the extent
practicable unless, by such application, the Hearing Officer determines that
application of the rule would be an injustice or preclude the introduction of
evidence of the type commonly relied upon by a reasonably prudent person in the
conduct of her or his affairs. Such determination shall be in the sole
discretion of the Hearing Officer. The Hearing Officer must state on the record
her or his reason for that determination.
   (D)   Final determination. A written determination by the hearing officer of
whether the petitioning applicant is eligible for the benefits under PSEBA
shall constitute a final administrative determination for the purpose of
judicial review under common law writ of certiorari.
   (E)   Burden of proof. At any administrative hearing, the applicant shall
have the obligation and burden of proof to establish that the applicant is
eligible and qualified to receive PSEBA benefits. The standard of proof in all
hearings conducted under this subchapter shall be by the preponderance of the
evidence.
   (F)   Administrative records. All records pertaining to the administrative
process shall be held in a separate file under the Applicant’s name with the
village.
(Ord. 17-11-07, passed 11-28-2017)
CHAPTER 35: MINIMUM FINE SCHEDULE
Section
   
35.01   Minimum fine schedule for ordinance violations
§ 35.01 MINIMUM FINE SCHEDULE FOR ORDINANCE VIOLATIONS.
   (A)   The minimum fine schedule for violating certain sections of the
ordinances of the village shall be as follows:
Section Section Title Minimum Fine
Section   Section Title                                            Minimum Fine
          Removal of Refuse, Garbage and Debris (Ord. 74-1,
          adopted 1-14-1974)
50.51     Unlawful accumulation                                    $250
           
          Regulating Alarm Systems (Ord. 89-12-01, adopted 12-19-
          1989)
90.04(A)  Unlawful interconnection of an alarm                     $100
90.04(B)  Failure to register an alarm                             $100
           
          Regulating the Control of Animals (Ord. 08-07-01,
          adopted 7-22-2008)
92.04     Cruelty to animals                                       $300
92.05     Keeping animals other than domestic pets                 $100
92.06     Livestock yards/structures                               $150
92.07     Keeping of dangerous animals                             $300
92.08     Keeping of vicious animals                               $300
92.21     Diseased animals                                         $150
92.22     Disturbing the peace                                     $100
92.23     Exposing dead animals to view                            $200
92.24     Animals running at large                                 $150
92.25     Removal of excrement                                     $100
92.26     Holding for reward strayed or stolen animals             $300
92.27     Animal nuisance                                          $100
           
          Regulating Burning (Ord. 09-05-02, adopted 5-26-2009)
93.03     Unlawful burning                                         $100
           
          Regulating Inoperable Vehicles (Ord. 04-12-01, adopted
          12-21-2004)
93.36     Abandoned and/or inoperable vehicle                      $150
           
          Alcoholic Liquor Control (Ord. 07-05-01, adopted 5-22-
          2007)
110.060   Possession/consumption on unlicensed premises            $300
110.075   Prohibitions related to age (alcohol)                    $250
110.077   Prohibitions related to responsibility (alcohol)         $250
110.078   Prohibitions related to open containers and consumption  $200
          Cannabis Business Establishments (Ord. 19-12-01, adopted
          12-17-2019)
114.02    Cannabis business establishments prohibited              $750
           
          Registration of Solicitors (Ord. 85-12-01, adopted 12-9-
          1985)
112.04    Duties of solicitors                                     $150
           
          General Offenses (Ord. 03-09-02, adopted 9-23-2003)
130.01    Aiding and abetting                                      $250
130.15    Resisting or obstructing a peace officer                 $500
130.16    Impersonation of village officers/employees              $300
130.17    False alarms and reports                                 $150
130.18    Obstructing justice                                      $500
131.01    Assault                                                  $300
131.02    Battery                                                  $300
131.03    Reckless conduct                                         $300
131.04    Fighting                                                 $300
131.15    Loitering                                                $150
131.16    Disorderly conduct                                       $300
131.17    Mob action                                               $300
131.18    Aggressive panhandling                                   $200
131.19    Noise                                                    $150
131.30(A) Throwing of dangerous materials                          $250
131.30(B) Dumping, deposit of litter                               $100
131.30(C) Dumping, deposit of litter from motor vehicle            $100
131.31    Storage, sale, use or explosion of fireworks             $150
131.32    Possession of a weapon                                   $750
131.33    Discharge of a weapon                                    $750
132.01    Graffiti                                                 $250
132.02    Trespass generally                                       $300
132.03    Criminal trespass to government supported land           $300
132.04    Breaking and entering                                    $500
132.05    Damaging village property                                $300
132.06    Damaging property                                        $300
132.15    Theft generally                                          $300
132.16    Retail theft                                             $300
132.17    Burglar’s tools; altering keys                         $300
132.18    Tampering with cable TV equipment                        $300
132.19    Theft of labor, services or use of property              $300
132.20    Theft of lost or mislaid property                        $300
133.01    Public indecency                                         $300
133.02    Public urination and defecation                          $300
133.03    Prostitution                                             $300
133.04    Solicitation                                             $300
133.15    Gambling                                                 $300
133.30    Possession of cannabis                                   $350
133.31    Possession of drug paraphernalia                         $300
134.01    Curfew                                                   $100
134.02    Permitting a child to violate curfew                     $200
134.03    Sale of tobacco to minors prohibited                     $300
 
   (B)   This section shall be in effect ten days after its passage, approval
and publication on April 29, 2015.
(Ord. 03-09-03, passed 9-23-2003; Ord. 08-07-02, passed 7-22-2008; Ord. 08-05-
04, passed 5-28-2008; Ord. 15-04-02, passed 4-28-2015; Ord. 19-12-01, passed
12-17-2019)
TITLE V: PUBLIC WORKS
   Chapter
      
50.   GARBAGE AND REFUSE
      
51.   STORMWATER MANAGEMENT
      
52.   WATER REGULATIONS
      
53.   SEWER REGULATIONS
      
54.   WATER AND WASTEWATER USER CHARGE SYSTEMS
      
55.   WATER AND WASTEWATER RATES AND FEES
CHAPTER 50: GARBAGE AND REFUSE
Section
Collection of Garbage Waste
   
50.01   Definitions
   
50.02   Service required
   
50.03   Container requirements
   
50.04   Container placement before and after pickup
   
50.05   Declaration of nuisance
Waste Hauler Licensing Regulations
   
50.15   License required
   
50.16   Conditions required
   
50.17   Applications
   
50.18   License fee
   
50.19   Vehicles
   
50.20   Ashes and non-noxious matter
   
50.21   Delinquent customers
   
50.22   Revocation of license
   
50.23   Number of licenses
   
50.24   Assignment of licenses
   
50.25   Duties of licensee
   
50.26   Excuse of performance
   
50.27   Standards of performance
   
50.28   Default penalties and fines
   
50.29   Administrative proceedings
   
50.30   Hearings
Landscape Waste Programs
   
50.35   Purpose
   
50.36   Definitions
   
50.37   General restrictions
   
50.38   Leaf collection program
   
50.39   Brush and tree limb collection program
   
50.40   Administration and enforcement
Removal of Refuse, Garbage and Debris from Private Property
   
50.50   Definitions
   
50.51   Unlawful accumulation declared a nuisance
   
50.52   Removal; notice
   
50.53   Abatement
   
50.54   Lien
 
   
50.99   Penalty
Cross-reference:
   Fine schedule, see §
35.01
COLLECTION OF GARBAGE
§ 50.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ASHES. The waste product of combustion of any material.
   COMMERCIAL FACILITY. Any structure or building, or any portion thereof,
other than a residential dwelling.
   CONSTRUCTION or DEMOLITION DEBRIS. Any solid waste containing a variety of
materials resulting from the construction, demolition, remodeling, or
renovation of residential, commercial or industrial structures. CONSTRUCTION or
DEMOLITION DEBRIS also includes cement, concrete, asphalt, or masonry debris
resulting primarily from street, sidewalk, bridge, sewer and water
construction, repair or replacement, which is defined as "clean fill" by the
Illinois Environmental Protection Agency.
   CURBSIDE. That portion of the right-of-way adjacent to and within five feet
of the public roadway, highway, or street, including any alley.
   CUSTOMER. Any tenant, lessee or occupant of any dwelling, tenant house,
lodging house, hotel, restaurant, boarding house, or other person, persons,
firm or corporation who hires a hauler as defined herein for the purpose of
regularly collecting garbage.
   GARBAGE WASTE. Any garbage, refuse, rubbish, debris, and general household
waste, including waste resulting from the handling, preparation, cooking and
consumption of food, wastes from the handling, storage and sale of produce
whether generated at a single-family dwelling, multifamily dwelling or
commercial facility. This definition does not include construction or
demolition debris, landscape waste or any material or waste classified as
hazardous, toxic, flammable or otherwise dangerous to the environment under any
federal, state or local law.
   GARBAGE WASTE CONTAINER. Containers having a minimum capacity of 30 gallons
that garbage waste must be placed in for the purpose of garbage waste
collection. One 96-gallon tote cart shall be provided to each single-family
dwelling free of charge by their licensed hauler.
   LICENSEE. Any garbage waste hauler licensed by the village.
   MULTIFAMILY DWELLING. Any residential dwelling containing more than two
dwelling units.
   OTHER REFUSE. Sweepings, papers, tin cans, or other accumulations not giving
off noxious odors.
   PERSON. Any natural individual, firm, trust, estate, partnership,
association, joint stock company, joint venture, limited liability company or
corporation, or a receiver, trustee, conservator, or other representative
appointed by order of any court.
   RECYCLABLE MATERIAL. Any cardboard, newsprint or other paper, aluminum,
glass, plastic or ferrous metal containers.
   RIGHTS-OF-WAY. The area on, below, or above land dedicated to a public
roadway, highway, street, public sidewalk, or alley dedicated for
transportation and other compatible uses.
   SINGLE-FAMILY DWELLING. A residential dwelling designed for and used for
living and sleeping purposes, containing its own kitchen and bathroom
facilities, and having its own independent entry/access from the exterior of
such residential dwelling or from a common interior hallway. The definition for
single-family dwelling shall include not more than two dwelling units.
   VEHICLE. Automobile, truck or any vessel, vehicle or wagon used to transport
garbage or refuse as herein defined.
   WASTE HAULER. Any person who charges a fee for collecting garbage waste and
is licensed by the village(licensee).
(Ord. passed 3-9-1987; Ord. 25-01-04, passed 1-28-2025)
§ 50.02 SERVICE REQUIRED.
   (A)   Any person who is the owner or lessee of any single-family dwelling
within the village shall be required to have any accumulation of garbage waste
on any such property collected and disposed of at least once every seven
calendar days, subject to delays on account of licensee's holiday schedule, by
a waste hauler who has a valid waste hauler license issued by the village. Any
additional service requests beyond the basic weekly pickup requested by the
tenant shall be the responsibility of the owner or lessee.
   (B)   Any person who is the owner or lessee, of any multifamily dwelling,
multifamily apartment complex, or of any commercial or industrial premises
within the village shall have any accumulation of garbage waste on any such
property collected and disposed of at least once every seven calendar days,
subject to delays on account of licensee's holiday schedule, by a waste hauler
who has a valid waste hauler license. Any additional service requests beyond
the basic weekly pickup requested by the tenant shall be the responsibility of
the tenant.
   (C)   The occupancy of any dwelling unit, multifamily dwelling, or the
operation of any commercial or industrial activity by any person within the
village shall be prima facie evidence that garbage waste is being produced and
accumulated within any such dwelling unit, multifamily dwelling or on any such
commercial or industrial premises.
(Ord. 25-01-04, passed 1-28-2025)
§ 50.03 CONTAINER REQUIREMENT.
   No person who, as owner, agent, lessee, occupant, or other person in control
of any residential dwelling unit or of any commercial or industrial premises,
shall accumulate, store, or permit the accumulation of garbage waste on any
such property except:
   (A)   For single-family dwelling, waste must be stored at all times in a
garbage waste container as may be supplied from time to time by a licensed
provider of such waste collection service and shall not be allowed to overflow
the containers provided for storage of same. One 96-gallon tote cart which
shall be provided by the licensee to each single-family dwelling free of
charge.
   (B)   For multifamily dwelling or commercial facility, a watertight
container or containers which meet or exceed the requirements of being
constructed of a rigid material with handles, a tight-fitting lid and
sufficient capacity to contain the accumulation of garbage waste until the next
date of collection; or a watertight dumpster or similar trash receptacle which
meets or exceeds the requirements of being constructed of a rigid material with
a lid and sufficient capacity to contain the accumulation of garbage waste
until the next date of collection.
(Ord. 25-01-04, passed 1-28-2025)
§ 50.04 CONTAINER PLACEMENT BEFORE AND AFTER PICKUP.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to place garbage waste or garbage waste
container in front of any premises, or curbside, even in a proper container,
sooner than 48 hours prior to scheduled pick-up time or later than 48 hours
after the actual pick-up time by a licensee. The garbage waste or garbage waste
container must not be placed at any time on a public roadway, highway, street,
or public sidewalk.
(Ord. 25-01-04, passed 1-28-2025)
§ 50.05 DECLARATION OF NUISANCE.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to keep or store any garbage waste on
any premises in the village in such a manner as, to violate any provisions of
this code. Such activity in violation hereof is declared hereby to be a public
nuisance, and the Village Administrator or Code Compliance Official is
authorized hereby to take whatever legal steps may be necessary to abate such
public nuisance forthwith. If a licensee fails to collect the garbage waste the
licensee bears responsibility and all provisions thereof for the nuisance
violation, except as provided in §
50.21.
(Ord. 25-01-04, passed 1-28-2025)
WASTE HAULER LICENSING REGULATIONS
§ 50.15 LICENSE REQUIRED.
   (A)   No firm, corporation or person shall engage in the business of
collecting garbage waste and recyclable material, or be permitted to haul,
convey or transport over and upon the streets of the village any garbage or
other refuse as defined, or other material giving off noxious odors unless he
or she shall be licensed therefor.
   (B)   The licensee shall maintain an office and telephone for the receipt of
service calls or complaints, and shall be available for such calls on all
working days from 9:00 a.m. to 4:00 p.m. Any complaints must be given prompt
and courteous attention, and in case of missed scheduled collection, the
licensee shall investigate; and if verified, shall arrange for pick-up of said
garbage within 24 hours after the complaint is received.
   (C)   A license is not required for collection of construction or demolition
debris.
(Ord. 25-01-04, passed 1-28-2025)
§ 50.16 CONDITIONS REQUIRED.
   (A)   Each licensee shall agree to the terms of this subchapter and any and
all conditions required to holding such license in the village and acknowledges
that it is solely liable for fines, damages, and penalties imposed by the
village or other governmental agency resulting from the licensee's performance
or its failure to perform its duties and obligations under this chapter and a
condition of the license.
   (B)   Such service shall be offered to single-family dwellings, multifamily
dwellings or commercial facilities (or any combination thereof) within the
corporate limits of the village and any land hereinafter annexed during the
term of the license. The licensee acknowledges that it is familiar with the
number and type of properties to be served within the village and is familiar
with the projected growth of the village boundaries.
   (C)   Every vehicle utilized by a person required to have a license under
this subchapter and used for the transfer of garbage waste or recyclable
materials through the streets of the village shall comply with all vehicle
requirements listed in § 50.19.
   (D)   No person required to have a license under this subchapter shall
deposit or store any garbage waste, when collected, within the corporate limits
of the village. If recyclable materials must be stored, the licensee shall
store recyclable materials under conditions which will not degrade the quality
of the recyclable materials.
   (E)   No vehicle used for the collection of garbage waste or recyclable
materials by a person required to have a license under this subchapter shall be
allowed to become offensive to the sense of smell of a person of ordinary
sensibilities. Such vehicles shall be cleaned inside and outside at regular
intervals.
   (F)   Every vehicle utilized by a person required to have a license under
this subchapter hauling garbage waste or putrescible rubbish must be evacuated
of its contents within 24 hours of the deposit of such garbage or putrescible
rubbish.
   (G)   No vehicle utilized by a person required to have a license under this
subchapter shall be parked overnight in or adjacent to residential areas
outside of an enclosed structure. If a vehicle licensed under this subchapter
is stored in a residential district within an enclosed structure, the owner of
the vehicle shall have a rodent control plan approved by and on file with the
Village Clerk.
   (H)   No person required to have a license under this subchapter shall
transfer garbage waste or recyclable materials from one vehicle to another
vehicle on any village street, or in such a manner as to cause the release of
waste onto any property.
   (I)   Any person required to be licensed by this subchapter shall maintain
in force and effect commercial general liability, automobile liability, and
worker's compensation insurance and unemployment insurance to the extent
required by the village in this chapter. A certification of insurance from an
insurance company licensed to do business in the state certifying that the
licensee has the following coverage:
      (1)   Comprehensive general liability insurance of $1,000,000 per
occurrence, $2,000,000 in the aggregate, $1,000,000 umbrella liability.
      (2)   Vehicle liability of $1,000,000 for bodily injury each accident and
$500,000 each person, and $1,000,000 property damage each accident or combined
single limit of $1,000,000; and
      (3)   Workers' compensation per statutory limits required under the
Illinois Workers Compensation Act, ILCS, Ch. 820, Act 305, §§ 1 et seq., or as
otherwise required by state and federal.
      (4)   Employers' liability of $500,000 for each accident, each disease -
each employee, and each disease - policy limit.
      (5)   The village shall be named as an additional insured. All
certificates of insurance must remain current. The licensee shall use the
ACCORD certificate of insurance form. The certificate of insurance shall be
submitted to the Village Clerk prior to the issuance of license.
(Ord. 25-01-04, passed 1-28-2025)
§ 50.17 APPLICATIONS.
   All applications for a license hereunder shall be made in writing to the
Village Clerk who shall refer the application to the Board of Trustees. Action
shall be taken to grant or deny the application for a license within 60 days of
the date of filing with the Village Clerk. The application for and renewal of a
waste hauling license shall include the following information:
   (A)   Name and phone number of the business operating the vehicle(s);
   (B)   Name of the manager of the business;
   (C)   Address of business;
   (D)   Year, make and model and Illinois vehicle plate number of each
collection vehicle operated by the business;
   (E)   Type of each collection vehicle (e.g. pickup, dump truck, semi);
   (F)   Weight of each collection vehicle;
   (G)   Capacity of each collection vehicle in yards;
   (H)   Provide with application, the certificate of insurance as required in
§
50.16.
   (I)   Payment of annual license fee.
(Ord. 05-01-04, passed 1-28-2025)
§ 50.18 LICENSE FEE.
   The license fee shall be $1,000 per year for each license holder, payable at
the time application is made. The license shall expire on December 31 of each
year regardless of when issued, and there shall be no proration of the license
fee, and the license fee shall be payable in advance.
(Ord. 25-01-04, passed 1-28-2025)
§ 50.19 VEHICLES.
   (A)   The licensee agrees to use modern loader trucks for its operations in
the village and to keep all equipment used in the performance of its work in a
clean, sanitary condition and not to permit the same to remain standing
anywhere in the village.
   (B)   The licensee shall furnish to the village a complete list of the
vehicles to be used in the execution of the contract at the time of application
and will provide updated equipment list to the village if changes occur.
   (C)   All vehicles shall display the name of the licensee, a local telephone
number and a vehicle identification number which are clearly visible on both
sides.
   (D)   All vehicles shall be fully enclosed with a water-tight bed or
receptacle leakproof and operated in such a way that no garbage waste can leak,
spill, or blow off the vehicle and be scattered or left in or upon the
sidewalks, streets, alleys or public grounds of the village.
   (E)   No vehicle shall be operated on the village streets that leak any
fluids from the engine or compacting mechanism.
   (F)   In the event any garbage waste should leak, spill, or blow off a
vehicle as the result of the licensee's failure to properly monitor the vehicle
load or to close openings, the licensee shall be responsible for the immediate
collection and clean-up.
   (G)   Each vehicle shall carry in the vehicle tools sufficient for the
removal of scattered or spilled garbage waste. Whenever collecting garbage
waste, a licensed hauler shall completely recover and remove scattered debris
lying within three feet of the garbage waste container or container area which
the hauler is servicing and all debris that has been dropped or spilled during
collection.
   (H)   All vehicles used in the collection of recyclable materials shall be
operated in such a way as to allow for the physical characteristics of the
materials to be retained. Compaction of materials shall be performed at a
minimum. The village reserves the right to inspect the garbage waste hauler's
equipment solely for the purpose of determining compliance with this chapter.
   (I)   Violations of this section shall constitute grounds for revocation or
suspension of a hauler's license received pursuant to this chapter.
(Ord. 25-01-04, passed 1-28-2025)
§ 50.20 ASHES AND NON-NOXIOUS MATTER.
   All ashes and non-noxious matter must be hauled in vehicles of such
construction as not to permit the sifting out or spilling or scattering by the
wind or leakage of any matter so hauled or transported.
(Ord. 25-01-04, passed 1-28-2025)
§ 50.21 DELINQUENT CUSTOMERS.
   Any hauler granted a license under this chapter shall be under no obligation
to make a pickup of garbage from any customer who is more than 60 days
delinquent in paying garbage collection charges.
(Ord. 25-01-04, passed 1-28-2025)
§ 50.22 REVOCATION OF LICENSE.
   If, during the period covered by the license granted, garbage waste hauler
shall permit his or her equipment to fall into disrepair or shall fail to keep
the same in a sanitary condition when not in use or shall fail to obey any of
the provisions of this chapter, the license may be revoked or suspended after
reasonable notice and hearing by the Board of Trustees following the hearing
procedures in this chapter.
(Ord. 25-01-04, passed 1-28-2025)
§ 50.23 NUMBER OF LICENSES.
   (A)   The number of licenses to be issued under this chapter shall be a
maximum of three.
   (B)   Subject to §
50.28(G), existing legacy license holders are automatically eligible for
renewal.
   (C)   If a license becomes available, the village will use a request for
qualifications (RFQ) process from interested garbage waste haulers. Selection
will be made using quality based selection (QBS) principles and will be
evaluated, scored, and ranked according to a process and criteria determined by
the Village Administrator. The Village Administrator will then make a
recommendation to the full Village Board of Trustees who by resolution will
award the available license(s). The village reserves the right to waive
technicalities or any informality in the process and award a license which is
deemed to be in the best interest of the village.
   (D)   Village Administrator shall provide written notice of any license
denial stating the basis for the denial and shall provide notice to the
applicant that if an appeal is desired, a written request for a hearing must be
received by the department within 15 calendar days following service, exclusive
of the day of service. Upon receipt of a request for the hearing, the Village
Administrator shall set a time and place for the hearing. The hearing shall be
conducted pursuant to the procedures in this chapter.
(Ord. 25-01-04, passed 1-28-2025)
§ 50.24 ASSIGNMENT OF LICENSES.
   No license may be assigned or transferred without the express approval of
the Board of Trustees of the village. A change in control or transfer of 50% or
more of the ownership in a licensee shall be deemed an assignment for the
purposes of this section.
(Ord. 25-01-04, passed 1-28-2025)
§ 50.25 DUTIES OF LICENSEE.
   Except as otherwise provided, it is the duty of each licensee to:
   (A)   Agree to all conditions required in §
50.16 and all terms of this chapter and any and all conditions required to hold
such license.
   (B)   Shall offer and provide at least once per week collection and disposal
on designated days determined by licensee. If not picked up on designated days,
licensee shall pick up within 48 hours after the designated day excluding
Sundays and holidays.
   (C)   Shall provide collection day information to the residents prior to the
start of service.
   (D)   Shall provide a holiday schedule once a year to their customers.
   (E)   Shall meet the container requirements provided in §
50.03.
   (F)   At the request of a resident of a single-family dwelling, the licensee
shall pick up bulky items such as sofas, chairs, couches, etc., with payment
method and fee-based charge determined by the licensee.
   (G)   Shall provide, at an additional cost, twice a month collection of
recyclable materials from all single-family dwellings in the village at the
curbside on a day determined by the licensee. License shall provide collection
day information to the residents prior to the start of service.
   (H)   Shall provide adequate employees and equipment to fulfill the
requirements of the license and maintain customers.
   (I)   Exceptions. Except as provided in §
50.19(F) and §
50.19(G), licensee shall not be required to pick up any loose or scattered
garbage waste or loose or scattered recyclable materials. Licensee shall not be
required to pick up as recycled materials any material mixed or mingled with
non-recyclable material or in such unsanitary condition that it could not be
recycled without being cleaned (but licensee shall pick up such items as
garbage waste).
(Ord. 25-01-04, passed 1-28-2025)
§ 50.26 EXCUSE OF PERFORMANCE.
   Licensee shall not be liable for its failure to perform the garbage waste
disposal and collection services hereunder due to events, actions or
contingencies beyond its reasonable control, including, but not limited to,
strikes, explosion, accident, flood, sabotage, riot, war, fire, acts of God;
compliance with any applicable governmental laws, rules, regulations or orders;
coercive action of regulatory agencies; court injunction or order; loss of
permits; failure to obtain permits; or lack of adequate fuel, power, raw
materials, and disposal facilities; provided, however, licensee shall work
diligently to remove any such contingency.
(Ord. 25-01-04, passed 1-28-2025)
§ 50.27 STANDARDS OF PERFORMANCE.
   (A)   The licensee shall be responsible for all work to be performed as a
condition of the license, and shall provide and furnish all the labor,
materials, necessary tools, expendable equipment and supplies, vehicles,
transportation services, landfill space required to perform and complete the
collection, transportation and disposal of all garbage, refuse, and recyclables
as defined in this chapter.
   (B)   The licensee shall undertake to perform all disposal services rendered
hereunder in a neat, orderly, and efficient manner, to use care and diligence,
and to provide neat, orderly, and courteous personnel on its crew and courteous
and knowledgeable personnel in its customer service function.
   (C)   The licensee's performance of the work under the terms of the license
and this chapter shall be observed and monitored by the village. Should the
village determine during the license period that the licensee has not performed
satisfactorily, the licensee, upon notification from the village, shall
increase the work force, tools and equipment as needed to properly perform to
the satisfaction of the village. The failure of village to give such
notification shall not relieve the licensee of its obligation to perform the
work at the time and in the manner specified.
(Ord. 25-01-04, passed 1-28-2025)
§ 50.28 DEFAULT PENALTIES AND FINES.
   (A)   Citation. Any violation of this subchapter will, unless otherwise
specified, result in the issuance of a complaint or citation for an ordinance
violation by the Village Administrator or his designee.
   (B)   Fines. Any person(s) or business violating the provisions of this
subchapter shall be subject to the following fines:
 
First offense                                                        $50
Second offense within 12 months of the first offense                 $100
Third offense within 12 months of the first offense                  $150
Fourth offense within 12 months of the first offense                 $200
Fifth offense or more within 12 months of the first offense for each $250
offense
 
   (C)   Separate offenses. A separate offense may be deemed committed for each
customer address and on each day during or on which violation occurs or
continues. These provisions do not waive other remedies that the village may
have.
   (D)   All terms and conditions of the license are considered material and
the failure of the licensee to perform any of said terms and conditions shall
be considered a breach of the license. If the licensee fails to perform
according to the terms and conditions herein or fails to collect and/or dispose
of the garbage, refuse, and recyclables as required herein for more than seven
consecutive working days, the village shall reserve the right to determine if
there has not been sufficient cause to justify such lack of performance. If in
the village's judgement, sufficient cause has not been demonstrated, the
village shall serve notice, identifying the licensee's violations and stating
that their license shall be deemed in default if the licensee does not take
action to correct the violation or re-establish the schedule within three days
of said notice. If, at the end of the three day period, the licensee has not
made the necessary corrections, the village may take such steps as are
necessary to solicit another garbage waste hauler who can furnish services
according to the collection requirements provided in their license and shall
have the right to terminate the license.
   (E)   The licensee shall be liable for any and all costs of such steps from
the date of the notice of default. The remedies provided herein shall not be
exclusive but shall be in addition to any other remedy available to the village
including, but not limited to, legal or equitable remedies. The failure of the
village to declare a default or insist on performance of any specific term or
condition shall not constitute a waiver on the part of the village to declare a
default by the continuing or subsequent failure of the licensee to perform
according to the terms and conditions of its license.
   (F)   The licensee shall be solely liable for fines, liquidated damages and
penalties imposed by the village or other governmental agency resulting from
the licensee's performance or its failure to perform its duties and obligations
under the license and this chapter.
   (G)   The village has the right to not renew a license, regardless of
whether the licensee holds a current license, for failure of the licensee to
meet the standards of performance or violate other terms of this subchapter.
There is no appeal for a license that is not renewed by the village.
(Ord. 25-01-04, passed 1-28-2025)
§ 50.29 ADMINISTRATIVE PROCEEDINGS.
   (A)   Suspension or revocation of license.
      (1)   The village may suspend or revoke any license issued under this
chapter for a violation of any provision of this subchapter. Suspension shall
be for a period of no less than 30 days nor more than 180 days.
      (2)   Notice of a suspension or revocation shall be in writing and shall
be served personally or by registered or certified mail upon the licensee at
least 15 calendar days prior to the effective date of the suspension or
revocation. The written notice shall contain the effective date of the
suspension or revocation; the facts which support the conclusion that a
violation or violations have occurred; a statement that if the licensee desires
to appeal, a written request for a hearing must be received by the village, as
specified in the notice, within 15 calendar days following service of the
notice, exclusive of the day of service; and that the request for hearing must
state the grounds for appeal. If a hearing is requested, the suspension or
revocation shall be stayed pending outcome of the hearing.
      (3)   Upon receipt of a request for hearing, the village shall set a
date, time and place for the hearing. The hearing shall be conducted pursuant
to the procedures in §
50.30.
   (B)   Summary suspension of license.
      (1)   If the village finds that the public health, safety or welfare
requires immediate action, it may order summary suspension of a license.
      (2)   Written notice of a summary suspension shall be by personal service
upon the licensee or sent by certified return receipt mail to the licensee's
business address. The village shall also take reasonable steps to notify
licensee by telephone, at the phone number provided by the licensee, prior to
the summary suspension.
      (3)   The written notice shall state the effective date of the summary
suspension, the violation requiring emergency action, the facts which support
the conclusion that a violation has occurred, a statement that if the licensee
desires to appeal, a written request for a hearing must be received by the
village, as specified by the notice, within ten calendar days following service
of the notice, exclusive of the day of service, and that the request for
hearing must state the grounds for appeal.
      (4)   Upon receipt of a request for hearing the village shall set a date,
time and place for the hearing. The hearing shall be conducted pursuant to the
procedures in §
50.30.
(Ord. 25-01-04, passed 1-28-2025)
§ 50.30 HEARINGS.
   Hearings required pursuant to this subchapter shall be conducted as follows:
   (A)   Board of Trustees. The hearing shall be before the Board of Trustees.
   (B)   Prehearing and hearing notice. The village shall schedule and provide
notice of the date, lime and place of the hearing. The hearing shall be held no
later than 45 calendar days after receipt of the request for hearing or by
mutual agreement of the parties.
   (C)   Procedures.
      (1)   Each party shall exchange all relevant information and documentary
evidence at least one week prior to the hearing date. Such information shall
include all evidence intended for introduction at the hearing and includes, but
is not limited to, the following: exhibits, statements, reports, witness lists
including a description of the facts and opinions to which each is expected to
testify, photographs, slides, and demonstrative evidence. Evidence not
exchanged in accordance with these provisions will not be considered in the
hearing unless good cause is shown to the Village President.
      (2)   The hearing shall be public and shall be recorded by the Village
Clerk.
      (3)   All witnesses shall testify under oath or affirmation.
      (4)   The hearing is subject to the general rules of evidence with
latitude necessary to gain facts or information. Irrelevant, immaterial or
unduly repetitious evidence shall be excluded. The Village President shall make
all rulings for the Board of Trustees.
      (5)   The village, licensee or applicant, and additional parties as
determined by the Board of Trustees, shall present evidence in that order. Each
party shall have the opportunity to cross-examine the witnesses of the other
party. The Board of Trustees may examine witnesses.
      (6)   The Board of Trustees shall make written finding of fact and
conclusions based upon the evidence provided at the hearing.
      (7)   The cost of preparing a record shall be borne by the applicant or
licensee.
      (8)   The decision of the Board of Trustees is final.
(Ord. 25-01-04, passed 1-28-2025)
LANDSCAPE WASTE PROGRAMS
§ 50.35 PURPOSE.
   The purpose of this subchapter is to establish standards for the use of the
Village Landscape Waste Collection Programs. The programs are intended to
provide appropriate alternatives to open burning of seasonally generated
landscape waste materials from property in the village and are not intended for
collection of landscape waste materials generated from the complete removal of
trees and the clearing of excessive amounts of landscape waste which should
otherwise be handled by a professional contractor.
(Ord. 10-05-01, passed 5-25-2010; Ord. 24-02-01, passed 2-27-2024)
§ 50.36 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   BRUSH. Cut or broken branches from woody shrubs and trees.
   DRIED PLANT MATERIAL. Dried leaves and stems from annual and/or perennial
plants.
   GRASS. Slender leaved lawn grasses, not including ornamental grasses.
   LEAVES. Foliage from woody shrubs and trees.
   TREE LIMBS. Large branches of trees, not including trunks or stumps.
(Ord. 10-05-01, passed 5-25-2010; Ord. 24-02-01, passed 2-27-2024)
§ 50.37 GENERAL RESTRICTIONS.
   (A)   It shall be a violation of this subchapter to place any soil, sod,
stones, brick or other construction materials, grass, weeds, hedge apples and
similar seed pods/fruit, root masses from plants, shrubs or trees, flocked/
decorated holiday trees, household refuse and construction materials on public
right-of-way for collection through the Village Landscape Waste Collections
Programs.
   (B)   It shall be a violation of this subchapter to place materials for
collection through the Village of Mahomet Landscape Waste Collections Program
that exceed size or volume restrictions outlined in this subchapter.
   (C)   It shall be a violation of this subchapter to place materials for
collection generated from a complete tree removal.
   (D)   It shall be a violation of this subchapter to place materials for
collection through the Village Landscape Waste Collections Programs on or block
public street pavements, public sidewalk pavements or public drainage
facilities.
   (E)   It shall be a violation of this subchapter to place materials for
collection through the Village Landscape Waste Collections Programs more than
seven days prior to the scheduled and announced collection day.
   (F)   It shall be a violation of this subchapter to place materials for
collection through the Village Landscape Waste Collection Programs, which are
not gathered from the property in which the materials are placed for collection
within the village.
   (G)   It shall be a violation of this subchapter for the use of the
Landscape Waste Collection Program by landscapers, arborists and similar
professions for property maintenance services conducted on behalf of residents
and property owners within the village.
(Ord. 10-05-01, passed 5-25-2010; Ord. 24-02-01, passed 2-27-2024) Penalty, see
§
50.99
§ 50.38 LEAF COLLECTION PROGRAM.
   (A)   Acceptable materials include leaves from trees, shrubs, and other
plants; dried non-woody stems and perennial plant material less than one foot
in length; dried ornamental grasses cut less than one foot in length; and pine
needles and pinecones.
   (B)   Waste must be free from limbs and other large debris and shall be
placed into piles and deposited within three feet of the curb or street edge
prior to scheduled and announced collection day.
   (C)   Materials shall be placed for collection prior to 7:00 a.m. on the
scheduled and announced collection day, but not more than seven days prior.
   (D)   Bagged or containerized leaves shall not be placed for collection.
   (E)   Vehicles shall be relocated on the scheduled and announced collection
day to provide access for leaf collection.
   (F)   The village reserves the right to deny collection due to the size of
dried plant material, the mixing of leaf and brush/tree limb materials, the
lack of access to the piles or late placement of materials.
(Ord. 10-05-01, passed 5-25-2010; Ord. 24-02-01, passed 2-27-2024)
§ 50.39 BRUSH AND TREE LIMB COLLECTION PROGRAM.
   (A)   Acceptable materials include brush, shrub, and tree limbs no longer
than five feet in length and with a diameter no greater than six inches; and
woody stems and dried perennial plant debris greater than one foot in length
and no longer than three feet.
   (B)   Brush and tree limbs, similarly aligned, are to be placed in distinct
piles within three feet of the curb or street edge, perpendicular to the curb
or street edge, prior to scheduled and announced collection day.
   (C)   Materials for all zones are to be placed prior to 7:00 a.m. on the
Monday of the scheduled and announced collection week but not more than seven
days prior.
   (D)   Maximum amount of materials placed on a property for collection
through the Village of Mahomet Landscape Waste Collections Program cannot
exceed a pile larger than eight feet long by five feet deep by four feet tall
(eight feet by five feet by four feet).
   (E)   Bound or tied bundles of brush and tree limbs will not be collected.
   (F)   Vehicles shall be relocated on the scheduled and announced collection
day to provide access for brush and tree limb collection.
   (G)   The village reserves the right to deny collection of brush and tree
limbs due to the mixing of leaf and brush/tree limb materials, the lack of
access to or within the piles, excessive volume of materials or late placement
of materials.
   (H)   The collection of landscape waste materials generated from the
complete removal of trees will not be collected.
(Ord. 10-05-01, passed 5-25-2010; Ord. 24-02-01, passed 2-27-2024)
§ 50.40 ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT.
   It shall be the duty of the Village Administrator or his or her designee, or
the Police Chief or his or her designee, to administer and enforce the
regulations contained herein.
(Ord. 10-05-01, passed 5-25-2010; Ord. 24-02-01, passed 2-27-2024) Penalty, see
§
50.99
REMOVAL OF REFUSE, GARBAGE AND
DEBRIS FROM PRIVATE PROPERTY
§ 50.50 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ASHES. The residue from the burning of wood, coal, coke or other combustible
materials.
   DEBRIS. The remains of something broken down or destroyed.
   GARBAGE.  Putrescible animal and vegetable wastes resulting from the
handling, preparation, cooking and consumption of food.
   REFUSE. All putrescible and nonputrescible solid wastes (except body
wastes), including garbage, rubbish, ashes, street cleanings, dead animals,
abandoned automobiles, and solid market and industrial wastes.
   RUBBISH.  Nonputrescible solid wastes (excluding ashes), consisting of both
combustible and noncombustible wastes, such as paper, cardboard, tin cans, yard
clippings, wood, glass, bedding, crockery and similar materials.
(Ord. 74-1, passed 1-14-1974)
§ 50.51 UNLAWFUL ACCUMULATION DECLARED A NUISANCE.
   The accumulation of ashes, garbage, refuse, rubbish or debris on private
property is unlawful, and any such unlawful accumulation is hereby declared to
be a nuisance.
(Ord. 74-1, passed 1-14-1974)
Cross-reference:
   For fine, see §
35.01
§ 50.52 REMOVAL; NOTICE.
   It shall be the duty of the Village President to serve or cause to be served
a notice upon the owner or occupant of any premises on which unlawful
accumulation of ashes, garbage, refuse, rubbish or debris are permitted to
exist in violation of the provisions of this subchapter, to demand the
abatement of the nuisance within ten days.
(Ord. 74-1, passed 1-14-1974)
§ 50.53 ABATEMENT.
   If the person so served does not abate the nuisance within ten days, the
Village President may proceed to abate the nuisance, keeping an account of the
expense of the abatement, and the expense shall be charged to and paid by the
owner or occupant.
(Ord. 74-1, passed 1-14-1974)
§ 50.54 LIEN.
   (A)   The cost of the abatement shall be a lien upon the real estate,
superior to all subsequent liens and encumbrances, except taxes. Whenever a
bill for the abatement remains unpaid 30 days after it has been rendered to the
property owner, the Clerk shall file, within 60 days after the cost and expense
of the abatement is incurred, with the Recorder of Deeds of the county, a
notice of lien. The notice shall consist of a sworn statement setting out:
      (1)   A description of the real estate sufficient for identification
thereof;
      (2)   The amount of money representing the cost and expense incurred or
payable for the service; and
      (3)   The date or dates when the cost or expense was incurred by the
village.
   (B)   A copy of this notice shall be mailed by the Clerk to the owner of the
premises, if his or her address is known to the Clerk.
   (C)   Property subject to a lien for unpaid bills shall be sold for
nonpayment of the same, and the proceeds of the sale shall be applied to pay
the charges, after deducting costs, as is the case in the foreclosure of the
name of the village.
   (D)   The Village Attorney is hereby authorized and directed to institute
proceedings, in the name of the village, in any court having jurisdiction over
such matter, against any property for which the bill has remained unpaid 30
days after it has been rendered.
(Ord. 74-1, passed 1-14-1974)
§ 50.99 PENALTY.
   (A)    Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which no
specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to §
10.99. Any day on which any violation occurs shall constitute a separate
offense.
   (B)   Any violation of any provision of §§
50.35 through
50.40 shall be punished by a fine not less than $75, nor more than $750 for
each violation. Any day on which any violation occurs shall constitute a
separate offense.
   (C)   Any person, firm or corporation violating any of the provisions of §§
50.50 through
50.54 shall be fined not less than $1 nor more than $500 for each offense; and
a separate offense shall be deemed committed on each day during or on which the
nuisance continues unabated after ten days from receipt of notice.
(Ord. 74-1, passed 1-14-1974; Ord. passed 3-9-1987; Ord. 10-05-01, passed 5-25-
2010; Ord. 25-01-04, passed 1-28-2025)
CHAPTER 51: STORMWATER MANAGEMENT
Section
   
51.01   Title, purpose, intent and policy
   
51.02   Applicability
   
51.03   Exemptions
   
51.04   Definitions
   
51.05   Drainage system components
   
51.06   Permits and applications
   
51.07   Drainage plan submittal requirements
   
51.08   Design requirement
   
51.09   Maintenance responsibility
   
51.10   Inspections
   
51.11   Approval of constructed facilities
   
51.12   Performance guarantee
   
51.13   Dry weather water outlets
   
51.14   Variances
   
51.15   Enforcement
   
51.16   Severability
   
51.17   Penalties
   
51.18   Appeals
   
51.19   Disclaimer of liability
   
51.20   Retroactivity
   
51.21   Administrative rules
   
51.22   Savings and applicability
§ 51.01 TITLE, PURPOSE, INTENT AND POLICY.
   (A)   Title. This chapter shall be known, cited and referred to as the,
“Stormwater Management Ordinance of the Village of Mahomet, Champaign County,
Illinois”.
   (B)   Purpose. The purpose of this chapter is to guide developer’s attempts
to control the transportation or movement of stormwater so as to reduce the
likelihood of damage to property; prevent injury to persons; protect the public
health, safety, and general welfare of the community; and to promote the
orderly development of land and water resources within the Village of Mahomet.
   (C)   Intent. The intent of this chapter is to require temporary storage of
stormwater runoff, to control the rate of release of stormwater runoff by
implementation of “reasonable provisions” and “in accordance with generally
accepted engineering practices”, to provide for adequate drainage of
development sites and surrounding areas, and to protect existing agricultural
drainage system. Further, it is intended that this chapter complement and
coordinate with the Village of Mahomet Subdivision Ordinance and the Village of
Mahomet Zoning Ordinance.
   (D)   Policy. This chapter establishes a stormwater management policy for
the future control of stormwater runoff within the jurisdictional limits of the
village. Accordingly, a combination of temporary storage and the controlled
release of stormwater runoff shall generally be required for all new commercial
and industrial developments, residential subdivisions, planned unit
developments, and any redevelopment or other new construction, as further
defined in this chapter.
(Ord. 15-12-02, passed 12-15-2015)
§ 51.02 APPLICABILITY.
   (A)   Scope of application. A combination of stormwater storage and
controlled release of stormwater runoff is required for all non-agricultural
development activities within the boundaries of the village involving:
      (1)   All non-agricultural developments greater than two acres in size.
      (2)   All non-agricultural developments between 20,000 square feet and
two acres in size with greater than 35% impervious surface area.
      (3)   All new or expanded subdivisions which require approval of the
village pursuant to the provisions of the Village of Mahomet Subdivision
Ordinance, as amended.
      (4)   Generally, any new construction within the village’s area of zoning
jurisdiction, pursuant to the provisions of the Village of Mahomet Zoning
Ordinance, that increases the amount of pervious area of the lot or parcel of
land upon which it is constructed.
      (5)   Except as may otherwise be provided herein, all structures erected
hereafter, all uses of land or structures established hereafter, all
improvements to water courses, all structural alterations or relocation of
existing structures occurring hereafter, and all enlargement of, or additions
to, existing uses which increase the amount of pervious area, occurring
hereafter, shall be subject to the provisions of this chapter. Therefore,
except as provided in §
51.03, no building permit may be issued, no subdivision or plat of land may be
approved or recorded; no mobile home, independent travel trailer, or
recreational travel trailer park permit may be issued; no planned unit
development may be approved; no watercourse, stormwater drainage system, storm
sewer, or stormwater control structure may be constructed; and no paved or
compacted area designed to be used for loading, open storage, or the parking or
movement of vehicles may be constructed without first having complied with the
applicable provisions of this stormwater management chapter.
   (B)   Whenever storage and controlled release of stormwater is required for
existing developed parcels, and where improvements upon such parcels were
constructed prior to 1972, such storage and the required controlled release
rate shall apply to the net increase in the amount of runoff since January 1,
1972.
   (C)   Any area proposed for development, consisting of a tract of land of
three or more acres in common ownership or interest and upon which phased
development is proposed, shall be required to provide a combination of storage
and controlled release of stormwater runoff for future development of the
entire tract.
      (1)   Where phased development is proposed, the owner may construct,
after receiving site specific approval from the Administrator, one stormwater
detention facility which is built larger than initially needed in order to
anticipate subsequent phases of development and/or is designed to be enlarged
at later dates as additional portions of the overall site are developed. Phased
construction shall include implementation of sufficient and enforceable
covenants upon the land to properly document the phased implementation. The
form of covenant shall be approved by the Village Attorney, and the substance
of the covenant shall reflect the approved overall stormwater detention plan
for the site.
      (2)   Where a subdivision plat or a planned unit development involves new
lots which are more than three acres in size that are zoned for commercial or
industrial purposes, the developer/owner may provide for storage and controlled
release of stormwater runoff for the developed lots by sufficient and
enforceable covenant upon the individual lots. The covenant shall require
construction of on-site stormwater detention facilities upon each lot at the
time of subsequent development of that lot. The form of covenant shall be
approved by the Village Attorney, and the substance of the covenant shall
require construction of on-site stormwater runoff storage and controlled
release of stormwater runoff from each lot in a manner approved by the
Administrator, and in accordance with the provisions of this chapter.
   (D)   Any property or development falling within the scope of the provisions
of this chapter shall be subject to review by the Administrator in order to
establish and determine, in the opinion of the Administrator,that no adverse
consequences will arise downstream as a result of construction of improvements
under the sought-after permit. Any property located within floodplain areas, as
defined in the flood hazard area development ordinance of the village shall be
governed by such ordinance in the event of and to the extent of conflict with
the provisions of this stormwater management ordinance.
   (E)   All applications for building permits shall contain a statement that
such buildings or structures and appurtenances connected therewith include
facilities for the orderly runoff or detention of rain and melting snow, as
required herein. Plans submitted with said application shall include a signed
statement issued by the owner and by an Illinois professional engineer that the
plans include facilities adequate to prevent hazardous runoff, as required
herein. For single family dwellings to be located in a subdivision meeting the
requirement of this chapter, the signed statement may, in lieu of the above
procedure, be placed on the face of the final plat or upon the required
subsidiary drainage plat for the entire subdivision.
   (F)   Existing conditions. 
      (1)   It is anticipated in this chapter that a land owner shall be
allowed to pass through existing excess stormwater runoff from tributary areas
upstream from that owner’s land without storage or controlled release of such
runoff. It is further anticipated that this chapter will require the controlled
release of excess stormwater runoff resulting from development on an owner’s
land. The controlled release rate of excess stormwater runoff from an owner’s
land shall not exceed the rate of runoff which would have occurred from that
owner’s land prior to the development or redevelopment of that owner’s land.
      (2)   It is presumed by this chapter that prior to development, the
owner’s land had a traditional agricultural use. It is further presumed that
the maximum safe stormwater drainage capacity for downstream stormwater
drainage systems is the capacity required to carry the peak rate of stormwater
runoff from a five year return period storm event prior to December 14, 1981.
(Ord. 15-12-02, passed 12-15-2015)
§ 51.03 EXEMPTIONS.
   (A)   The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to the following
developments:
      (1)   Any development constructed totally upon a lot or parcel of land,
recorded prior to December 14, 1981, that contains less than 20,000 square feet
of land area, provided the development has less than 35% impervious surface
area; or
      (2)   Any single-family residential or two-family residential development
on any lot or parcel of land, which was recorded prior to December 14, 1981; or
      (3)   Modification of single-family residential or two-family residential
structures which will continue to be used as single-family or two-family
dwellings; or
      (4)   Modification of existing structures or appurtenances, other than a
single-family dwelling or two-family dwelling, which do not increase the amount
of impervious area of the lot or parcel upon which it is constructed; or
      (5)   Traditional agricultural land uses; or
      (6)   Improvement of any existing roadways which do not increase the
number of traffic lanes in the typical cross-section of the roadway; or
      (7)   Any development greater than two acres in size which the total
impervious area is less than 15% of the total area of the site.
      (8)   New development in which the total impervious area, including the
area of the existing, adjacent public or private streets, is less than 20% of
the total area or is less than 10,000 square feet, whichever is less.
   (B)   The exemptions set forth above shall not apply to the installation,
repair, or replacement of dry weather water outlets.
(Ord. 15-12-02, passed 12-15-2015)
§ 51.04 DEFINITIONS.
   (A)   For the purposes of this chapter, the following definitions are
adopted.
      ADMINISTRATOR. The Village of Mahomet Administrator or other person
specifically designated by the President of the Board of Trustees to enforce
the provisions of this chapter.
      BOARD OF TRUSTEES. The Board of Trustees of the Village of Mahomet.
      CAPACITY OF A STORMWATER DETENTION FACILITY. The maximum volume that can
be stored by a stormwater detention facility without causing damage to the
public or encroachment upon private property. The capacity of a stormwater
detention facility is generally determined utilizing average end area or
similar volume calculation methods.
      CAPACITY OF A STORMWATER DRAINAGE FACILITY. The maximum flow at
atmospheric pressure that can be conveyed by the facility without causing
damage to the public or encroachment upon private property. The capacity of a
stormwater drainage facility is determined utilizing “Mannings Equation” or
similar approved formula.
      CHANNEL. A natural or artificial watercourse of perceptible extent which
periodically or continuously contains moving water, or which forms a connecting
line between two bodies of water. It has a definite bed and banks which serve
to confine the water.
      CONTROL STRUCTURE. A facility constructed to regulate the volume and rate
of stormwater that is released during a specific length of time.
      CULVERT. A closed conduit for the passage of surface drainage water under
a roadway, railroad, or other surface impediment.
      DETENTION STORAGE. Temporary detention or storage of stormwater in
storage basins, on rooftops, in parking lots, school yards, parks, open space,
lakes, ponds, or other areas under predetermined and controlled conditions,
with the rate of drainage therefrom regulated by appropriately installed
devices.
      DEVELOPMENT. Any man-made change to improved or unimproved real estate,
including, but not limited to, construction of or substantial improvements to
buildings or other structures, the placement of mobile homes, paving, mining,
filling, or other similar activities.
      DISCHARGE. The rate of outflow of water from a stormwater drainage or
stormwater detention facility.
      DIVERSION. The deflection of storm or stream waters in such a way that
those waters flow into a watercourse to which they are not naturally tributary
or that the point of discharge of these waters within a natural watershed is
changed.
      DRAINAGE AREA. The area from which water is carried off by a drainage
system; a watershed or catchment area above a given point.
      DRAINAGE EASEMENT. Authorization by a property owner allowing use of a
designated portion of his/her property by others for drainage purposes.
      DRY BOTTOM STORMWATER DETENTION BASIN. A facility that is designed to be
normally dry and which accumulates stormwater runoff only during periods when
the restricted stormwater runoff release rate is less than the stormwater
inflow rate.
      DRY WEATHER WATER OUTLET. A dry weather water outlet is an outlet from a
sump pump, footing tile, field tile, or other source which may discharge at
times other than during periods of rainfall and pursuant to direct surface
runoff.
      EXCESS STORMWATER PASSAGEWAY. A channel formed on the surface of the soil
to carry excess stormwater runoff through a specific area from dominant to
servient land areas.
      EXCESS STORMWATER RUNOFF. That portion of stormwater runoff which exceeds
the transportation capacity of storm sewers, swales, ditches or natural
drainage channels serving a specific watershed.
      FLOOD ELEVATION. The elevation of all locations delineating the maximum
level of high waters for a flood of a given return period.
      FLOODPLAIN. The special flood hazard lands adjoining a watercourse or
channel, the surface elevation of which is lower than the flood elevation and
which are subject to periodic inundation during floods.
      FLOODWAY. A channel of a watercourse and those portions of the adjoining
floodplain which are reasonably required to carry and discharge the design
flood.
      GRADE. The inclination or slope of a channel, canal, conduit, etc., or
natural ground surface, usually expressing in terms of percentage of the
vertical rise (or fall) as compared to the corresponding horizontal distance.
      ILLINOIS URBAN MANUAL. This term shall mean “A Technical Manual designed
for Urban Ecosystem Protection and Enhancement”, published by the United States
Department of Agriculture, Natural Resources Conservation Service, latest
edition thereof.
      IMPERMEABLE. A term applied to material through which water cannot pass.
      IMPERVIOUS. A term applied to material through which water cannot pass,
or through which water passes with great difficulty or at a very slow rate. For
purposes of this chapter, any surface which
would typically be assigned a Rational Method “C” value of 0.60 or greater
shall be considered impervious.
      INLET. An opening into a storm drainage system for the entrance of
surface storm runoff, more completely described as a storm drainage inlet.
      NATURAL DRAINAGE. Water flow by gravity in channels formed by the true
surface topography of the earth prior to changes made by the efforts of man.
      NATURAL DRAINAGE CONDITION. The situation whereby water flows by gravity
in channels formed by the true surface topography of the earth prior to changes
made by the efforts of man or as defined by the Illinois Compiled Statutes.
      NATURAL SAFE STORMWATER DRAINAGE CAPACITY. The quantity of stormwater
runoff that can be transported by means of a channel, passage, conduit, tube,
duct, or combination thereof, in such a manner that the elevation of the water
does not rise significantly above the level of the adjacent soil surface, and
cause damage or encroachment upon public or private property. For the purposes
of this chapter, it is presumed that the maximum NATURAL SAFE STORMWATER
DRAINAGE CAPACITY for downstream stormwater drainage systems is the capacity
required to carry the rate of stormwater runoff from a five year return period
storm prior to December 14, 1981.
      OWNER. The record title holder or a beneficiary of a land trust which is
the record title holder, and includes singular or plural; if the owner is other
than an individual, the term includes beneficiaries, agents, shareholders,
officers and directors, partnerships, associations, firms, trusts, clubs,
companies, or corporations.
      PEAK FLOW. The maximum rate of flow of water at a given point in a
channel or conduit resulting from a predetermined storm or flood.
      PERSON. An individual, public or private corporation, unit of government,
partnership, or unincorporated association.
      POSITIVE GRAVITY OUTLET. A term used to describe the drainage of an area
in a manner that will ensure complete removal of all surface water by means of
gravity.
      RECOGNIZED AGENCY. A governmental unit or agency which has statistically
and consistently examined local, climatic, and geologic conditions and
maintained records as they apply to stormwater runoff, e.g. National Weather
Service, University of Illinois Engineering Experiment Station, and the
Illinois State Water Survey.
      RETENTION BASIN. A structure of feature design to retain stormwater over
a period of time, with its release being positively controlled over a longer
period of time than a typical stormwater “detention” storage facility.
      RETURN PERIOD. The average interval of time within which a given rainfall
event will be equaled or exceeded once. As an example, a flood having a return
period of 50 years has a 2% probability of being equaled or exceeded in any one
year.
      RUNOFF COEFFICIENT. A decimal fraction relating the amount of rain which
appears as runoff and reaches the storm sewer system to the total amount of
rain falling. For example, a coefficient of 0.50 implies that 50% of the rain
falling on a given surface appears as stormwater runoff.
      STANDARD SPECIFICATIONS. The Standard Specifications for Road and Bridge
Construction published by the State of Illinois Department of Transportation,
latest edition.
      STORM DRAIN. A closed conduit for conveying collected stormwater runoff.
      STORMWATER DRAINAGE SYSTEM. All means, natural or man-made, used for
conducting stormwater to, through or from a drainage area to the point of final
outlet, including but not limited to any of the following: conduits, storm
drains, swales, canals, channels, ditches, streams, culverts, street gutters
and pumping stations.
      STORMWATER RUNOFF. The water that results from precipitation which is not
absorbed by soil or plant material, which does not evaporate and which flows
over the surface of the ground or is collected in channels, conduits or ponds.
      STORMWATER RUNOFF RELEASE RATE. The rate at which stormwater runoff is
released from dominant to servient land.
      STORMWATER STORAGE AREA. An area designated to temporarily accumulate
excess stormwater.
      STRUCTURE. Anything which is constructed or erected with a fixed location
on the ground or attached to something having a fixed location on the ground.
Among other things, structures include buildings, fences, signs, mobile homes,
swimming pools, and walls.
      TIME OF CONCENTRATION. The time required for stormwater runoff from the
remotest part of the drainage basin to reach the point being considered.
Minimum time of concentration requirements for design of stormwater drainage
systems shall be 15 minutes.
      TRADITIONAL AGRICULTURAL USES. Uses commonly classes as agricultural or
horticultural, including forestry, crop farming, truck gardening, wholesale
nursery operations, animal husbandry, the operation of any machinery or
vehicles incidental to said uses, and the construction of a single-family
dwelling and other farm structures incidental to and typically associated with
said uses. The terms does not include commercial feed lots, commercial grain
storage/processing facilities or other similar agriculturally related
commercial and industrial land uses.
      TRIBUTARY WATERSHED. The entire catchment area that contributes
stormwater runoff to a given point.
      VILLAGE. The Village of Mahomet, Champaign County, Illinois and its staff
and elected officials.
      WATERCOURSE. Any stream, creek, brook, branch, natural or artificial
depression, slough, gulch, reservoir, lake, pond or natural or man-made
drainageway in or into which stormwater runoff and flood waters flow either
regularly or intermittently.
      WET BOTTOM STORMWATER STORAGE AREA. A facility that contains a body of
water and which accumulates excess stormwater during periods when the
restricted stormwater runoff release rate is less than the stormwater inflow
rate.
   (B)   Words not defined shall be interpreted in accordance with the
definitions contained in Webster’s New Collegiate Dictionary.
(Ord. 15-12-02, passed 12-15-2015)
§ 51.05 DRAINAGE SYSTEM COMPONENTS.
   (A)   Minor. The Minor drainage system components shall consist of storm
drains, street gutters, small open channels, and swales designed to store and
convey the peak rate of runoff from the ten year return period precipitation
event of critical duration, as determined utilizing the Illinois State Water
Survey Bulletin 70 (or the latest revision thereof), and shall generally
conform to the requirements of the Village of Mahomet Infrastructure Design
Manual.
   (B)   Major. The Major drainage components, such as open ditches and large
surface swales draining 40 acres or more in the area, shall be designed to
store and convey stormwater flows beyond the capacity of the minor drainage
components. They shall be designed to convey the peak rate of stormwater runoff
from a 25 year return period precipitation event.
   (C)   Excess stormwater passageways. 
      (1)   An excess stormwater passageway shall be provided for the
floodplain of all natural water courses and such man-made water courses and
storm drainage systems as the Administrator may direct, which shall have
adequate capacity to convey the excess stormwater runoff from the tributary
watershed. The capacity of this excess stormwater passageway shall be adequate
to transport the peak rate of runoff from the 100 year return period storm,
assuming all upstream areas are fully developed for uses specifically permitted
by existing zoning, and antecedent rainfall in the tributary watershed is
average (e.g. Antecedent Moisture Condition II).
      (2)   No buildings or structures shall be constructed within this
passageway; however, streets, parking lots, playgrounds, park areas, pedestrian
walkways, open green space, and utility and sewer easements may be considered
compatible uses.
(Ord. 15-12-02, passed 12-15-2015)
§ 51.06 PERMITS AND APPLICATIONS.
   (A)   Requirement for permit. No person may undertake development under the
jurisdiction of the village set forth herein without first obtaining a
stormwater management permit from the village.
   (B)   An application for a permit authorizing the construction of a
stormwater drainage system and a stormwater detention facility shall be made on
forms provided by the Administrator, and submitted along with a stormwater
detention plan at the same time as approval is required for a final plat of
subdivision, conditional use permit, or building permit or any kind is
requested, and be accompanied by an application fee. The amount of the
application fee shall be as determined from time to time by resolution of the
Board of Trustees of the Village of Mahomet. No application shall be
considered, or construction permit request approved, without prior payment of
the application fee.
(Ord. 15-12-02, passed 12-15-2015)
§ 51.07 DRAINAGE PLAN SUBMITTAL REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   Once it is determined that a development is subject to the provisions
of this chapter, the owner shall submit a drainage plan containing the
information set forth in the Infrastructure Design Manual, to ensure that the
provisions of this chapter are met. The submittal shall include sufficient
information to evaluate the environmental characteristics of the property, the
potential adverse impacts of the development on water resources both on-site
and downstream, and the effectiveness of the proposed Drainage plan in managing
stormwater runoff. The applicant shall certify on the drawings that all
clearing, grading, drainage, and construction shall be accomplished in strict
conformance with the drainage plan.
   (B)   (1)   All developers intending to carry out any development within the
boundaries of the village, shall cause engineering plans and specifications to
be prepared for all stormwater detention or retention basins regulated by this
chapter. Said stormwater detention facilities shall be designed to conform to
the standards set forth in this chapter hereafter and shall also conform to the
minimum standards and requirements of other local, state and federal
authorities which have jurisdiction over the development. Engineering plans and
specifications shall be prepared under the supervision of an Engineer licensed
pursuant to the laws of the State of Illinois and shall bear the engineer’s
seal and signature.
      (2)   Any developer wishing to carry out any development as defined in
this chapter within the boundaries of the village shall submit engineering
plans and specifications to the Administrator for review and written approval
prior to the commencement of construction of any stormwater detention facility
required or regulated by this chapter.
      (3)   The Administrator or designated representative shall review all
said engineering plans and specifications for conformance with this chapter and
within a reasonable time after receipt thereof and shall submit a written
report to the developer setting
forth any village requirements which have not yet been met by the plans and
specifications. Within 30 days of receipt of satisfactory engineering plans and
specifications, the Administrator shall determine whether to approve or
disapprove the proposed stormwater detention facility or stormwater drainage
facility and shall advise the requesting developer of his (her) determination
in writing.
(Ord. 15-12-02, passed 12-15-2015)
§ 51.08 DESIGN REQUIREMENTS.
   General design methods and standards. The design requirements for stormwater
detention and drainage facilities set forth in the Infrastructure Design Manual
shall be applicable and shall be satisfied prior to the construction,
improvement or development of any structure, project or land which is subject
to the provisions of this chapter.
(Ord. 15-12-02, passed 12-15-2015)
§ 51.09 MAINTENANCE RESPONSIBILITY.
   (A)   Maintenance of stormwater drainage facilities located on private
property shall be the responsibility of the owner of that property. Before a
permit is obtained from the village, the applicant shall ensure that covenants
are placed upon the property, guaranteeing that the applicant and all future
owners of the property have sufficient funds to maintain and will maintain its
stormwater drainage system. The covenants shall specifically authorize
representatives from the village to enter onto the property for the purpose of
inspection and maintenance of the drainage system. The property’s stormwater
drainage system and shall provide for access to the system for inspection by
authorized personnel of the village.
   (B)   The owner of any stormwater detention facility located upon private
property shall enter into a maintenance agreement with the village which shall
set forth the minimum maintenance requirements for the basin and such other
information as the village may require.
   (C)   In the event that an inspection by the village reveals that the
private stormwater drainage facilities are not properly maintained, the village
may require that proper maintenance be performed. The Administrator shall
notify the property owner to begin any necessary corrections within 30 calendar
days of such notification and complete the corrections within 90 calendar days.
If the corrections are not made within this time period, the village may have
the necessary work completed and assess all the costs to the property owner, in
a manner approved by the Village Attorney.
   (D)   The private property owner may, after approval by the Administrator,
assign the owner’s maintenance responsibilities and duties under the terms of
the covenants to a third party, such as a property owner’s association, or
other competent agency. When such an assignment is made, the entity undertaking
the maintenance responsibility shall show evidence of financial ability to
provide any maintenance required.
(Ord. 15-12-02, passed 12-15-2015)
§ 51.10 INSPECTIONS.
   (A)   Inspections during construction. 
      (1)   Construction of impervious surfaces shall not begin until the
developer’s engineer has certified in writing to the Administrator that any
necessary stormwater detention facilities are in place and are operational. The
Administrator, or his or her representative may conduct periodic inspections of
the work in progress to be certain that the drainage system is being built as
designed. If any violations of the provisions or requirements of this chapter
are noted during such inspections, the Administrator shall notify the property
owner in writing of the items needing correction.
      (2)   The property owner shall have ten calendar days to make such
corrections unless given a specific extension of time in writing by the
Administrator. Failure to complete such corrections within the specified time
period shall constitute a violation of this chapter.
   (B)   Routine inspections. All privately owned drainage systems may be
inspected by representatives of the Administrator at any reasonable time. If
any violations of the provisions or requirements of this chapter are identified
during such inspections, the Administrator shall notify the property owner in
writing of the items needing correction. The property owner shall have 30
calendar days to make such corrections unless given a specific extension of
time in writing by the Administrator. Failure to complete such corrections
within the specified time period shall constitute a violation of this chapter.
(Ord. 15-12-02, passed 12-15-2015)
§ 51.11 APPROVAL OF CONSTRUCTED FACILITIES.
   (A)   “as-built” drawings. 
      (1)   “As-built” drawings must be prepared and submitted by an Illinois
professional engineer stating conformance with the design plans before final
approval of the constructed improvements by the Administrator.
      (2)   Upon completion of construction of all stormwater detention
facilities required and/or regulated by this chapter, all applicants shall
deliver to the Administrator two complete sets of “as-built” plans, each sheet
of which is clearly marked “as-built”. “As-built” plans shall depict the actual
construction on the date of submittal of the plans. Said “as-built” plans shall
also include a signed verification by the developer’s engineer that the
stormwater detention and drainage facilities were constructed in accordance
with the approved engineering plans and specifications and/or any modifications
approved by the Administrator.
   (B)   (1)   Within 30 days after receipt of above said materials, the
Administrator shall conduct a final inspection of the stormwater detention and
drainage facilities required and/or regulated by this chapter. If the
facilities are found to be satisfactory the Administrator shall approve in
writing all constructed facilities which conform to the approved engineering
plans and specifications, and shall give written notification of the approval
to the applicant.
      (2)   The Administrator is authorized to reject any constructed facility
which fails to conform to the approved plans and specifications. Upon such
notification, the developer shall have 30 days in which to carry out any work
required to bring the stormwater detention or drainage facility into compliance
with the approved plans and/or specifications.
      (3)   Failure on the part of any applicant to so remedy any such non-
compliance, may result in the village utilizing funds obtained from the
performance guarantee to properly complete the improvements.
      (4)   Failure to properly complete the required stormwater detention and
drainage facilities in a manner consistent with the approved engineering plans
and specifications shall be considered a violation of this chapter.
(Ord. 15-12-02, passed 12-15-2015)
§ 51.12 PERFORMANCE GUARANTEE.
   (A)   Performance bond. All developers shall execute a performance bond in
favor of the village which guarantees that all stormwater detention and
drainage facilities regulated by this chapter shall be constructed and
maintained as required in this chapter. The amount of the performance guarantee
shall be not less than 120% of the estimated cost to construct the
improvements. The form of the performance guarantee shall be as approved by the
Village Attorney, and shall be similar to that utilized for subdivisions under
the requirements of the Village of Mahomet Subdivision Ordinance.
   (B)   Performance bond security. Each performance bond required by this
chapter shall be secured in favor of the village by one of the following
methods or a combination of the following methods:
      (1)   Cash, money order or cashier’s check which shall be deposited in a
segregated village account for performance bonds and any interest earned shall
be retained in the account for the use by the village, should the developer
fail to construct stormwater detention or drainage facilities as approved;
      (2)   Certificates of deposit payable to the village; or
      (3)   Irrevocable letter of credit in a form approved by the Attorney for
the Village of Mahomet.
   (C)   Release of performance bond. 
      (1)   Final release of the performance bond and security shall take place
upon approval of the stormwater detention and drainage facility.
      (2)   Upon satisfactory completion of all construction activities, and
upon request of the applicant, and upon payment by the applicant of any costs
incurred by the village associated with the stormwater detention facility, the
village shall release the performance bond and the security in its entirety.
      (3)   The release of any and all of the bond and its security shall be in
writing.
   (D)   Performance by village of developer’s obligation. Should the developer
fail to construct the stormwater detention and drainage facilities as required
by these regulations or fails to perform any of the obligations set forth in
the ordinance, the village may liquidate any performance security in the
village’s possession and use the proceeds to construct the stormwater detention
and drainage facilities in whole or in part as the village deems appropriate.
   (E)   Developer to pay village’s actual costs of construction to remedy any
defect. Notwithstanding the amount of the developer’s performance bond, the
developer shall pay all costs the village actually incurs in designing and
constructing stormwater detention or drainage facilities or correcting defects
within facilities which the developer is required to construct or which the
developer fails to design, construct or maintain free from defects in
accordance with this chapter. If the amount of money received by the village
from the performance bond and security is insufficient to pay all such costs,
the developer shall reimburse the village for the remainder within 28 days of
the village submitting a bill for the balance due to the developer.
(Ord. 15-12-02, passed 12-15-2015)
§ 51.13 DRY WEATHER WATER OUTLETS.
   (A)   Permits.
      (1)   Dry weather water outlets are prohibited from discharging directly
onto any public property, public right-of-way, public street or public sidewalk
if such discharge creates or contributes to a public hazard or public nuisance.
No person shall hereafter construct, build, establish, replace or maintain any
dry weather water outlet which discharges onto a public right-of-way, public
street, public sidewalk, roadside ditch, or other public property maintained by
the village without first obtaining a permit to do so from the Administrator.
      (2)   Failure to obtain a permit from the Administrator for a dry weather
water outlet discharge onto a public street, public sidewalk, or other public
property shall be deemed a violation of this chapter.
   (B)   Sump pumps. Sump pumps installed to receive or discharge groundwater
or stormwater runoff shall be connected to a storm drain where possible or
discharged into a designated stormwater drainage facility. No sump pump shall
discharge directly onto a street surface or public sidewalk. Sump pumps are
prohibited from discharging in any way that would cause water to flow onto any
public sidewalks, streets, or driveways within the public right-of-way. No sump
pump outlets shall be connected to or discharged into a sanitary sewer.
   (C)   Footing drains. Footing drains and drainage tile shall discharge into
a storm drain or other designated stormwater drainage facility. No footing
drains or drainage tile shall be connected to a sanitary sewer or be discharged
directly onto a street surface or public sidewalk.
   (D)   Discharges.
      (1)   Sump pumps, footing drains, downspouts, and other dry weather water
outlets shall discharge not less than five feet away from the nearest property
line. Such outlets shall not discharge directly onto an adjacent property.
      (2)   All dry weather water outlets shall be operated and maintained by
the property owner. Where mutual sump pump outlet pipes or drainage tiles are
provided for use by multiple properties, an appropriate property owners
association shall be designated to provide for the operation and maintenance of
said drainage facilities.
   (E)   Downspouts and roof drains shall discharge onto the ground or be
connected to a storm drain. No downspouts or roof drains shall be connected to
a sanitary sewer or be discharged directly onto a street surface or public
sidewalk.
(Ord. 15-12-02, passed 12-15-2015)
§ 51.14 VARIANCES.
   (A)   Standards. In order to promote the best possible development and use
of land, the Administrator shall interpret the standards, provisions, and
specifications contained in this chapter liberally and in favor of the public
interest. Variations from these standards, provisions, and specifications may
be granted when it is demonstrated to the satisfaction of the Zoning Board of
Appeals that, owing to special conditions, a strict adherence to the provisions
of this chapter will result in unnecessary hardship and that the spirit and
intent of the ordinance will be observed.
   (B)   Procedure. A request for variation shall be filed by the owner with
the Administrator, who shall refer it, together with his recommendation, to the
Zoning Board of Appeals for decision. The request for variation shall be
written and shall state specifically what variation is sought and the public’s
interest in granting the variation. The Zoning Board of Appeals shall meet
within a reasonable time thereafter to consider the request.
(Ord. 15-12-02, passed 12-15-2015)
§ 51.15 ENFORCEMENT.
   (A)   The administration and enforcement of this chapter shall be the
responsibility of the Administrator, as designated by the President of the
Board of Trustees, or his/her assigns.
   (B)   In carrying out the responsibilities of administering this chapter,
the Administrator may establish rules and procedures to assist in his/her
efforts, provided said rules and procedures conform to the intent and purpose
of this chapter.
   (C)   If, as part of his/her responsibilities of administering this chapter,
the Administrator identifies ambiguities relative to the provisions of this
chapter, the Administrator may independently, or after consultation with
others, issue a written interpretation shall guide future administrative
activities by the Administrator.
(Ord. 15-12-02, passed 12-15-2015)
§ 51.16 SEVERABILITY.
   If any section, clause, provision, or portion of this chapter is judged
unconstitutional or invalid by a court of competent jurisdiction, the remainder
of this chapter shall remain in force and not be affected by such judgment.
(Ord. 15-12-02, passed 12-15-2015)
§ 51.17 PENALTIES.
   (A)   Any person or owner determined by the Administrator, or a court having
jurisdiction, to be in violation of any of the provisions of this chapter shall
be fined not less than $50 and not more than $500 for each violation. Each day
the violation continues shall be deemed a separate offense.
   (B)   (1)   The Village Administrator may determine and administratively
assess a fine for any instance of noncompliance with this chapter which he may
find, noting that said fine shall continue for each day that such violation
continues. The per diem fine for noncompliance shall be $50 per day. If the
offender pays the administrative fine assessed and also corrects said
noncompliance, then no further proceedings shall be required.
      (2)   The Village Administrator may also, in the event he finds any
improper construction activities or improperly constructed facilities not in
conformance with this chapter, issue a stop work order which shall require the
immediate cessation of any further work on the project or use of the improper
facility until the violations are remedied.
   (C)   The village reserves the right to seek any and all additional legal
remedies allowed by the Illinois Compiled Statues and other village ordinances,
against an owner deemed to be in violation of this chapter, including but not
limited to personal judgments, and the recovery of all administrative costs
incurred as part of the enforcement proceedings.
(Ord. 15-12-02, passed 12-15-2015)
§ 51.18 APPEALS.
   (A)   Any person wishing to appeal a determination made by the Administrator
under the provisions of this chapter may do so to the Village of Mahomet Zoning
Board of Appeals by following the procedures set forth in the zoning ordinance.
Failure to file said appeal within 30 days after the Administrator’s
determination shall preclude further review. The appeal must state
specifically:
      (1)   The determination made by the Administrator that is being appealed;
      (2)   The basis for the appeal;
      (3)   The position of the party appealing;
      (4)   Any supportive information for the position of the party appealing;
and
      (5)   Such additional information as the party may wish to submit.
   (B)   The request for an appeal shall be filed with the Administrator, who
shall refer it to the Zoning Board of Appeals for decision. The Zoning Board of
Appeals shall meet within a reasonable time thereafter to consider the appeal.
(Ord. 15-12-02, passed 12-15-2015)
§ 51.19 DISCLAIMER OF LIABILITY.
   (A)   The drainage design standards required by this chapter are considered
reasonable for regulatory purposes and are based upon engineering and
scientific methods of study. Larger rainfalls may occur on rare occasions, and
greater runoff rates or decreased hydraulic capacities of the structure may
occur due to uncontrollable circumstances.
   (B)   This chapter does not imply that an area within or outside of the
sites to which the standards of this chapter have been applied will be totally
free from potential flooding or runoff damages. This chapter shall not create
liability on the part of the village or any officer or employees or agent
thereof for any damages that result from reliance on this chapter or any
administrative decision lawfully made thereunder.
(Ord. 15-12-02, passed 12-15-2015)
§ 51.20 RETROACTIVITY.
   (A)   The adoption of this chapter, as herein provided, shall not operate to
amend, modify or otherwise alter any current development or previously approved
permits for development, absent resubmittal of application or the submittal of
proposed amendments to permits or applications and the full and complete
review, as herein provided, for determination of the application of the
provisions within this chapter.
   (B)   All work being performed under previously issued permits must be
performed in conformance with the terms and provisions of each permit; and
failure to so perform shall continue to give cause for the initiation of
enforcement, prosecution or other pursuit of remedy against persons responsible
for the violation of the provisions of the permit; notwithstanding the adoption
of these provisions, enforcement and such other actions as may be necessary in
order to compel compliance with the permit provisions are hereby directed and
authorized, and the ordinance upon which such actions are based are continued
in full force and affects as applied upon the provisions of any heretofore
issued permit.
(Ord. 15-12-02, passed 12-15-2015)
§ 51.21 ADMINISTRATIVE RULES.
   (A)   Administrative rules and construction standards. The village may, from
time to time, adapt administrative rules which implement, interpret and clarify
the requirements of this chapter. Further, the village may adopt construction
standards which provide minimum requirements regarding the construction of
common elements of stormwater detention and drainage facilities. All persons
shall comply with these administrative rules and construction standards to the
same extent as they are required to comply with this chapter.
   (B)   Infrastructure Design Manual. The Infrastructure Design Manual adopted
from time to time by the Board of Trustees of the village contains the
technical requirements and construction standards applicable to the design and
construction of stormwater detention and drainage facilities in a manner
consistent with this chapter. The Infrastructure Design Manual may be altered
or modified by the village from time to time as set forth in the established
procedures for its amendment. Applicants shall comply with the requirements of
the Infrastructure Design Manual as a part of the implementation of this
chapter.
(Ord. 15-12-02, passed 12-15-2015)
§ 51.22 SAVING AND APPLICABILITY.
   (A)   Saving clause. Nothing herein hereby adopted shall be construed to
affect any suit or proceeding now pending in any court or any rights accrued or
liability incurred or any cause or causes of action accrued or existing under
any prior constitution or ordinance. Nor shall any right or remedy of any
character be lost, impaired, or affected by this chapter.
   (B)   Applicability. When this chapter imposes a greater restriction than
those imposed or required by the provisions of exiting ordinances or rules and
regulations, this chapter shall control. When the provisions of existing
ordinances or rules and regulations impose greater restrictions than those
imposed or required by this chapter, they shall control. Areas within the
Sangamon River Floodplain and other regulated floodplains are subject to the
requirements of the flood hazard area development regulations.
(Ord. 15-12-02, passed 12-15-2015)
CHAPTER 52: WATER REGULATIONS
Section
General Water Provisions
   
52.001   Use of public water supply
   
52.002   Definitions
Regulations Generally
   
52.015   Application for required water service
   
52.016   Liability of customers for payment
   
52.017   Complaints
   
52.018   Turning on water or resetting meter
   
52.019   Permit to connect to village water system
   
52.020   Rules governing water service
   
52.021   Backflow prevention devices
   
52.022   Metered water service
   
52.023   Fire service
   
52.024   Private fire service
   
52.025   General
   
52.026   Setback zoning requirements
Conservation of Water During High Use Periods
and Restrictions During Water Shortage
   
52.055   Response to high usage, water shortage or water emergency
   
52.056   Water conservation stages; voluntary and mandatory measures
   
52.057   Scope and duration; effect of conservation method
Control of the Drilling of Water Wells
Within the Village Limits
   
52.070   Well control
   
52.071   Other governmental units
   
52.072   Availability
   
52.073   Permits required - new wells
   
52.074   Permits required - existing wells
   
52.075   Existing agreements recognized
   
52.076   Well abandonment
   
52.077   State well permit records
Water System Extensions
   
52.090   General policies
   
52.091   Design, materials, and construction
Variance from Requirements
   
52.110   Variance allowed
   
52.111   Limitations
   
52.112   Petition
   
52.113   Documentation required
   
52.114   Consideration of petition
   
52.115   Revocation
Enforcement Procedures and Remedies
   
52.130   Notice of violation
   
52.131   Liability of violator
   
52.132   Violation prohibited; enforcement
   
52.133   Action by village
   
52.134   Falsified information
   
52.135   Disconnection of service
   
52.136   Stop work orders
   
52.137   Other remedies
Validity
   
52.138   Validity of chapter
 
   
52.999   Penalty
GENERAL WATER PROVISIONS
§ 52.001 USE OF PUBLIC WATER SUPPLY.
   (A)   Unlawful facilities. Except as hereinafter provided, it shall be
unlawful to construct or maintain any well, cistern or other facility intended
or used for the supply of potable water for public or private uses within the
village.
   (B)   Required connection to public water supply facilities.
      (1)   Any person owning property situated within the jurisdiction of the
village, which property is improved with one or more residences, houses,
buildings or structures used or intended to be used for human use, occupancy,
employment, recreation or any other similar purpose whatever, and which
property abuts on any street, alley, or right-of-way in which there is located
a water main within 300 feet of said property shall, within 90 days of the
effective date of this chapter or within 90 days after the water main is in
service, whichever is later, at his or her expense, install a suitable water
service line therein and connect the property with the water main in accordance
with the terms and provisions of this chapter.
      (2)   In the event that compliance with this section causes economic
hardship to the owner, the owner may apply to the Board of Trustees for
exemption from or extension of the deadline or of the requirements of this
section. These exemptions or extensions may only be granted to persons when the
exemption will not endanger the public health, welfare or safety and shall be
in the best interests of the village. The Village Administrator shall review
any request for an exemption and provide a recommendation to the Board of
Trustees concerning the request.
      (3)   A required water connection as described above shall not be avoided
by reasons of actual distance from the building or structure to the connecting
point at the water main.
(Ord. 18-04-01, passed 4-24-2018)
§ 52.002 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   CROSS-CONNECTION. Any direct or indirect connection between a customer’s
piping system having a service connection to the village’s facilities and any
other piping or plumbing systems, or a vessel such as, but not limited to,
compressed gas cylinders, sinks, toilets, drains and other pressurized or
unpressurized liquid or gaseous containers, which contain, or which could
contain, any substance other than water supplied by the village. CROSS-
CONNECTION also means any use of water supplied by the village which permits,
or which could permit, backflow of water or any other substance into the
village’s water mains.
   CUSTOMER, CONSUMER. The party contracting for water service to a property as
herein classified and a separate contract shall be required for each property
described as follows:
      (1)   A building under one roof owned by one party and occupied by one
person or family as a residence;
      (2)   A building under one roof owned by one party and occupied by one
person, firm or corporation as one business;
      (3)   A combination of buildings in one common enclosure owned by one
party and occupied by one person or family as a residence;
      (4)   A combination of buildings in one common enclosure owned by one
party and occupied by one person, firm or corporation as one business;
      (5)   The one side of a double house or duplex having a solid vertical
partition wall;
      (6)   A building owned by one party containing more than one apartment;
      (7)   A building owned by one party and having a number of offices or
business spaces which are rented to tenants using in common, one or more means
of entrance;
      (8)   A single lot, park or playground;
      (9)   Each house in a row of houses; or
      (10)   A single apartment or unit in a building of multiple dwelling
units.
      (11)   A single retail or commercial business space within a building of
multiple commercial spaces owned by one party.
   CUSTOMER’S SERVICE LINE. A pipe with appurtenances installed, owned and
maintained by the owner of a premises between the water service connection to
the village’s water main and the structure or other point of service on the
owner’s premises as described in the application for water service connection.
   HIGH USAGE. Shall be deemed to exist when water demand equals or exceeds
village water treatment production capacity for a time period that potentially
threatens system storage capacity and the continued availability of water for
human consumption, sanitation and fire protection.
   IDM (INFRASTRUCTURE DESIGN MANUAL). The Manual of design requirements and
construction procedures required by the Village of Mahomet intended to provide
a uniform design criteria for installation of public infrastructure.
   IDPH (ILLINOIS DEPARTMENT OF PUBLIC HEALTH). The Agency of the State of
Illinois, any divisions thereof or successors thereto, authorized by present
and subsequent acts of the legislature to regulate and control matters with
respect to the implementation, management, and operation of private water
supply facilities.
   IEPA (ILLINOIS ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION AGENCY). The agency or agencies of
the State of Illinois, any divisions thereof or successors thereto, authorized
by present and subsequent acts of the legislature thereof to regulate and
control matters in respect to the environment, and particularly in respect to
the management, maintenance and operations of the village’s public water supply
facilities.
   METER. A device which measures and registers the quantity of water supplied
to a customer by the village.
   OWNER. Whenever the same appears herein, means the person, firm, corporation
or association having the sole ownership and interest in any premises which is
or is about to be supplied with water service by the village, and the word
OWNERS means all so interested.
   PAST DUE BILL. The customer’s bill is past due if unpaid after due date
printed on the bill.
   PERSON. Any and all persons, natural or artificial, including any
individual, firm, company, municipal or private corporation, association,
society, institution, enterprise, governmental agency or other entity.
   POLLUTION SOURCE OR ROUTE. As defined in the Illinois Groundwater Protection
Act, ILCS Ch. 415, Act 55, §§ 1 et seq. (1991, Ch. 111 ½, Para. 7451), the text
of which is incorporated in this chapter by reference.
   PRIVATE FIRE HYDRANT. A device supplying water for firefighting purposes
which is owned and operated by a customer.
   PRIVATE FIRE SERVICE CONNECTION. A connection providing water only for fire
protection which will normally be used through a private fire protection system
installed on the premises by the owner of same.
   PUBLIC FIRE HYDRANT. A device for supplying water for firefighting purposes
and which is owned and operated by the village.
   REMOTE METER READING DEVICE. A device installed on the outside of a
customer’s building, on a post or on a support that permits the meter to be
read without making visual contact with the water meter.
   SERVICE RECONNECTION CHARGE. A charge made for reconnection of a service
which has been discontinued for nonpayment or other proper reason.
   TENANT. Anyone occupying a premises under lease, oral or written, from the
owner and obtaining water service from the mains of the village with the
consent of his or her landlord.
   USEPA (UNITED STATES ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION AGENCY). An agency of the
federal government of the United States which was created for the purpose of
protecting human health and the environment by writing and enforcing
regulations based on laws passed by Congress.
   VILLAGE. Whenever the name appears herein, means the “Village of Mahomet,
Champaign County, Illinois”.
   VILLAGE ADMINISTRATOR. The person appointed by the President of the Board of
Trustees to enforce the provisions of this chapter. The Village Administrator
may designate other village employees to act on his / her behalf.
   WATER. All potable water (not wastewater) supplied by the village to any
customer.
   WATER EMERGENCY. Shall be deemed to exist when a natural disaster,
mechanical failure or other extraordinary event has caused the village water
production or distribution capacity to be severely limited or damaged, and when
all but bare essential water use must be curtailed so as to allow a subsistence
usage of water for human consumption and sanitation.
   WATER MAIN. The supply pipe located in a public street, public road, other
public way and/or an easement, owned and maintained by the village containing
potable water, to which water service connections are attached to supply water
service to a premises.
   WATER SERVICE CONNECTION. A pipe with appurtenances used to conduct water
from the village water main to a point at or near the property line of the
premises to be served. WATER SERVICE CONNECTIONS are classified as follows:
      (1)   REGULAR WATER SERVICE CONNECTION. A connection providing water
service to a premises for normal residential, commercial, industrial or public
authority purposes and for which the period of service may normally be expected
to exceed one year by an indefinite period.
      (2)   TEMPORARY WATER SERVICE CONNECTION. A connection providing water
service to a premises for any other purpose and for which the period of service
is a period of time usually less than one year. Connections providing water for
construction purposes are included within this category.
   WATER SHORTAGE. Shall be deemed to exist when the ordinary demands and
requirements of water customers served by the village cannot be satisfied
without unreasonably depleting the water supply to or below a critical level,
the level at which the continued availability of water for human consumption,
sanitation and fire protection is jeopardized.
(Ord. 18-04-01, passed 4-24-2018)
REGULATIONS GENERALLY
§ 52.015 APPLICATION FOR REQUIRED WATER SERVICE.
   (A)   All applications for water service must be made at the office of the
village in writing, on forms furnished by the village, by the persons or
parties desiring same, and must state truly and fully the uses to which the
water is to be applied, and the correct lot and street number of the premises
to be supplied. All applications must be signed by the owner of the premises to
be supplied or his or her duly authorized agent. In the case of rental units,
if the tenant is the applicant, the owner of the premises must also be a
guarantor for the water service bill. An application fee set from time to time
by resolution of the Village Board of Trustees shall be required.
   (B)   An application must be made and approved by the village upon any
change in tenancy where the tenant has contracted for the water service or in
ownership when the owner has contracted for the water service. When the change
in tenancy and/or ownership is made without giving the village notice within 48
hours after the change, the new tenant or owner may be held responsible for the
payment of all unpaid water service.
   (C)   When application is made, the village reserves the right to require a
cash deposit set from time to time by resolution of the Village Board of
Trustees to secure the payment of the bills. The deposit shall be retained by
the village as long as the applicant secures water service. When the service is
discontinued for nonpayment of bills or for violation by the consumer of the
village’s rules and regulations, the village may apply the deposit against the
account of consumer, and the balance, if any, will be refunded.
   (D)   No agreement will be entered into by the village with any applicant
for water service, whether owner or tenant, until all arrears and charges due
by the applicant for water service or other services at any premises now or
previously owned or occupied by him or her shall have been paid.
   (E)   When an application for a new service pipe, water service or the
reinstatement of water service is filed with the village, it is assumed that
the private piping and fixtures, which the service will supply, are in proper
working order and are in full compliance with all the applicable local, state,
and federal codes and regulations. The village will not be liable in any event
for any accident, breaks or leakage, arising in any way in connection with the
supply of water or failure to supply same.
(Ord. 18-04-01, passed 4-24-2018)
§ 52.016 LIABILITY OF CUSTOMERS FOR PAYMENT.
   (A)   Customers are liable for payment for all water used on the premises
until written notice has been received at the village’s office that the use of
the water is no longer desired. Customers are liable for all water shown to
have passed through the meter, whether by use, wastage or leakage. Where more
than one tenant is supplied through a meter, the application of the water
service must be made by the owner of the property or his or her duly authorized
agent. Customers are liable for all water shown to have been delivered to the
premises either by registration of a meter or determined by other means.
   (B)   When a property is leased to the customer by the property owner, the
owner shall also be liable for payment for all water used on the premises until
written notice has been received at the village’s offices that use of water is
no longer desired.
(Ord. 18-04-01, passed 4-24-2018)
§ 52.017 COMPLAINTS.
   Complaints with regard to the character of the service furnished, of the
reading of the meters or of the bills rendered must be made at the Village
Office, in writing, and a record of the complaint must be kept by the village,
giving the name and address of the complainant, the date, the nature of the
complaint and the remedy of the complaint.
(Ord. 18-04-01, passed 4-24-2018)
§ 52.018 TURNING ON WATER OR RESETTING METER.
   (A)   A charge set from time to time by resolution of the Village Board of
Trustees will be made for turning on water or for resetting a meter where the
service has been discontinued due to violation of these rules and regulations.
Application for turning on water or for resetting a meter where the service has
been discontinued shall be made in writing at the Village Office, on forms
furnished by the village.
   (B)   A charge set from time to time by resolution of the Village Board of
Trustees will be made for turning on water services disconnected at the owner’s
request.
   (C)   At no time shall water be turned on at a service connection without a
permanent meter in place.
(Ord. 18-04-01, passed 4-24-2018)
§ 52.019 PERMIT TO CONNECT TO VILLAGE WATER SYSTEM.
   (A)   When a customer or a property owner desires to make a connection to
the village water system, he or she shall submit an application for a
connection permit on a form furnished by the village.
      (1)   The permit application of nonresidential users shall be
supplemented by any plans, specifications, detailed drawings or other
information that may be deemed necessary by the Village Administrator or
village staff. Any permit application submitted by an industrial user shall be
accompanied by information which describes the industry’s water supply needs
and use demands.
      (2)   A water service connection will be installed only upon the approval
of an application made in writing at the office of the village on a form
provided for the purpose by the village. The application must be signed by the
owner or customer or his or her duly authorized agent.
   (B)   The service pipe from main to the property line, curb stop and curb
box shall be furnished and placed by the village or its designee, at the
property owner’s or customer’s expense.
   (C)   Within new subdivisions the service pipe from the main to the property
line, the curb stop and curb box shall be furnished and placed by the
subdivider at the subdivider’s expense as set forth in the subdivision code.
   (D)   The remainder of the service pipe shall be installed by a licensed
plumber. All costs and expenses incident to the installation and connection of
the private service connection or fire service connection shall be borne by the
owner or customer. The owner or customer shall indemnify the village from any
loss or damage to the public system that may directly or indirectly be
occasioned by the installation.
   (E)   All service pipe shall be installed in compliance with the village
requirements and the Illinois Plumbing Code. The village shall not be
responsible for improper installations by customer’s plumber.
   (F)   Whenever a plumber has completed work on a new installation, he or she
shall leave the water turned off at the service connection. The use of
“jumpers”, bypasses or other similar devices to allow unmetered water usage of
any type shall not be allowed.
   (G)   (1)   The village will provide one water service connection for any
one building on a property owner’s premises. The owner shall obtain a separate
water service connection for each living unit in a multiple housing unit where
each living unit has its own separate entrance and could have individualized
ownership. Each separate water service connection shall be separately metered
and billed. Each multiple housing building where each living unit does not have
its own separate entrance and could not have individualized ownership, shall
have one water service connection per building. Each apartment or condominium
unit within the building shall be separately metered. A readily accessible
location shall be provided for the installation of all the meters that service
the apartments within that building.
      (2)   Each building or business in a commercial premises such as a strip
mall or mall shall have one water service connection regardless of the number
of establishments within the building. Each commercial premises within the mall
shall be independently metered. A readily accessible location shall be provided
for this installation of all the meters that service commercial establishments
within that building.
   (H)   Curb stops and line stops in branch service pipes are for exclusive
use of the village.
   (I)   (1)   Service pipes will not be installed where any portion of the
pipe must pass through lands, buildings or parts of buildings which are not the
property of the applicant unless applicant, in writing, assumes the liability
and provides to the village written easements for the installation of the
service pipes.
      (2)   Existing service lines may be used for connection of new buildings
only when they are found, on examination and test by the Village Administrator
or village staff, to meet all the requirements of this chapter and are adequate
to serve the purposes of the new building and its use. A water connection
permit shall be required for all new buildings reusing old service line
connections. Abandoned connections shall be effectively closed or sealed off as
directed by the Village Administrator.
   (J)   (1)   Application for service pipe extension will be accepted subject
to the condition that a village water main is located adjacent to the premises
to be served and extension of service does not obligate the village to extend
its mains to service the premises for which water service is desired.
      (2)   A water connection permit will only be issued and a water
connection allowed only if it can be demonstrated by the applicant to the
satisfaction of the Village Administrator and the Village Engineer that the
village water supply facilities, including water mains and water treatment
facilities, have sufficient reserve capacity to adequately and efficiently
handle the additional anticipated water use load.
   (K)   No application for a service pipe installation will be accepted
between December 1 and March 1, unless the applicant agrees to pay excess costs
that may be incurred due to weather conditions during that period.
   (L)   The village will repair all leaks in the service pipes from the main
to and including the curb stop. Beyond the curb stop the property owner or
customer is responsible for all leaks and the same must be repaired by him or
her in a manner acceptable to the village. When defects or leaks are
discovered, the consumer will be notified and if the defects or leaks are not
repaired within reasonable time, the water may be turned off, with or without
further notice.
   (M)   Water service connections will be sized by the village and all
decisions relative to size, material and manner of installation will be made by
the village.
   (N)   (1)   The service line and the connection of the service line or fire
service line into any public water main within the jurisdiction of the village
and the size, alignment, materials of construction of a water service
connection or fire service connection and the methods to be used in excavating,
placing of the pipe, jointing, testing and backfilling the trench shall all
conform to the material and procedural requirements set forth in the State
Plumbing Code and any other applicable rules and regulations of the village.
Village requirements may be found in the latest editions of the appropriate
specifications of the American Society of Testing Materials, State Plumbing
Code, American Waterworks Association, the Standard Specifications for Water
and Sewer Main Construction in Illinois, and the village IDM. All water service
connections or fire service connections shall be made watertight. Any deviation
from these prescribed procedures and materials must be reviewed and recommended
by the Village Engineer and approved by the Village Administrator before
installation.
      (2)   Installation requirements for water service connections supplying
nonresidential facilities, fire service connections and connections three
inches in diameter and larger will be established by the village on a case-by-
case basis following review of appropriate plans submitted by the applicant.
Although individual review is required, all applicable provisions of this
chapter apply. Pipe materials shall be as set forth by the Village IDM.
      (3)   All excavations for service line installation shall be adequately
guarded with barricades and lights to as to protect the public from hazard.
Streets, sidewalks, parkways and other public property disturbed in the course
of the work shall be restored in a manner satisfactory to the village.
      (4)   When existing pavement, sidewalk, yard area, ditches or other
surface treatments on public rights-of-way are removed in the course of making
a service connection, the surfaces shall be restored to meet the original
condition in accordance with the Standard Specifications for Water and Sewer
Main Construction in Illinois and in accordance with the requirements of the
Village IDM. Street cuts shall be made only at times and in a manner approved
by the village following at least 24-hours’ notice to the village.
   (O)   When required by State Plumbing Code or, in the judgment of the
Village Administrator, an approved backflow prevention device is necessary,
then an approved backflow prevention device shall be installed by the customer
at the customer’s expense in a manner satisfactory to the village.
   (P)   No water service curb box may be placed in a driveway unless a
driveway sleeve has been installed at customer expense. A cast iron sleeve with
lid must be utilized when a service curb box is placed in a driveway.
   (Q)   No private water service connection, fire service connection or
temporary water service connection shall be made to any village water main
until the plans and specifications for that connection have been approved by
the Village Administrator or his or her designated representative, a written
permit therefor is issued by the village, and the fees therefor are paid in
full by the applicant to the village.
   (R)   No unauthorized person shall uncover, alter or disturb any public
water main or open any public fire hydrant, alter any valve or any appurtenance
thereof without first obtaining a written permit to do so from the village in
accordance with the provisions of this chapter.
   (S)   No unauthorized person shall make any connection with or opening into,
alter or disturb, or use any water main operated by the village or
appurtenances thereto without first obtaining a connection permit as required
by this chapter.
   (T)   Failure of the customer or the property owner or his or her agent to
secure the applicable permits shall cause the person to be subject to
disconnection, in addition to the fines and penalties provided for in this
chapter. In addition, the property owner or customer shall be refused any
additional permits until such time as the discrepancies have been corrected in
a manner satisfactory to the Village Administrator or designated
representative.
   (U)   (1)   The service connections shall be inspected and approved by the
village as set forth herein. The applicant for the water service connection or
fire service connection permit shall notify the Village Administrator when the
service line is ready for inspection and when connection to the public water
main occurs. No part of a service line shall be covered until the line has been
inspected and approved by the Village Administrator or designated village
staff. The connection to the public water main shall only be made under the
direct supervision of a licensed plumber and in accordance with the standards
of this chapter. The permit application shall be accompanied by a nonrefundable
permit and inspection fee paid to the village to cover filing of the permit
application and one inspection of a connection to the public water main system.
If inspection of a connection to any public water main for which a permit has
been issued is found to be faulty, the person shall apply for reinspection
after the corrections have been made. The request for reinspection shall be
made at the Village Office and shall include a nonrefundable reinspection fee.
      (2)   In addition to permit and inspection fees, the village may also
collect connection charges and other fees as may be determined by the village
at the time the permit application is made.
   (V)   (1)   If the application and any supporting documentation is in proper
form, and if the water service or fire service connection indicated therein, in
the judgment of the Village Administrator or village staff, appears to be in
conformance with this chapter and all other village requirements, and the
applicable permit and inspection fee and other required connection charges have
been paid, the Village Administrator or village staff shall issue the permit
for connection to the water main. If otherwise, the application shall be
denied.
      (2)   If the application is denied by the Village Administrator or
designated village staff, he or she shall state the reason or reasons therefor
in writing, mailed or personally delivered to the applicant, within ten days
from the date on which the application is denied. The applicant shall have the
right to either amend the application to bring it into conformity with the
reasons given for denial or to have the application and denial reviewed by the
Board of Trustees, provided the applicant shall give written notice of the
request for review within ten days after receipt of denial. The Board shall
review the permit application, the written denial and any other evidence or
matters as the application and Village Administrator or village staff shall
present at its next regular meeting following receipt of request for its
review, and the decision of the Board rendered publicly at the meeting shall be
final.
   (W)   Insurance required. Each applicant for a permit required by this
chapter for work on public property shall carry adequate public liability and
property damage insurance to indemnify the village in case of any accident or
damage occurring in conjunction with or as a result of the work being done
under the permit.
      (1)   The form of insurance required shall be subject to the approval of
the Village Attorney.
      (2)   Limits of liability shall be at least $100,000 for injury to any
one person and $500,000 for injury resulting from any one accident and $50,000
for injury to any property.
      (3)   The insurance required may not be canceled until completion of the
work for which a permit is issued and following final inspection and
approval of the work by the village. Cancellation or lapse of the insurance
required shall terminate any permit for which the policy provides coverage.
   (X)   Change in property use. In the event the use of a property changes,
the owner shall apply for a new connection permit in accordance with this
section and shall be subject to all requirements including payment of the
permit fee.
   (Y)   Private legal responsibility. Each applicant for a permit required by
this chapter for work on private or public property shall bear the
responsibility for accidental injury or death, property damage or any other
litigation that may arise in connection with this work and shall in any case
hold the village harmless from all damages.
(Ord. 18-04-01, passed 4-24-2018)
§ 52.020 RULES GOVERNING WATER SERVICE.
   (A)   When the supply of water is to be temporarily cut off, notice will be
given when practicable to all customers affected by the shutting off, stating
the probable duration of the interruption of service and also the purpose for
which the shut-off is made.
   (B)   In the interest of public health, the village will not permit its
water mains or services to be connected on any premises with any service pipe
or piping which is connected to any piping, tank, vat or other apparatus which
contains liquids, chemicals or any other matter which may flow back into the
village’s service pipe or water mains and consequently endanger the water
supply.
   (C)   The village undertakes to use reasonable care and diligence to provide
a constant supply of water at a reasonable pressure, but reserves the right, at
any time, without notice, to shut off the water in its mains for the purpose of
making repairs or extensions or for other purposes. The village shall not be
liable for a deficiency or failure, regardless of cause, in the supply of water
or in the pressure, nor any damage caused thereby or by the bursting or
breaking of any main or service pipe or any attachment to the village’s
property. All customers having boilers upon their premises depending upon the
water pressure in the village’s water mains to keep them supplied are cautioned
against danger of collapse in the event of interruption of service. All damage
occasioned by any collapse must be borne exclusively by the consumer or
customer.
   (D)   The village shall have the sole right to determine the size of meters,
valves, service lines and connection necessary to give the service applied for.
   (E)   A temporary supply of water for building construction, lawn watering
or other similar purposes must be specifically applied for.
   (F)   All use of water other than by the applicant or for any purpose or
upon any premises not stated or described in the application, must be prevented
by him or her. The applicant will be liable for the amount of water used in
conformity with the schedule of rates of the village as may be established from
time to time.
   (G)   Service may be discontinued for any of the following reasons:
      (1)   For the use of water for any other property or purpose than that
described in the application;
      (2)   For misrepresentation in the application as to property or fixtures
to be supplied;
      (3)   For waste of water;
      (4)   For interference with, tampering with or damage to any service
pipe, meter, curb stop, valve, fire hydrant or other appliances of the village;
      (5)   For continued vacancy of the premises;
      (6)   For use of water with intent to defraud the village of payment for
the water used;
      (7)   For failure to repair any defect or leak in service pipe within
five days after discovery;
      (8)   For nonpayment of water service or any other charges accruing under
the application;
      (9)   For cross-connecting the village service pipe with any other source
of supply or with any apparatus which may endanger the quality of the village’s
water supply;
      (10)   For refusal of reasonable access to property for purpose of
inspecting or for reading, repairing or removing meters;
      (11)   For refusal to install and maintain an air chamber on plumbing
installations where inspection proves their necessity;
      (12)   For violation of or refusal to comply with the rules and
regulations of the village;
      (13)   For emergency conditions; or
      (14)   For failure to comply with any applicable portion of the village’s
rules regarding cross-connections and RPZ installation, including refusal to
provide an inventory of water using devices and backflow preventers or
reasonable access to the premises for purposes of inspection for compliance or
bypass; failure to prevent or remove cross-connections; failure to install,
test or maintain RPZ or low pressure cutoffs; removal of RPZ or low pressure
cut-offs; and failure to maintain records and make required reports to the
village.
   (H)   If a customer, whose service has been discontinued for nonpayment of
bills or for violation of the rules and regulations of the village, desires a
reconnection, the reconnection will only be made after the customer has:
      (1)   Made a deposit to assure future payment of bills (in cases only
where no deposit was originally made);
      (2)   Paid all unpaid bills for water service;
      (3)   Paid a reconnection fee as set from time to time by resolution of
the Village Board of Trustees; and
      (4)   Has corrected any condition found to be in violation of the rules
and regulations of the village.
   (I)   When weather conditions cause the water in the customer’s service line
to freeze, the village is not obligated to thaw the frozen water line to
restore water service to the customer or owner. Repair of damage to a service
line due to freezing or other external causes or repair of damage caused by
customer will be made by customer at customer’s expense.
   (J)   The village recognizes that at times the customer’s service line and
plumbing system is used as an electrical grounding electrode for electrical
circuits and devices. This method of grounding involves an element of danger
and is highly discouraged by the village. The village will not be liable for
the adequacy of this electrical grounding system and reserves the right to make
any structural or material changes it so desires in the installation of the
village’s water mains, water service connections and meters without regard to
the effect the changes may have on the overall adequacy of an electrical
grounding system utilizing the customer’s service line and plumbing system.
   (K)   The village will not permit anyone except an authorized employee of
the village to make any connection to or disconnection from the water main of
the village. The village also will not permit any unauthorized individuals to
set, change, remove, interfere with, bypass or make any connection to the
village’s water meter or other property. The customer and/or owner shall be
responsible for any violations of this rule and the consequences thereof,
including costs to repair damage to the village’s property.
(Ord. 18-04-01, passed 4-24-2018)
§ 52.021 BACKFLOW PREVENTION DEVICES.
   (A)   (1)   Each customer, owner and/or occupant of premises receiving water
service shall prevent backflow of water or any other substance into the water
mains of the village from any cause within the premises and shall prevent and
remove all cross-connections. No customer, owner and/or occupant shall make,
cause, allow or permit any cross-connection on the premises or any backflow of
water or any other substance from the premises to the village’s water mains.
      (2)   An approved reduced pressure principle backflow prevention device
(“RPZ”) shall be installed on:
         (a)   Each commercial or industrial service line;
         (b)   All other customers’ service lines when the following conditions
exist:
            1.   The premises has an auxiliary water supply;
            2.   The premises has an underground lawn sprinkler system; or
            3.   The premises has a reported history of cross-connections being
established or reestablished.
            4.   The premises has a hot water or steam heating system.
         (c)   All fire protection systems connected to the village’s water
supply, when any of the following conditions exist:
            1.   The system contains antifreeze, fire retardant or other
chemicals;
            2.   Water is pumped into the system or can be pumped into the
system from another service;
            3.   Water flows into the fire safety system by gravity from a non-
potable service; or
            4.   There is a connection whereby water can be pumped into the
fire safety system from any other source.
   (B)   All RPZ required by these rules shall be approved by the Foundation
for Cross-Connection Control and Hydraulic Research at the University of
Southern California, American Water Works Association, American Society of
Sanitary Engineers, or American National Standards Institute, or certified by
the National Standards Institute or the National Sanitation Foundation to be in
compliance with applicable industry specifications.
   (C)   Installation of an RPZ shall be made in accordance with applicable
regulations of the State Pollution Control Board, the State Plumbing Code and
Illinois Environmental Protection Agency, and only as specified by the
Foundation for Cross-Connection Control and Hydraulic Research of the
University of Southern California, American Water Works Associates, American
Society of Sanitary Engineers, of American National Standards Institute. In
addition, installation shall be subject to the following conditions:
      (1)   The device shall be accessible for maintenance and testing;
      (2)   Minimum clearances recommended by the manufacturer shall be used;
      (3)   The device shall be protected against flooding and freezing;
      (4)   Relief ports shall not be plugged. A drain which will remain free-
flowing under all conditions shall be provided;
      (5)   A collection system with an air gap under the relief port drain
shall be installed with ceiling level units;
      (6)   No reduction shall be made in the size of the relief port drain;
and
      (7)   A bypass and second RPZ shall be installed if there is only one
service line and the water service cannot be interrupted. Bypass lines without
RPZ shall not be installed.
   (D)   It shall be the duty of the customer, owner and occupant of any
premises on which an RPZ is installed to inspect, test, maintain and repair the
device at least annually or more frequently if recommended by the manufacturer.
      (1)   Inspection, testing, maintenance and repair shall be performed by a
licensed plumber who has been approved by the Illinois Environmental Protection
Agency as competent to service the device. Proof of approval shall be in
writing.
      (2)   Each RPZ shall have a tag attached listing the date of most recent
test, name of inspector, and type and date of repairs.
      (3)   A maintenance log shall be maintained and include:
         (a)   Date of each test;
         (b)   Name and approval number of licensed plumber approving test;
         (c)   Test results;
         (d)   Repairs or servicing required;
         (e)   Repairs and date completed; and
         (f)   Servicing performed and date completed.
      (4)   Whenever RPZ are found to be defective, they shall be repaired or
replaced at the customer’s expense without delay.
      (5)   RPZ shall not be bypassed, made inoperative or removed.
      (6)   After the test, the information in division (D)(3) above shall be
submitted to the village on the form provided by the village for its records.
   (E)   Installation of RPZ; their inspection, testing and maintenance; and
reports to the village shall be at the customer’s expense.
   (F)   Where a booster pump has been installed on the service to or within
any premises, the pump shall be equipped with a low pressure cut-off device
designed to shut off the booster pump when the pressure in the service line on
the suction side of the pump drops to 20 psi or less. It shall be the duty of
the customer to maintain the low pressure cut-off device in proper working
order and to certify to the village, at least once a year that the device is
operable.
   (G)   On request of a representative of the village, the customer shall
furnish information regarding the piping system or systems or water use within
the customer’s premises. The customer’s premises shall be accessible at all
reasonable times to village staff for the verification of information submitted
by the customer to the village regarding cross-connection and RPZ installation
and maintenance results and for the verification of compliance with these
rules.
(Ord. 18-04-01, passed 4-24-2018)
§ 52.022 METERED WATER SERVICE.
   (A)   (1)   For new connections the village will provide at the customer’s
expense a suitable meter and remote meter reading device for each customer’s
water service connection. The village will determine the size and type of
meter. The meter and remote meter reading device will remain the sole property
of the village. The meter shall be installed by the customer’s plumber at the
customer’s expense in compliance with the village requirements and the Illinois
Plumbing Code. The village is not responsible for improper installations.
      (2)   Secondary meters for outside water use must be applied for and will
be furnished at a cost as set from time to time by resolution of the Village
Board of Trustees.
   (B)   Meters shall be conveniently located at the point approved by the
village. A curb stop shall be installed by the village at a point determined by
the village. A gate valve shall be installed by the customer on the village’s
side of the meter adjacent to the meter. A suitable check valve shall be
installed by the customer on the customer’s side of the meter if required by
the village. The owner and/or customer will provide at his or her expense a
clean, dry, safe place, not subject to a great variation in temperature, so
that the meter will be properly protected from freezing and other hazards, so
located as to control the entire supply, and as to be easily accessible for
installation, maintenance, reading and disconnection. The customer shall cause
to be placed, at the customer’s expense, a stop and waste valve on the service
pipe at or near the influent side of the meter and another stop or waste valve
on the service pipe at or near the effluent side of the meter. A backflow
prevention device may be required at the customer’s expense in accordance with
IEPA regulations and State Plumbing Code requirements. If so required, it will
be inserted at some convenient point on the customer’s plumbing to protect the
meter from excess pressure due to heating water or other circumstances.
   (C)    (1)   Acceptable meter locations, so long as they meet the preceding
requirements, include basements, utility rooms, furnace rooms, meter rooms and
garages. Unacceptable locations include closets, and under lavatory or kitchen
sinks. Meter boxes are acceptable only for mobile homes without permanent
foundations, buildings without heat; existing buildings that did not have water
service and do not have an adequate location for a water meter, and lawn or
garden watering systems.
      (2)   When one water service connection supplies one meter, the meter
must be located so that access to the customer’s meter is through the
customer’s own premises only. When one water service connection supplies
multiple meter installations, the meters must be located in a meter room (a
room specifically constructed for the meters) accessible from a common hallway,
separate outside entrance on grade, or outside of the customer’s premises.
      (3)   Where there are multiple meter installations located in a meter
box, a key box furnished by the village at its expense will be installed near
the door to the meter room. The building owner will furnish at the owner’s
expense a key to the door to the meter room which will be placed in the key
box.
      (4)   The owner and/or customer must permit installation of a remote
meter reading device including wiring on the exterior of the premises. The
device will be located so that it is easily accessible and as inconspicuous as
possible.
         (a)   If a check valve is required, a safety valve shall be inserted
at some convenient point on the house piping to relieve any excess pressure due
to heating water or other circumstances.
         (b)   Meters will be maintained by the village so far as ordinary wear
and tear is concerned, but damage due to hot water or external causes shall be
paid for by the customer. Meters and remote meter reading devices will be owned
and maintained by the village at the village’s expense for normal maintenance
requirements. Repair of damage due to freezing, hot water or external causes
which could have been prevented by ordinary precautions on the part of the
customer and repair of damage caused by the customer, will be paid for by the
customer. The amount charged for repair will be the actual cost of maintenance
and labor including removal, testing and overhead expenses.
         (c)   No water meter shall be placed in service, nor be allowed to
remain in service if it registers more than 102% or less than 98% of the water
which passes through it.
   (D)   The village reserves the right to remove and test any meter at any
time, and to substitute another meter in its place. In case of a disputed
account involving a question as to the accuracy of a meter, the meter will be
tested upon the request of the customer without charge, providing a
satisfactory test can be made in service. If removed for test, a charge as set
from time to time by resolution of the Village Board of Trustees must be
payable in advance of the test. In the event that the meter so tested is found
to have an error in registration in excess of 2%, the fee advanced for testing
will be refunded, and the bills shall be corrected accordingly on the basis of
one-fourth the time since the previous test. This correction shall apply both
for over and under registration.
   (E)   Where water is furnished by flat rate, the village shall have the
right to install, maintain and inspect a meter to determine the quantity
supplied and the applicant shall provide a suitable location therefor. The
village reserves the right to change from flat rate service to metered service
at any time under uniform, nondiscriminatory rules.
(Ord. 18-04-01, passed 4-24-2018)
§ 52.023 FIRE SERVICE.
   (A)   No person, except the Village Water Superintendent or other authorized
person, shall take water from any public fire hydrant, hose plug, street
washer, or fountain pipe, except for Fire Department purposes or for the use of
the Fire Department in case of fire; and no public fire hydrant shall be used
for sprinkling streets, flushing sewers or gutters or for anything other than
firefighting purposes except with the approval of the village or its duly
authorized agent.
   (B)   All public fire hydrants, valves and main connections will be
installed and maintained by the village or their authorized agents.
   (C)   Requests for the installation of a new fire hydrant or for the removal
and/or replacement of an existing fire hydrant must be made to the Village
Administrator. The applicant shall be required to pay reasonable costs for the
requested installation or modification.
   (D)   Because of the investment required to install fire hydrants, a hydrant
once installed may not be removed unless replaced at another location on
existing mains, and in those cases the cost of moving and reinstalling must be
paid by the applicant.
(Ord. 18-04-01, passed 4-24-2018)
§ 52.024 PRIVATE FIRE SERVICE.
   (A)   Private fire service connections serving private fire hydrants or
other private fire protection systems will be installed in accordance with the
provisions and terms of a private fire service connection permit. Only the
owner of premises being served may apply for private fire protection service.
   (B)   Application for private fire protection service will not be approved
unless there is suitable water volume and pressure, subject to the terms and
conditions in the application, available in the village distribution water main
abutting the premises to be supplied by the service.
   (C)   The applicant for a private fire service connection shall furnish a
set of drawings prepared by an Illinois Professional Engineer showing the
pipes, valves, hydrants, tanks, opening and appurtenances contemplated in the
application. The drawings must show any other water supply system, pipelines
and appurtenances which may exist on the premises.
   (D)   After completion, the customer must obtain, in advance, the approval
of the village for any change, alteration or addition in the fixtures, openings
and uses specified in the application and shown on the original drawings.
   (E)   Private fire hydrants will be installed and maintained by the customer
at the customer’s expense.
   (F)   No person or party may take water from any private fire hydrant except
authorized persons or parties for firefighting purposes; and no private fire
hydrant may be used for any purpose except the extinguishment or prevention of
fire unless prior approval of the village is obtained.
   (G)   A private fire service connection to be used to supply water to a fire
system utilizing fire hydrants, automatic sprinkler heads or standpipes, will
be installed from the village’s main to the customer’s property line or
easement line by the village at the applicant’s expense. The village reserves
the right to size the connection and to specify all materials used. The
applicant will pay the exact cost of material, labor and overhead expense. The
fire service connection so installed will remain the sole property of the
customer. The remainder of the installation including any fire hydrant(s) and
other firefighting appurtenances located on the premises of the applicant, will
be installed, owned and maintained by applicant.
   (H)   The applicant for a private fire service connection to supply water to
fire hydrants, automatic sprinkler heads or standpipes, will be obligated to
pay the applicable rate for the service in accordance with the rate schedules
in effect at that time.
   (I)   Private fire service connections are to be used only for the
extinguishment of fires and are to have no connection whatever with any other
service connection or service pipes that may be used for other than
firefighting purposes. The private fire service connection shall be distinct
and separate from the regular water service connections. The village reserves
the right to provide a meter and install it at the customer’s expense on a fire
service connection to ensure that water is not being used for purposes other
than extinguishment of fires.
   (J)   Private fire protection service shall be furnished through a line
guarded by an approved fire line meter furnished by the village at the
customer’s cost or detector device which shall be furnished and installed by
the customer at the customer’s cost and expense and with a bypass meter
furnished by the village at the customer’s cost. The fire line meter or
detector device shall be located at a point approved by the village. The fire
line meter shall be owned and maintained by the village and the detector device
will be maintained by the customer at its expense. The bypass meter only, used
with the detector device, shall be furnished, installed and maintained by the
village at the customer’s cost and expense.
   (K)   Customer-owned fire hydrants supplied through a fire service
connection shall be painted orange or yellow and shall not be painted the color
“red”, which has been adopted by the village for fire hydrants owned by the
village.
   (L)   Private fire service connections shall be provided with an approved
backflow prevention device.
(Ord. 18-04-01, passed 4-24-2018)
§ 52.025 GENERAL.
   (A)   Where water is used for steam boilers or other uses where a stoppage
of water supply might cause damage, the consumers are cautioned that the
village is not responsible for a continuous supply of water and that,
therefore, if such a supply is necessary, the consumer should arrange for
adequate storage capacity.
   (B)   In the case of temporary consumers, including contractors, desiring
water for construction purposes, the village shall require a deposit equal to
the estimated cost (including labor and materials) of making the connections to
furnish the service and upon discontinuance of the service a refund shall be
made equivalent to the difference between the actual cost of making the
connection and the salvage value of the materials reclaimed.
   (C)   Water will not be furnished where pipes are inferior, the plumbing
defective, or the faucets, water-closets or other fixtures are leaky or
imperfect, and when these conditions are discovered, the supply of water will
be shut off, unless immediate repairs are made.
   (D)   Title to all services from main to and including curb stop, meters and
meter installations is vested in the village and shall at all times remain the
sole property of the village and shall not be trespassed upon or interfered
with in any respect. This property shall be maintained by the village and may
be removed or changed by it at any time.
   (E)   Curb stops shall not be used by the consumer for turning on or
shutting off the water supply. The control of the water supply by the consumer
shall be by means of a separate stop, located in general just inside the
building wall. Curb stops are for the exclusive use of the village.
   (F)   If it becomes necessary to repair or replace an existing meter
installation the new meter installation will be made according to these
regulations.
   (G)   Where two or more customers are supplied through a single service
pipe, any violation of the rules of the village with reference to either or any
of the customers shall be deemed a violation as to all, and the village may
take action to all customers as may be taken for a single customer.
   (H)   All employees of the village whose duty compels them to enter the
property of any consumer shall, upon request, show their identification. Duly
authorized employees of the village, the Illinois Environmental Protection
Agency, and the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency, bearing proper
credentials and identification, shall be permitted to enter all properties for
the purpose of inspection, observation, measurement, sampling and testing as
may be required in pursuance of the implementation and enforcement of the terms
and provisions of this chapter.
   (I)   If the village finds that a meter seal has been broken, or any bypass
inserted, or there is evidence that the meter or service line connection has
been tampered with, the water will be shut off and shall not be turned on again
until the customer has paid for the estimated quantity of water which has been
used and not registered plus the cost to restore the meter or service line to
proper working order and any other necessary expense.
   (J)   The Village Board of Trustees reserves the right at any time to alter,
amend or add to these rules and regulations or to substitute other rules and
regulations.
   (K)   No person shall maliciously, willfully or negligently break, damage,
destroy, uncover, deface or tamper with any structure, appurtenance or
equipment which is a part of the village water supply system, without being
authorized to do so by the Village Administrator.
   (L)   In the case of backflow of any substance into the village’s mains, or
leakage of water from a customer’s service line, it shall be the customer’s
responsibility to immediately notify the village of the incident, via
telephone. The notification shall include the name of the caller, location and
time of discharge, type of substance, concentration and volume.
   (M)   The Village Administrator or other agent so designated by the Village
Board President is hereby authorized and directed to administer and enforce all
of the provisions of this chapter. Whenever necessary, the Water Treatment
Plant Operator or village staff of other departments of the village shall give
assistance as is consistent with the usual duties of their respective
departments.
   (N)   Duly authorized employees of the village bearing proper credentials
and identification shall be permitted to enter all private properties through
which the village holds a duly negotiated easement for the purposes of, but not
limited to, inspection, observation, measurement, sampling, testing, repair and
maintenance of any portion of the water supply works lying within the easement.
All entry and subsequent work, if any, on the easement, shall be done in full
accordance with the terms of the duly negotiated easement pertaining to the
private property involved, and subject to the provisions of this chapter.
(Ord. 18-04-01, passed 4-24-2018)
§ 52.026 SETBACK ZONING REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   Except as provided for by the Illinois Groundwater Protection Act,
ILCS Ch. 415, Act 55, §§ 1 et seq. (1991, Ch. 111 ½, Para. 7451) within this
section hereinafter referred to as the “Act”, no person shall place a new
potential primary pollution source, new potential secondary pollution source or
new potential pollution route within the minimum setback zone of 500 feet of
any water production well site currently operated by the village.
   (B)   Except as provided for by the Act, no person shall place a new
potential primary source of pollution within the maximum setback zone of 750
feet of any water protection well site currently operated by the village.
(Ord. 18-04-01, passed 4-24-2018)
CONSERVATION OF WATER DURING HIGH USE PERIODS
AND RESTRICTIONS DURING WATER SHORTAGE
§ 52.055 RESPONSE TO HIGH USAGE, WATER SHORTAGE OR WATER EMERGENCY.
   It shall be the duty of the Water Plant Operator to report to the Village
Administrator conditions that may adversely affect the village water supply.
The Administrator shall review all relevant and available information, and
shall determine whether or not a condition of high usage, water shortage or
water emergency exists. If the Village Administrator determines that a
condition of high usage, water shortage or water emergency exists, the
Administrator shall, with the advice of the President of the Board of Trustees,
declare the appropriate water conservation methods and procedures to be in full
force and effect. The Administrator shall take those actions necessary to alert
the public of the required conservation practices, including providing notice
to newspapers, radio stations and television stations.
(Ord. 18-04-01, passed 4-24-2018)
§ 52.056 WATER CONSERVATION STAGES; VOLUNTARY AND MANDATORY MEASURES.
   (A)   Stage I - Conservation Practices. In the event that a state of high
usage is determined to exist, the Village Administrator shall with the advice
of the President of the Board of Trustees declare that Stage I Conservation
Practices be in effect.
      (1)   Voluntary. Customers shall be encouraged to observe voluntary water
conservation measures to increase the level of conservation effort as follows:
         (a)   Limit the use of clothes washers and dishwashers, and when used,
to operate fully loaded;
         (b)   Limit car washing to the minimum;
         (c)   Check for water leaks and repair;
         (d)   Review water uses and make adjustments where possible for uses
such as dishwashing, showers and baths; and
         (e)   Restaurants shall be encouraged to minimize unnecessary water
uses.
      (2)   Mandatory.
         (a)   Customers shall observe the mandatory requirements as follows:
            1.   Watering of lawns, grass, trees, shrubbery, flowers or gardens
shall be curtailed by such methods as the Village Administrator and the Water
Plant Operator determine to be the best methods for conserving water. It is
anticipated that a timetable of intermittent watering will be established;
            2.   There shall be no washing down of outside areas such as
sidewalks, patios, driveways or other outside areas;
            3.   There shall be no use of any water to fill swimming pools or
wading pools except to replenish losses due to evaporation, spillage or the
maintenance of chemical feed equipment; and
            4.   There shall be no use of water for any unnecessary purpose.
         (b)   Provided, however, any customer may secure a written license
from the Village Administrator or his or her designee to use water contrary to
the mandatory water restrictions listed above where it can be shown to the
Administrator’s satisfaction that the use of the water pursuant to conditions
prescribed in the license will actually save water. The license must be in the
possession of the licensee any time water is being used contrary to the
mandatory watering restrictions. The license may be revoked at any time by the
Village Administrator.
   (B)   Stage II - Mandatory Conservation. In the event that a state of water
shortage is determined to exist, the Village Administrator shall with the
advice of the President of the Board of Trustees declare that Stage II
Conservation Practices shall be in effect.
      (1)   Customers shall be encouraged to observe the conservation methods
recommended in Stage I and required to observe the mandatory requirements in
Stages I and II as follows:
         (a)   Watering of lawns, gardens, grass, trees, flowers and shrubbery
shall be prohibited.
         (b)   No person shall:
            1.   Use water outside a structure except in an emergency involving
fire;
            2.   Add to or replenish water to any swimming or wading pool; or
            3.   Wash any motor vehicle. The hours of commercial carwash use
shall be reduced by hours set by the Administrator.
         (c)   Restaurants shall not serve water with meals unless requested by
the customer.
         (d)   Industrial users will be requested to reduce consumption by 10%.
   (C)   Stage III - Severe Mandatory Conservation. In the event that a state
of water emergency is determined to exist, the Village Administrator shall with
the advice of the President of the Board of Trustees declare that Stage III
Conservation Practices shall be in effect. Stage III Conservation Practices
shall be as follows.
      (1)   Voluntary. Customers shall be encouraged to observe the following
voluntary conservation measures:
         (a)   Purchase bottled water for drinking and cooking purposes;
         (b)   Postpone or eliminate showers and baths until the water
emergency has passed;
         (c)   Postpone or minimize clothes washing and dishwashing until the
water emergency has passed; and
         (d)   Minimize toilet flushes.
      (2)   Mandatory. Customers shall observe the following mandatory
conservation practices:
         (a)   All of the mandatory measures of Stages I and II shall be
observed;
         (b)   Use of commercial car washes and commercial laundromats shall be
prohibited; and
         (c)   Commercial and industrial consumption shall be reduced by 50% or
more. The extent of the reduced consumption shall be established by the Village
Administrator in consultation with the commercial or industrial user.
(Ord. 18-04-01, passed 4-24-2018) Penalty, see §
52.999
§ 52.057 SCOPE AND DURATION; EFFECT OF CONSERVATION METHOD.
   (A)   Scope and duration. In the event that the Village Administrator shall
declare one or more stages of water conservation to be in effect, the
proclamation shall be applicable to all persons using water supplied by the
village.
   (B)   Effect until official declaration. Whenever a Stage I, II or III
Conservation Practice is declared to be in effect, it shall remain in full
force and effect until such time as the Village Administrator declares that the
particular stage of the high water usage, water shortage or water emergency is
over and the measures applicable to it are no longer in effect.
(Ord. 18-04-01, passed 4-24-2018)
CONTROL OF THE DRILLING OF WATER WELLS WITHIN THE VILLAGE LIMITS
§ 52.070 WELL CONTROL.
   It shall be unlawful for the owner, occupant or party or parties in
possession of any house, structure, factory, governmental facility, industrial
or commercial establishment or any other building or structure of any other
character located on property within the village to establish or maintain a
water well, if facilities from the waterworks system of the village are
available to the property, without the approval and written agreement of the
village.
(Ord. 18-04-01, passed 4-24-2018) Penalty, see §
52.999
§ 52.071 OTHER GOVERNMENTAL UNITS.
   Other governmental units may apply to the village for a permit to construct
and operate a water well within the village limits. A permit to construct and
operate a well will be given to another unit of local government only if it is
demonstrated that issuance of the permit would be in the best interests of the
village.
(Ord. 18-04-01, passed 4-24-2018)
§ 52.072 AVAILABILITY.
   For purposes of this chapter, a public water supply facility shall be
considered available if it is located within 300 feet of any portion of the
property, unless a physical barrier exists which prevents reasonable connection
to the public water supply of the village.
(Ord. 18-04-01, passed 4-24-2018)
§ 52.073 PERMITS REQUIRED - NEW WELLS.
   (A)   Any person, owner, occupant or party or parties in possession of any
house, structure, factory, governmental facility, industrial or commercial
establishment or any other building or structure of any character within the
village, and for which public water supply is not available, shall, before
constructing and operating a water well, first obtain a permit to do so from
the village. The applicant for the permit shall provide evidence that the
applicable construction permit from the state has been obtained. The applicant
shall provide a sketch of the location of the proposed well, the sketch shall
include information about the adjacent sanitary sewers, on-site sewage disposal
systems or other potential sources of contamination.
   (B)   No permit shall be issued for construction of a new well if a public
water supply is available. No permit shall be issued for construction of a new
well if a source of groundwater contamination is located adjacent to the
proposed well.
   (C)   A nonrefundable application fee, in an amount to be determined from
time to time by resolution of the Board of Trustees, shall be paid to the
village at the time of application for the permit.
(Ord. 18-04-01, passed 4-24-2018)
§ 52.074 PERMITS REQUIRED - EXISTING WELLS.
   (A)   Within 90 days of the date of the enactment of this chapter, the
owners and operators of all existing wells within the village shall obtain a
permit to operate any well currently in existence. The applicant for the permit
shall provide evidence that the applicable permit from the state was obtained
before construction of the well. The applicant shall provide a sketch of the
location of the existing well. The sketch shall include information about
adjacent sanitary sewers, on-site sewage disposal systems and any other
potential sources of contamination. No permit for any existing well shall be
issued by he village for an existing well where use of public water supply is
available, unless otherwise specified by written agreement between the owner
and the village.
   (B)   A nonrefundable application fee in an amount as determined from time
to time by resolution of the Board of Trustees, shall be paid to the village at
the time of application for permit. Failure to obtain a permit will be evidence
that the well is no longer in operation and that the owner intends to abandon
the well in accordance with §
52.076.
(Ord. 18-04-01, passed 4-24-2018)
§ 52.075 EXISTING AGREEMENTS RECOGNIZED.
   It is recognized that the village previously entered into written agreements
with the owners and operators of some existing private well facilities within
the village. In the event of conflict between the terms of any existing written
agreement and the requirements of this chapter, the village and well operator
shall honor the terms and conditions of the existing agreement, to the extent
of the conflict. This section shall not be interpreted as eliminating the
requirement to obtain a permit for an existing well.
(Ord. 18-04-01, passed 4-24-2018)
§ 52.076 WELL ABANDONMENT.
   Any existing well which is no longer in use shall be fully sealed and
abandoned within 60 days after use ceases. Well abandonment shall be performed
in full accordance with the requirements of the Illinois Water Well
Construction Code. The well owner shall notify the village within 30 days of
the abandonment of any well and shall provide the village with a copy of all
well abandonment documentation.
(Ord. 18-04-01, passed 4-24-2018)
§ 52.077 STATE WELL PERMIT RECORDS.
   Copies of state well construction permits can be obtained locally from the
State Geological Survey, 234 Natural Resources Building, 615 East Peabody
Drive, Champaign, Illinois 61820. ATTN: Geological Records Unit. (Phone # 217-
244-2498).
(Ord. 18-04-01, passed 4-24-2018)
WATER SYSTEM EXTENSIONS
§ 52.090 GENERAL POLICIES.
   (A)   All public water system extensions for new development activities
shall be constructed by the customer at the customer’s expense. All
construction shall comply with the applicable village standards for water
facility construction. The village, at its option, may participate in a portion
of the cost of public water system extensions when it is in the best interest
of the village to do so. The latest version of the Village Water Distribution
System Extension Policy, as adopted by the Board of Trustees, shall govern any
voluntary village cost participation.
   (B)   All three-inch diameter and larger water service lines and fire
service lines shall be constructed of materials and with methods equivalent to
the materials and methods utilized to construct public water mains.
   (C)   The village must approve the plans and specifications for any water
main extension before any installation occurs. No extension will be permitted
when, in the opinion of the village, the system does not have the capacity to
serve the proposed extension.
(Ord. 18-04-01, passed 4-24-2018)
§ 52.091 DESIGN, MATERIALS, AND CONSTRUCTION.
   All design and construction criteria shall conform with the current Illinois
Environmental Protection Agency regulations and the Recommended Standards for
Waterworks (Ten State Standards), latest edition, and the requirements of the
Standard Specifications for Water and Sewer Main Construction in Illinois,
latest edition, and the Village of Mahomet’s Infrastructure Design Manual.
(Ord. 18-04-01, passed 4-24-2018)
VARIANCE FROM REQUIREMENTS
§ 52.110 VARIANCE ALLOWED.
   To the extent consistent with the applicable provisions of the Illinois
Environmental Protection Act, the Board of Trustees may grant variances beyond
the limitations prescribed in this chapter, provided that the petitioner has
demonstrated that failure to receive a variance would work an arbitrary or
unreasonable hardship on the petitioner. The burden of showing the arbitrary
and unreasonable hardship shall be on the petitioner who shall, before the
variance is granted, show the arbitrary and unreasonable hardship to the
Committee by clear and convincing proof. In no case shall the Board of Trustees
grant any variance whose terms might or could cause an interference of the
treatment process or the water distribution system.
(Ord. 18-04-01, passed 4-24-2018)
§ 52.111 LIMITATIONS.
   In granting a variance, the Board of Trustees may impose any conditions,
exceptions, time limitations, duration and other limitations as the policies of
this chapter or the Illinois Environmental Protection Act may require.
(Ord. 18-04-01, passed 4-24-2018)
§ 52.112 PETITION.
   Any user seeking a variance from any requirement of this chapter shall do so
by filing a petition for variance with the Village Administrator or Village
Clerk. Within 30 days of receipt of the petition, a hearing shall be held
before the Board of Trustees and the burden of proof shall be on the petitioner
to demonstrate the need for a variance.
(Ord. 18-04-01, passed 4-24-2018)
§ 52.113 DOCUMENTATION REQUIRED.
   The village shall specify information required to be submitted by the
petitioner. To enable the village to rule on the petition for variance, the
following information, where applicable, shall be included in the petition:
   (A)   Clear and complete statement of the precise extent of the relief
sought, including specific identification of the particular provisions of this
chapter from which the variance is sought;
   (B)   A factual statement why compliance with this chapter was not or cannot
be achieved by the required compliance date or why compliance with this chapter
is not possible;
   (C)   Past efforts to achieve compliance, if any, including costs incurred,
results achieved and permit status;
   (D)   A concise factual statement of the reasons the petitioner believes
that compliance with the particular provisions of this chapter would impose an
arbitrary or unreasonable hardship; and
   (E)   Any other information as is required by the village to properly
consider the request.
(Ord. 18-04-01, passed 4-24-2018)
§ 52.114 CONSIDERATION OF PETITION.
   The Village Administrator shall investigate the petition, consider the views
of persons who might be adversely affected by the granting of a variance and
make a report to the Board of Trustees regarding the disposition of the
petition.
(Ord. 18-04-01, passed 4-24-2018)
§ 52.115 REVOCATION.
   If the limits of a variance are exceeded or any terms of a variance are
violated by the person granted a variance, a violation of this chapter is
deemed to have occurred and the variance may be revoked by the Village
Administrator on 30 days notice.
(Ord. 18-04-01, passed 4-24-2018)
ENFORCEMENT PROCEDURES AND REMEDIES
§ 52.130 NOTICE OF VIOLATION.
   Any person found to be violating any provision of this chapter or any other
standards referred to herein, or who has failed to comply with any provisions
of this chapter and the orders, rules, regulations and permits issued hereunder
shall be served a written notice by the village stating the nature of the
violation and providing a reasonable time limit, but not less than ten days,
for the satisfactory correction thereof. The violator shall, within the period
of time stated in the notice, permanently cease or correct all violations. The
village may revoke any permit for water service or fire service as a result of
any violation of any provision of this chapter.
(Ord. 18-04-01, passed 4-24-2018)
§ 52.131 LIABILITY OF VIOLATOR.
   Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall become
liable to the village for any expense, loss or damage occasioned by the village
by reasons of the violation, including reasonable attorney fees incurred by the
village in the enforcement of this chapter.
(Ord. 18-04-01, passed 4-24-2018)
§ 52.132 VIOLATION PROHIBITED; ENFORCEMENT.
   (A)   Violation. In the event that the Village Administrator shall declare
one or more stages of water conservation as set forth herein, it shall be
unlawful for any person to use or permit use of water supplied by the village
in violation of any mandatory restrictions instituted.
   (B)   Enforcement. It shall be the duty of the Village Administrator to
investigate violations of the mandatory restrictions and issue orders
consistent with the purpose and intent of this subchapter. All customers shall
cease any violation of the mandatory restrictions upon the order of the Village
Administrator. Any customer who violates or fails to comply with any order made
hereunder shall be subject to penalty or a combination of the penalties as
follows:
      (1)   Discontinuance of service.
         (a)   The village may discontinue water service to any structure(s) or
parcel(s) when the Village Administrator upon recommendation of the Water Plant
Operator gives written notice of any violation of mandatory restrictions and
intent to discontinue service. Water service shall be discontinued after 24-
hours’ notice or any violation unless the violation shall cease voluntarily.
         (b)   When service is discontinued pursuant to the provisions of this
section, service shall not be reinstituted unless and until the Village
Administrator, upon recommendation of the Water Plant Operator, determines that
the risk to the village water supply has been alleviated. The customer shall
reimburse the village for all costs incurred to discontinue and reestablish
service before service is reinstituted.
      (2)   Appeal. The customers shall have a right to appeal to the Village
Board of Trustees, upon submitting a written notice of appeal to the Village
Administrator within five days after receiving notice of any violation and
intent to discontinue service. The appellant will be notified by the Village
Administrator of the time and place for the hearing of the appeal. The Board of
Trustees shall act on the appeal as expeditiously as possible and shall notify
the appellant in writing not later than two days after the final decision. The
water service shall remain discontinued until a decision has been reached by
the Board of Trustees.
(Ord. 18-04-01, passed 4-24-2018)
§ 52.133 ACTION BY VILLAGE.
   When in the opinion of the Village Administrator the violation of this
chapter presents an imminent and irreversible threat to the public health,
safety and welfare, or when the violation continues beyond the time limit in
which it was to be corrected, the village may correct the violation and assess
the costs thereof to the owner of the property on which the violation occurs.
(Ord. 18-04-01, passed 4-24-2018)
§ 52.134 FALSIFIED INFORMATION.
   Any person who knowingly makes any false statement, representation or
certification in any application, record, report, plan or other document filed
or required to be maintained pursuant to this chapter or who falsifies, tampers
with or knowingly renders inaccurate any monitoring device, backflow prevention
device or meter required under this chapter, shall be guilty of an offense and
upon conviction thereof, shall be fined as set forth in §
52.999(B).
(Ord. 18-04-01, passed 4-24-2018) Penalty, see §
52.999
§ 52.135 DISCONNECTION OF SERVICE.
   Any person who shall violate any provisions of this chapter shall, following
a hearing before the Board of Trustees, be subject to immediate disconnection
of the water service to the property upon or in connection with which the
violation occurred.
(Ord. 18-04-01, passed 4-24-2018)
§ 52.136 STOP WORK ORDERS.
   In the event that the Village Building Inspector (as a designee of the
Village Administrator) observes or is made aware that a violation of this
chapter has occurred or is occurring on the premises of new construction for
which a building permit has been issued, the Building Inspector is hereby
authorized to suspend the building permit and issue a stop work order
preventing continued construction work at the premises until such time as the
violation has been corrected.
(Ord. 18-04-01, passed 4-24-2018)
§ 52.137 OTHER REMEDIES.
   The remedies herein above provided shall not be exclusive and the village
may seek whatever other remedies are authorized by statute, at law or in
equity, against any person violating the provisions of this chapter.
(Ord. 18-04-01, passed 4-24-2018)
VALIDITY
§ 52.138 VALIDITY OF CHAPTER.
   If any section, paragraph, clause, or provision of this chapter shall be
held to be illegal, invalid or unenforceable for any reason, the illegality,
invalidity, or unenforceability of that section, paragraph, clause, or
provision shall not affect any of the remaining provisions of this chapter.
(Ord. 18-04-01, passed 4-24-2018)
§ 52.999 PENALTY.
   (A)   (1)   Any person who shall continue any violation of this chapter,
unless otherwise specified, beyond the time limit provided for in the written
notice of the violation, shall be guilty of an offense and upon conviction
thereof shall be fined an amount not greater than $500, but not less than $100
for each violation. Each day in which the violation exists or continues shall
be deemed a separate offense.
      (2)   In addition, the village may recover reasonable attorney’s fees,
expert’s fees, court costs and other expenses of litigation by appropriate suit
at law against the person found to have violated or cause to have violated this
chapter or the orders, rules, regulations and permits issued hereunder.
   (B)   Any violator of the provisions of §
52.134 shall be punished by a fine of not more than $500, but not less than
$100 for each violation.
(Ord. 18-04-01, passed 4-24-2018)
CHAPTER 53: SEWER REGULATIONS
Section
General Provisions
   
53.001   Purpose and intent
   
53.002   Definitions
   
53.003   Discharge generally; use of public sewers required
   
53.004   General requirements
Construction and Connections
   
53.015   Private sewage disposal; specifications and limitations
   
53.016   Public sewer connection requirements
   
53.017   Building sewers and private sewers
   
53.018   Public sanitary sewer extensions
Wastewater Discharge Requirements
   
53.030   Discharge prohibited
   
53.031   Harmful wastes prohibited
   
53.032   Specific discharge limitations
   
53.033   Compatible pollutants
   
53.034   Village reaction to harmful wastes
   
53.035   Special arrangements
Discharges; Disposal
   
53.045   Protection of sewage works from damage
   
53.046   Use of the public sewers
   
53.047   Wastewater haulers
Industrial Pretreatment
   
53.060   Pretreatment standards
   
53.061   Industrial discharge permits required
   
53.062   Permit issued
53.063Permit modifications
   
53.064   Change in conditions
   
53.065   Permit transfer
   
53.066   Pretreatment facilities required
   
53.067   Approvals
   
53.068   Owner’s responsibilities
   
53.069   Control manhole
   
53.070   Dilution
   
53.071   Compliance
   
53.072   Testing standards
   
53.073   Special arrangements
Inspection and Enforcement; Variances
   
53.085   Powers and authority of inspectors
   
53.086   Variances from requirements
   
53.087   Appeals
Validity
   
53.100   Validity of Chapter
 
   
53.999   Penalty
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 53.001 PURPOSE AND INTENT.
   (A)   Purpose. The purpose of this chapter is to regulate the use and
construction of public and private sanitary sewers within the jurisdiction of
the village in order to comply with applicable federal and state standards, and
to protect the public health, safety and welfare. The construction, maintenance
and repair of all sewage disposal systems, sanitary sewers and sanitary sewer
service lines including the connection to all sanitary sewers within the
village shall be under the direction of and subject to the approval of the
village whether constructed or maintained by the village or by private firms,
individuals or utilities.
   (B)   Intent. The intent of this chapter is to provide reasonable standards
and procedures for the uniform construction and use of sanitary sewers within
the jurisdiction of the village.
   (C)   Separate system. The sewer systems of the village shall consist of a
storm water drain system and a separate sanitary sewer collection system. The
two systems shall not be interconnected, but shall remain separate at all
times.
(Ord. 18-04-01, passed 4-24-2018)
§ 53.002 DEFINITIONS.
   (A)   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning. Further,
when used in this chapter, the word SHALL is mandatory; MAY is permissible.
   ADMINISTRATOR. The Administrator of the U.S. Environmental Protection
Agency.
   BOD (denoting BIOCHEMICAL OXYGEN DEMAND). The quantity of oxygen utilized in
the biochemical oxidation of organic matter under standard laboratory procedure
in five days at 20°C, expressed in milligrams per liter.
   BUILDING DRAIN. The part of the lowest piping of a building drainage system
within five feet outside of an exterior wall which receives the discharge from
soil pipes, waste pipes and floor drainage pipes inside the walls of the
building and conveys it to the building sewer or other approved point of
discharge, beginning five feet outside of the inner face of the building wall.
   BUILDING SEWER. The extension from the building drain to the public sanitary
sewer or other place of disposal.
   CAPACITY CONNECTION FEE. The fee due and payable from customer at time of
start of service to account for the anticipated usage of customer of the
village’s wastewater treatment and conveyance facilities. The capacity
connection fee shall also be due and payable from customer whenever a change of
use occurs on the premises which results in an increase of sue by the customer
of the village’s facilities.
   COMBINED SEWER. A sewer which is designed and intended to receive
wastewater, storm, surface and groundwater drainage.
   COMMERCIAL USER. Includes transit lodging, retail and wholesale
establishments or places engaged in selling merchandise, or rendering services.
   CONTROL MANHOLE. A structure located on a site from which industrial or
commercial wastes are discharged. Where feasible, the manhole shall have an
interior drop. The purpose of a CONTROL MANHOLE is to provide access for a
village representative to sample and/or measure discharges.
   CUSTOMER, CONSUMER. The party contracting for wastewater service to a
property as herein classified and a separate contract shall be required for
each property described as follows:
      (1)   A building under one roof owned by one party and occupied by one
person or family as a residence;
      (2)   A building under one roof owned by one party and occupied by one
person, firm or corporation as one business;
      (3)   A combination of buildings in one common enclosure owned by one
party and occupied by one person or family as a residence;
      (4)   A combination of buildings in one common enclosure owned by one
party and occupied by one person, firm or corporation as one business;
      (5)   The one side of a double house or duplex having a solid vertical
partition wall;
      (6)   A building owned by one party containing more than one apartment;
      (7)   A building owned by one party and having a number of offices or
business spaces which are rented to tenants using in common, one or more means
of entrance;
      (8)   A single lot, park or playground;
      (9)   Each house in a row of houses; or
      (10)   A single apartment or unit in a building of multiple dwelling
units.
      (11)   A single retail or commercial business space within a building of
multiple commercial spaces owned by one party.
   CUSTOMER’S SERVICE LINE. A pipe with appurtenances installed, owned and
maintained by the owner of a premises between the sanitary sewer service
connection to the village’s sanitary sewer and the structure or other point of
service on the owner’s premises as described in the application for wastewater
service connection.
   DIRECTOR. The Director of the Illinois Environmental Protection Agency.
   EASEMENT. An acquired legal right for the specific use of land owned by
others.
   EFFLUENT CRITERIA. Criteria for the content of waste water as defined in any
applicable NPDES permit.
   FEDERAL ACT. The Federal Clean Water Act (33 U.S.C. §§ 466 et seq.) as
amended (Pub. L. No. 95-217).
   FEDERAL GRANT. The U.S. government participation in the financing of the
construction of treatment works as provided for by Subchapter II, Grants for
Construction of Treatment Works of the Act and implementing regulations.
   FLOATABLE OIL. Oil, fat or grease in a physical state such that it will
separate by gravity from wastewater by treatment in an approved pretreatment
facility. A wastewater shall be considered free of FLOATABLE OIL if it is
properly pretreated and the wastewater does not interfere with the collection
system.
   GARBAGE. Solid wastes from the domestic and commercial preparation, cooking
and dispensing of food, and from the handling, storage and sale of food.
   IDM (INFRASTRUCTURE DESIGN MANUAL). The Manual of design requirements and
construction procedures required by the Village of Mahomet intended to provide
a uniform design criteria for installation of public infrastructure.
   IDPH (ILLINOIS DEPARTMENT OF PUBLIC HEALTH). The Agency of the State of
Illinois, any divisions thereof or successors thereto, authorized by present
and subsequent acts of the legislature to regulate and control matters with
respect to the implementation, management, and operation of private wastewater
facilities.
   IEPA (ILLINOIS ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION AGENCY). The agency or agencies of
the state, any divisions thereof or successors thereto, authorized by present
and subsequent acts of the legislature thereof to regulate and control matters
in respect to the environment, and particularly in respect to the management,
maintenance and operations of the village’s wastewater treatment and collection
facilities.
   INDUSTRIAL USERS. Includes establishments engaged in manufacturing
activities involving the mechanical or chemical transformation of materials of
substance into products.
   INDUSTRIAL WASTE. Any solid, liquid or gaseous substance discharged,
permitted to flow or escaping from any industrial, manufacturing, commercial or
business establishment or process or from the development, recovery or
processing of any natural resource, as distinct from domestic sanitary sewage.
   INSTITUTIONAL/GOVERNMENTAL USER. Includes schools, churches, penal
institutions, and users associated with federal, state and local governments.
   MAJOR CONTRIBUTING INDUSTRY. An industrial user of the publicly owned
treatment works that:
      (1)   Has a flow of 50,000 gallons or more per average work day;
      (2)   Has a flow greater than 10% of the flow carried by the municipal
systems receiving the waste;
      (3)   Has in its waste a toxic pollutant in toxic amounts as defined in
standards issued under § 307(a) of the Federal Act; or
      (4)   Is found by the permit issuant authority, in connection with the
issuance of the NPDES permit to the publicly owned treatment works receiving
the waste, to have significant impact, either singly or in combination with
other contributing industries, on that treatment works or upon the quality of
effluent from the treatment works.
   MILLIGRAMS PER LITER. A unit of the concentration of water or wastewater
constituent. It is 0.001 grams of the constituent in 1,000 milliliters of
water. It has replaced the unit formerly used commonly, parts per million, to
which it is approximately equivalent, in reporting the results of water and
wastewater analysis.
   NATURAL OUTLET. Any outlet into a watercourse, pond, ditch, lake or other
body or surface or groundwater.
   NPDES (NATIONAL POLLUTANT DISCHARGE ELIMINATION SYSTEM) PERMIT. Any permit
or equivalent document or requirements issued by the Administrator, or where
appropriate by the Director, after enactment of the Federal Clean Water Act to
regulate the discharge of pollutants pursuant to the § 402 of the Federal Act.
   OWNER. Whenever the same appears herein, means the person, firm, corporation
or association having the sole ownership and interest in any premises which is
or is about to be supplied with wastewater service by the village, and the word
OWNERS means all so interested.
   PERSON. Any and all persons, natural or artificial, including any
individual, firm, company, municipal or private corporation, association,
society, institution, enterprise, governmental agency or other entity.
   pH. The logarithm (base 10) of the reciprocal of the hydrogen ion
concentration expressed by one of the procedures outlined in the IEPA Division
of Laboratories Manual of Laboratory Methods.
   POPULATION EQUIVALENCY. A term used to evaluate the impact of industrial or
other waste on a treatment works or stream. One population equivalent is 100
gallons of sewage per day, containing 0.17 pounds of BOD and 0.20 pounds of
suspended solids.
   PPM. Parts per million, by weight.
   PRETREATMENT. The treatment of wastewaters from sources before introduction
into the public wastewater collection and treatment works.
   PRIVATE SANITARY SEWER. A sewer line owned and operated by an individual
property owner intended to provide a connection from a property to the public
sanitary sewer which is utilized for the purposes of wastewater disposal.
   PROPERLY SHREDDED GARBAGE. The wastes from the preparation, cooking and
dispensing of food that have been shredded to the degree that all particles
will be carried freely under the flow conditions normally prevailing in public
sewers, with no particle greater than one-half inch in any dimension.
   PUBLIC SANITARY SEWER. A sewer owned and operated by the village constructed
for the purpose of conveying wastewater to the village wastewater treatment
facilities from multiple properties.
   RESIDENTIAL USER. All dwelling units such as houses, mobile homes, modular
homes, apartments and permanent multi-family dwellings.
   SANITARY SEWER. A sewer that conveys sewage or industrial wastes or a
combination of both, and into which storm, surface water and ground water or
polluted industrial wastes are not intentionally admitted.
   SEWAGE. Used interchangeably with WASTEWATER.
   SEWER. A pipe or conduit for conveying sewage or any other waste liquids,
including storm, surface and groundwater drainage.
   SEWERAGE. The system of sewers and appurtenances for the collection,
transportation and pumping of sewage.
   SLUG. Any discharge of water, sewage or industrial waste which in
concentration of any given constituent or in quantity of flow exceeds for any
period of duration longer than 15 minutes more than five times the average 24-
hour concentration of flows during normal operation.
   STATE ACT. The Illinois Anti-Pollution Bond Act of 1970, being ILCS Ch. 30,
Act 405.
   STATE GRANT. The state participation in the financing of the construction of
treatment works as provided for by the Illinois Anti-Pollution Bond Act and for
making such grants as filed with the Secretary of State of Illinois.
   STORM DRAIN. A sewer that carries storm, surface and groundwater drainage
but excludes sewage and industrial wastes other than unpolluted cooling water.
   STORMWATER RUNOFF. The portion of the precipitation that is drained into the
storm drains.
   SUSPENDED SOLIDS (SS). Solids that either float on the surface of, or are in
suspension in water, sewage or industrial waste, and which are removable by a
laboratory filtration device. Quantitative determination of SUSPENDED SOLIDS
shall be made in accordance with procedures set forth in the IEPA Division of
Laboratories Manual of Laboratory Methods.
   UNPOLLUTED WATER. Water quality equal to or better than the effluent
criteria in effect or water that would not cause violation of receiving water
quality standards and would not be benefited by discharge to the sanitary
sewers and wastewater treatment facilities provided.
   USEPA (UNITED STATES ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION AGENCY). An agency of the
federal government of the United States which was created for the purpose of
protecting human health and the environment by writing and enforcing
regulations based on laws passed by Congress.
   USER CLASS. The type of user: residential, institutional/governmental,
commercial or industrial as defined herein.
   VILLAGE. The Village of Mahomet, Champaign County, Illinois.
   VILLAGE ADMINISTRATOR. The person appointed by the President of the Board of
Trustees to enforce the provisions of this Chapter. The Village Administrator
may designate other village employees to act on his/her behalf.
   WASTEWATER. The spent water of a community. It may be a combination of the
liquid and water-carried wastes from residences, commercial buildings,
industrial plants and institutions, together with any groundwater, surface
water and storm water that may be present.
   WASTEWATER FACILITIES. The structures, equipment and processes required to
collect, carry away and treat domestic and industrial wastes and transport
effluent to a watercourse.
   WASTEWATER TREATMENT WORKS. An arrangement of devices and structures for
treating wastewater, industrial wastes and sludge. Sometimes used as synonymous
with WASTE TREATMENT PLANT or WASTEWATER TREATMENT PLANT or POLLUTION CONTROL
PLANT.
   WATER QUALITY STANDARDS. As defined in the Water Pollution Regulations of
the state.
   WATERCOURSE. A channel in which a flow of water occurs, either continuously
or intermittently.
(Ord. 18-04-01, passed 4-24-2018)
§ 53.003 DISCHARGE GENERALLY; USE OF PUBLIC SEWERS REQUIRED.
   (A)   Unlawful waste disposal. It shall be unlawful for any person to place,
deposit or discharge, or cause or permit to be placed, deposited or discharged
in any unsanitary manner, upon the surface of publicly or privately owned
property, any human or animal excrement, garbage or other objectionable waste
or material or wastewaters within the jurisdiction of the village.
   (B)   Unlawful discharge. It shall be unlawful for any person to discharge
into any natural outlet or water course within the jurisdiction of the village
or to the environment any sewage, waste or material, industrial waste or any
polluted water, except where the person has made and provided treatment thereof
rendering the content of the discharge in accordance with state and federal
laws, ordinances and regulations, or further provisions of this chapter.
   (C)   Unlawful facilities. Except as hereinafter provided, it shall be
unlawful to construct or maintain within the village any privy, privy vault,
septic tank, cesspool or other private sewage disposal facility intended or
used for the disposal of sewage. Porta-pottys may be installed during
construction or other temporary activities on a temporary basis for not longer
than six months.
   (D)   Required connection to public sewer.
      (1)   Any person owning property situated within the jurisdiction of the
village, which property is improved with one or more residences, houses,
buildings or structures used or intended to be used for human use, occupancy,
employment, recreation or any other similar purpose whatsoever, and which
property abuts on any street, alley or right-of-way in which there is located a
public sanitary sewer within 300 feet from any property line on which the
improvement is located, shall, within 90 days of the effective date of this
chapter or within 90 days after the sanitary sewer is in service, whichever is
later, at his or her expense install suitable toilet and waste disposal
facilities therein, and connect the facilities with the public sanitary sewer
in accordance with the terms and provisions of this chapter.
      (2)   In the event that compliance with this section causes economic
hardship to the person, he or she may apply to the Village Board of Trustees
for exemption from or extension of the deadline of the requirements of this
section. These exemptions or extensions may only be granted to residential
users upon the favorable recommendation of the Village Engineer that the
extension will not endanger the public health, welfare or safety. Exemptions
shall not apply to commercial and industrial users.
      (3)   The required sewer connection described above shall not be avoided
by reason of actual distance from the building or structure to the connecting
point at the public sanitary sewer.
(Ord. 18-04-01, passed 4-24-2018) Penalty, see §
53.999
§ 53.004 GENERAL REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   Where reference is made herein to any federal or state statute, rules
or regulations, either specifically or generally, the reference shall be to
that statute, rule or regulation and to all amendments there to now in force or
which may be hereafter enacted, adopted and/or promulgated.
   (B)   No portion or provision hereof shall be taken to establish lesser or
different requirements than those imposed upon persons by the state and federal
governments for purposes of protecting and improving the environment, and to
the extent the statutes and regulations are different from, in conflict with,
and are more stringent than the provisions of this chapter, the state and
federal statutes, rules and regulations shall govern.
(Ord. 18-04-01, passed 4-24-2018)
CONSTRUCTION AND CONNECTIONS
§ 53.015 PRIVATE SEWAGE DISPOSAL; SPECIFICATIONS AND LIMITATIONS.
   (A)   Private sewage disposal system. Where a public sanitary sewer is not
available under the provisions of §
53.003(D), the building sewer shall be connected to a private sewage disposal
system complying with the provisions of this section and all other applicable
county, state and federal laws and regulations.
   (B)   Permit required. Before commencement of construction of a private
sewage disposal system, the owner shall first obtain a State Department of
Public Health permit as well as village approval in the form of a written
permit signed by the Village Administrator or other administrative agent so
designated by the Village Board President. The application for the permit shall
be made on a form furnished by the village. This permit application form shall
be accompanied by any plans, specifications and other information as deemed
necessary by the Village Administrator or Village Clerk. A nonrefundable permit
and inspection fee, as set forth from time to time by the Village Board of
Trustees, shall be paid to the village at the time the application is filed.
   (C)   Inspection. A permit for operation of a private sewage disposal system
shall not become effective until the installation is completed to the
satisfaction of the Village Administrator. The Village Building Inspector or
Wastewater Treatment Plant Operator shall be allowed to inspect the work at any
stage of construction. In addition, the applicant for the permit shall notify
the Village Administrator in writing when the work is ready for final
inspection, and before any underground portions are covered. The village
inspection shall be made within 48 hours of the receipt of written notice by
the village.
   (D)   Specifications for private sewage disposal systems. The type,
capacities, location and layout of a private sewage disposal system shall
comply with all recommendations of the State Private Sewage Disposal Licensing
Act and Code, with the Illinois Environmental Protection Agency, with the
Illinois Department of Public Health, and with the requirements of the
village’s Infrastructure Design Manual. No permit shall be issued for any
private sewage disposal system employing subsurface soil absorption facilities
where the area of the lot is less than 30,000 square feet (2,787 square
meters). No septic tank or cesspool shall be permitted to discharge to any
natural outlet, water course, or storm drain.
   (E)   Operation of private facilities.
      (1)   The owner shall operate and maintain the private sewage disposal
facilities in a sanitary manner at all times, and at no expense to the village.
      (2)   The village shall not be responsible in any way for the proper
operation and maintenance of a private sewage disposal system or on-site
treatment facility.
   (F)   Termination of private sewage disposal. Within 90 days after a
property served by a private sewage disposal system shall become subject to the
terms and provisions of this chapter by nature of an extension of public
sanitary sewers, a direct connection of the building sewer shall be made to the
public sanitary sewer, according to the terms and provisions of this chapter.
All private sewage disposal systems, septic tanks, cesspools and other
appurtenances of the private sewage disposal system shall be disconnected and
abandoned, cleaned of sludge and removed, all tanks or other containers shall
be permanently filled with clean bank-run gravel or dirt, and sealed.
   (G)   Prohibited waste disposal. It shall be unlawful for any person to
construct or maintain any cesspool, privy vault, septic tank, or other private
wastewater treatment facility under any of the following circumstances:
      (1)   Within 300 feet of the public sewer system or on property abutting
the village wastewater collection system;
      (2)   Within 40 feet of any school, church or public building;
      (3)   Within ten feet of any dwelling;
      (4)   Within ten feet of any side lot line;
      (5)   Within 50 feet of any well, cistern or water main;
      (6)   On property which contains an area of less than 30,000 square feet;
or
      (7)   On property which violates any of the requirements of the County
Health Department.
   (H)   Additional requirements. No statement contained in this section shall
be construed to alter, modify, interfere with or provide lesser requirements
for private sewage disposal systems as are presently or may hereafter be
imposed and required by any other legal governmental body, local, state or
federal agency, or County Health Department.
(Ord. 18-04-01, passed 4-24-2018) Penalty, see §
53.999
§ 53.016 PUBLIC SEWER CONNECTION REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   Disposal compliance. All disposal of wastewater by any person into the
public sanitary sewer system of the village is unlawful except those discharges
which are in compliance with federal standards promulgated and set forth
pursuant to the Federal Act and more stringent state and local standards.
   (B)   Permit required.
      (1)   No unauthorized person shall uncover, alter or disturb any public
sanitary sewer, or open any manhole, intercepting chamber or any appurtenance
thereof without first obtaining a written permit to do so from the village in
accordance with the provisions of this chapter.
      (2)   No unauthorized person shall make any connection with or opening
into or use any sewer, the flow of which is directly or indirectly discharged
into any public sanitary sewer, without first obtaining a connection permit,
extension permit and/or discharge permit as required by this chapter.
      (3)   Failure of the property owner or his or her agent to secure the
applicable permits shall cause the person to be subject to disconnection, in
addition to the fines and penalties provided for in this chapter. In addition,
the property owner and/or sewer builder shall be refused any additional permits
until such time as the discrepancies have been corrected in a manner
satisfactory to the Village Administrator.
   (C)   Connection permit classifications. There shall be two classes of
building sewer permits:
      (1)   Residential wastewater service; and
      (2)   Commercial, institutional/governmental, or industrial wastewater
service.
   (D)   Application for permit.
      (1)   A property owner, or his or her agent, shall make application for a
connection permit on a form furnished by the village.
      (2)   The permit application of nonresidential users shall be
supplemented by any plans, specifications, detailed drawings or other
information as may be deemed necessary by the Village Administrator. Any permit
application submitted by an industrial user shall be accompanied by information
which describes the industry’s wastewater constituents, characteristics and
type of activity.
   (E)   Permit and inspection fee.
      (1)   The permit application shall be accompanied by a nonrefundable
permit and inspection fee, the cost of which shall be as set from time to time
by the Village Board of Trustees, and paid to the village to cover filing of
the permit application and one inspection of a connection to the public
sanitary sewer system. If inspection of a connection to any public sanitary
sewer for which a permit has been issued is found to be faulty, the sewer
builder shall apply for reinspection after the corrections have been made. The
request for reinspection shall be made at the Village Office for a
nonrefundable reinspection fee, the cost of which shall be set from time to
time by the Village Board of Trustees.
      (2)   In addition to permit and inspection fees, the village may also
collect capacity connection fees and other fees as may be determined by the
village at the time the permit application is made.
   (F)   Permit approval or denial. If the application and any supporting
documentation is in proper form, and if the sewer connection indicated therein,
in the judgment of the Village Administrator, appears to be in conformance with
this chapter and all other village requirements, and the applicable permit and
inspection fee and other required connection charges have been paid, the
Village Administrator shall issue the permit for connection to the sanitary
public sewer. If otherwise, the application shall be denied.
   (G)   Appeal of permit denial. If the application is denied by the Village
Administrator, he or she shall state the reason or reasons therefor in writing,
mailed or personally delivered to the applicant, within five days from the date
on which the application is denied. The applicant shall have the right to
either amend the application in conformity with the reasons given for denial or
to have the application and denial reviewed by the Village Board of Trustees,
provided the applicant shall give written notice of the request for the review
within ten days after receipt of denial. The Board shall review the permit
application, the written denial and any other evidence or matters as the
application and Village Administrator shall present at its next regular meeting
following receipt of request for its review, and the decision of the Village
Board of Trustees rendered publicly at the meeting shall be final.
   (H)   Sufficient downstream capacity. A sanitary sewer connection permit
will only be issued and a sanitary sewer connection allowed if it can be
demonstrated by the applicant to the satisfaction of the Village Administrator
and the Village Engineer that the downstream sewerage facilities, including
sewers, pump stations and wastewater treatment facilities, have sufficient
reserve capacity to adequately and efficiently handle the additional
anticipated waste load.
   (I)   Connection notification and inspection.
      (1)   The village shall be notified when work on the connection is
started and shall be notified when the work is ready for inspection which shall
be the time when all piping is in place and before the trench is backfilled.
The village will make an inspection of the connections within 48 working hours
following the notification, Monday through Friday.
      (2)   No connection shall be made which is different in any way from that
specified in the permit granted. In the event of this difference, a new permit
shall be required of and submitted by the applicant before the connection is
made.
   (J)   Connection requirements. Connections to a public sanitary sewer shall
conform to the requirements of the Building and Plumbing Code, or other
applicable rules and regulations of the village, the village IDM, or the
procedures set forth in the latest edition of the appropriate specifications of
the American Society of Testing Materials, Water Pollution Control Federation
Manual of Practice No. 9, and Standard Specifications for Water and Sewer Main
Construction in Illinois in effect at the time the connection is made. All
connections shall be made gas-tight and watertight. Any deviation from the
prescribed procedures and materials must be approved by the Village
Administrator or Village Engineer before installation.
   (K)   Insurance required. Each applicant for a permit required by this
chapter for work on public property shall carry adequate public liability and
property damage insurance to indemnify the village in case of any accident or
damage occurring in conjunction with or as a result of the work being done
under the permit.
      (1)   The form of insurance required shall be subject to the approval of
the Village Attorney.
      (2)   Limits of liability shall be at least $100,000 for injury to any
one person and $500,000 for injury resulting from any one accident and $50,000
for injury to any property.
      (3)   The insurance required may not be canceled until completion of the
work for which a permit is issued and following final inspection and approval
of the work by the village. Cancellation or lapse of the insurance required
shall terminate any permit for which the policy provides coverage.
   (L)   Change in property use. In the event the use of a property changes,
the owner shall apply for a new capacity connection permit in accordance with
this section and shall be subject to all requirements including payment of the
capacity connection permit fee.
   (M)   Private legal responsibility. Each applicant for a permit required by
this chapter for work on private or public property shall bear the
responsibility for accidental injury or death, property damage or any other
litigation that may arise in connection with this work and shall in any case
hold the village harmless from all damages.
(Ord. 18-04-01, passed 4-24-2018)
§ 53.017 BUILDING SEWERS AND PRIVATE SEWERS.
   (A)   Responsibility for costs. All costs and expenses incident to the
installation and connection of the building sewer shall be borne by the owner.
The owner shall indemnify the village from any loss or damage to the public
sanitary sewer system that may directly or indirectly be occasioned by the
installation of the building sewer.
   (B)   Individual service line required. A separate and independent building
sewer shall be provided for every building except that where one building
stands at the rear of another on an interior lot, and no building or private
sewer is available or can be constructed to the rear building through an
adjoining alley, court, yard or driveway, the building sewer from the front
building may be extended to the rear building and the whole considered as the
building sewer (except for sewer connection charges accruing from the building
or properties).
   (C)   Existing building sewers. Existing building sewers may be used for
connection of new buildings only when they are found, on examination and test
by the Village Administrator, to meet all the requirements of this chapter and
are adequate to serve the purposes of the new building and its use. A sewer
connection permit shall be required for all new buildings reusing old sanitary
sewer connections. Abandoned connections or building sewers shall be
effectively closed or sealed off as directed by the Village Administrator.
   (D)   Prohibited connections. No person shall make connection of roof
downspouts, exterior foundation drains, areaway drains, sump pump discharges,
or other sources of surface runoff or groundwater to a building sewer or
building drain which in turn is connected directly or indirectly to a public
sanitary sewer.
   (E)   General construction requirements. The building sewer and the
connection of the building sewer into any public sanitary sewer within the
jurisdiction of the village and the size, slope, alignment, materials of
construction of a building sewer and the methods to be used in excavating,
placing of the pipe, jointing, testing, and backfilling the trench shall all
conform to the material and procedural requirements set forth in the Building
and Plumbing Code or other applicable rules and regulations of the village, the
village IDM, and in the latest editions of the appropriate specifications of
the American Society of Testing Materials, Water Pollution, Control Federation
Manual of Practice No. 9, and Standard Specifications for Water and Sewer Main
Construction in Illinois, and the requirements contained in this chapter. All
the building and private sanitary sewers and connections shall be made gas-
tight and watertight. Any deviation from these prescribed procedures and
materials must be reviewed and recommended by the Village Engineer and approved
by the Village Administrator before installation.
   (F)   Inspection required. The applicant for the building sewer permit shall
notify the Village Administrator when the building sewer is ready for
inspection and connection to the public sanitary sewer. No part of a building
or private sewer shall be covered until inspected and approved by the Village
Building Inspector or his or her designated representative. The connection to
the public sanitary sewer shall only be made under the direct supervision of
the Building Inspector or his or her representative, and in accordance with the
standards of this chapter.
   (G)   Excavations protected. All excavations for building sewer installation
shall be adequately guarded with barricades and lights as to protect the public
from hazard. Streets, sidewalks, parkways and other public property disturbed
in the course of the work shall be restored in a manner satisfactory to the
Village Administrator.
   (H)   Specific construction requirements.
      (1)   Vertical requirements. Where possible, the building sewer to serve
a new building shall be brought to the building at an elevation below the
lowest floor or below the lowest plumbing fixture or building drain. The depth
shall be sufficient to afford protection from frost and shall, at a minimum, be
42 inches from the ground level to the top of the pipe. The building sewer
shall be laid at a uniform grade insofar as possible. Changes in slope shall be
made only with properly curved pipe, fittings, or at a manhole facilitating
servicing. In all buildings in which the outlet from the lowest plumbing
fixture or any building drain is too low to provide gravity flow to the public
sanitary sewer, all sewage from the fixtures or building drain shall be lifted
by approved mechanical means in accordance with this chapter and discharged
into the building sewer. No water-operated sewage ejector pump shall be used.
      (2)   All basement drains and basement wastewater piping systems shall
discharge to the public sanitary sewer system by means of a sewage pump or
other mechanical means, and shall not be connected by gravity to the public
sanitary sewer.
      (3)   Horizontal alignment. Insofar as possible, the building sewer shall
be laid in straight alignment. Changes in direction shall be made only with
properly curved pipe and fittings or at a manhole.
      (4)   Size and slope. Only the following sizes and minimum slopes of
building and private sewers shall be allowed:
 
Pipe Size Minimum Slope
4-inch    1/4 inch per foot
5-inch    1/4 inch per foot
6-inch    1/8 inch per foot
8-inch    0.006 feet per foot
 
      (5)   Cleanouts. Cleanouts shall be required and installed in appropriate
locations in accordance with the State Plumbing Code and shall be constructed
in a watertight fashion. Cleanouts shall be capped with a watertight lid to
prohibit intrusion of unpolluted water into the public sanitary sewer system.
All details of cleanout location and construction for nonresidential users
shall be subject to the approval of the village.
      (6)   Pipe material and joints. All building and private sewers
constructed within the jurisdiction of the village and which may, at the time
of construction or in the future, be connected to the public sanitary sewer
system shall be constructed using the materials specified in the Village of
Mahomet’s IDM.
      (7)   Fittings, couplings and connections. Fittings and couplings shall
be made of the same or compatible material as the pipe material or as
recommended by the pipe manufacturer. For the connection of two sections of
sewer pipe of different sizes or of the same size but different materials, the
use of appropriate reducer/increaser or adaptor or pipe coupling specifically
made for the coupling of the two pipe sections shall be required. All jointing
and connections shall be as recommended by the pipe manufacturer and be made
gas-tight and watertight.
      (8)   Construction of lines. All building and private sanitary sewers
shall be constructed in a manner and of materials as set forth by the village
IDM. Within public street or alley right-of-way and within areas of present or
future pavement or sidewalk, the trench around and above the sewer pipe to the
level of the subgrade shall be backfilled with compacted granular backfill and
subject to the approval of the village.
      (9)   Relation to potable water facilities. No building or private sewer
shall be constructed in the same trench or within ten feet of a potable water
service line. Any part of a public or private sanitary sewer that is located
within ten feet of a potable water service line shall be laid in a separate
trench and at such an elevation that the top of the sewer is at least 18 inches
below the bottom of the water service pipe. If it is impossible to attain the
required horizontal or vertical separation, the sanitary sewer shall be
constructed of ductile iron or PVC water main pipe and be pressure tested to
assure water tightness. Sanitary sewers within 50 feet of a private well for
potable water use shall also be constructed of ductile iron or PVC water main
pipe.
      (10)   Connections to public sewers. The connection of any building or
private sanitary sewer to the public sanitary sewer system shall be made only
at an existing service lateral extended to the property, an existing wye or tee
in a main line public sewer, or an existing service stub from a manhole. In the
event a service lateral, wye, tee or manhole stub does not exist, a connection
may be made to an existing manhole or if an existing manhole does not exist,
via installation of a new manhole or by installation of a new wye branch
section. The connection of any building or private sanitary sewer to the public
sanitary sewer system shall be constructed in a manner and of materials as set
forth by the village IDM.
   (I)   Ownership and maintenance responsibility. Building and private
sanitary sewers shall be and shall remain the property of the owner of the lot
or parcel of real estate being served and any required repairs, maintenance, or
cleaning shall be the responsibility of the property owner. Should, at some
future time, the sewer service line be found to be defective, permitting the
introduction of storm or ground water into the system, the sewer line shall be
repaired at the property owner’s expense so that the entry of storm water or
ground water is stopped.
   (J)   Surface restoration. When existing pavement, sidewalk, yard area,
ditches or other surface treatments on public rights-of-way are removed in the
course of making a sewer connection, the surfaces shall be restored to meet the
original condition in accordance with the Standard Specifications for Water and
Sewer Main Construction in Illinois and with the requirements of the village
IDM. Street cuts shall be made only at the times and in a manner approved by
the village following at least 24-hours’ notice to the village.
(Ord. 18-04-01, passed 4-24-2018)
§ 53.018 PUBLIC SANITARY SEWER EXTENSIONS.
   (A)   Permit required. Issuance of public sanitary sewer extension permits
shall be initiated by an application for construction permit. The application
shall be made on forms provided by the village and the IEPA, shall be fully
completed by the applicable persons or parties, and shall be accompanied by a
set of plans, specifications and any other information as may be required by
the Village Engineer.
   (B)   Plans and specifications. Plans and specifications for all public
sanitary sewers to be constructed within and adjacent to the boundaries of the
village shall be prepared by an Illinois Professional Engineer and approval
thereof must be obtained from the village and the Illinois Environmental
Protection Agency prior to construction.
   (C)   Permit approval or denial. If the application is in proper form, and
the sanitary sewer extension indicated therein appears to be in accordance with
this chapter and all village, state and federal requirements, the Village
Administrator shall issue the permit for construction of the sewer. If
otherwise, the application for permit shall be denied by the Village
Administrator.
   (D)   Permit fee. There shall be a fee, as set from time to time by the
Village Board of Trustees, charged for sanitary sewer extension application
permits.
   (E)   Appeal of permit denial. If the application is denied by the Village
Administrator, he or she shall state the reason or reasons therefor in writing,
mailed or personally delivered to the applicant. The applicant shall have the
right to either amend the application in conformity with the reasons given for
denial, or to have the application and denial reviewed by the Board of
Trustees, provided he or she shall give written notice of his or her request
for the review within ten days after receipt of denial. The Board of Trustees
shall review the permit application, the written denial and any other evidence
or matters as the applicant and Village Administrator and Village Engineer
shall present at its next regular meeting following receipt of request for its
review, and the decision of the Board of Trustees rendered publicly at the
meeting shall be final.
   (F)   Engineer certifications.
      (1)   Prior to the application for, and issuance of, permits for sanitary
sewer connections by the village as regulated in this chapter, the person to
whom a public sanitary sewer extension permit was issued shall have his or her
engineer, at his or her own expense, submit certification that the extension
was constructed in accordance with the plans and specifications; the results of
the testing provisions of this chapter, including a certified statement showing
the source, place and volume of foreign waters; complete accurate “as-built”
plans showing all elevations as installed, as well as accurate measurements
showing the locations of service connections, recorded copies of all operation
and maintenance easements or a recorded subdivision plat showing all easements
for public sanitary sewers not built in the public street right-of-way, and any
other approvals as may be required by the village.
      (2)   The engineer certifying the IEPA permit application shall inspect
the construction, supervise the testing and certify the project to the
satisfaction of the village. During the time period in which the sanitary sewer
extension is under construction, the engineer shall submit weekly progress
reports to the village. The progress report shall describe construction
activities for the reporting period; i.e., sewer sections installed,
construction problems encountered, field orders issued, change orders requested
and the like. Any assignment of these responsibilities to another engineer
shall have prior approval of the Village Administrator.
   (G)   Negotiations for easements. Whenever the village or any person shall
acquire by purchase, condemnation or otherwise any real and personal property,
right-of-way easement or privilege for the purpose of constructing and
maintaining a sanitary sewer, no part of the consideration therefor, or any
other agreement in respect to the acquisition shall be made, either directly or
indirectly, as would permit connection by the seller or grantee of the rights,
or any other person, to connect to the sewer or sewer system without having
complied fully with all of the terms and provisions of this chapter in regard
to installation, connection and use of sewers, whether publicly or privately
owned.
   (H)   General construction requirements. All extensions of the public
sanitary sewer shall be constructed in accordance with the Standard
Specifications for Water and Sewer Main Construction in Illinois, the rules and
regulations of the IEPA and the requirements contained in this chapter and
other applicable village regulations including the Village IDM. Any deviations
will be allowed only by written permission of the Village Engineer.
   (I)   Unpolluted water excluded. No person shall at any time make connection
of any source of storm runoff, ground water or other sources of uncontaminated
water directly or indirectly to a sanitary sewer extension, existing public or
private sanitary sewer, or other facility or structure tributary to the
wastewater collection and treatment facilities of the village.
   (J)   Construction methods. Construction methods pertaining to the
installation, excavation, bedding and backfilling of sanitary sewer extensions
shall be in accordance with the Standard Specifications for Water and Sewer
Main Construction in Illinois, the village IDM, and shall conform to the
manufacturer’s recommendations for the type of material used.
   (K)   Pipe and joint materials. All sanitary sewer extensions constructed
within the jurisdiction of the village shall be constructed of the materials
and conforming to the specifications indicated or the latest designation
thereof in the village’s IDM.
   (L)   Service laterals. Service laterals of a minimum size of six inches
diameter shall be extended from the public sanitary sewer to individual
properties. Laterals shall be extended from a wye and shall be between seven
and nine feet deep at the property line. For deeper public sanitary sewers,
risers may be extended from a tee and shall be a maximum of 45 degrees laid on
undisturbed soil outside the main trench excavation. Risers in excess of three
feet shall be encased in granular cradle or concrete.
(Ord. 18-04-01, passed 4-24-2018) Penalty, see §
53.999
WASTEWATER DISCHARGE REQUIREMENTS
§ 53.030 DISCHARGE PROHIBITED.
   No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged any of the following
described waters or wastes to any public sanitary sewers:
   (A)   Any gasoline, kerosene, benzene, naphtha, toluene, xylene, ethers,
alcohols, ketones, aldehydes, peroxides, chlorates, perchlorates, bromates,
polychlorinated biphenyls, polybrominated biphenyls, carbides, hydrides,
Stoddard solvents, sulfides, fuel oil, waste engine oil, or other flammable or
explosive liquid, solid or gas;
   (B)   Any waters or wastes containing toxic or poisonous solids, liquids or
gases in sufficient quantity, either singly or by interaction with other
wastes, to injure or interfere with any sewage treatment process, constitute a
hazard to humans or animals, create a public nuisance, or create any hazard in
the receiving waters of the sewage treatment plant;
   (C)   Any waters or wastes having a pH lower than 5.5 or higher than 9.5 or
having any other corrosive property capable of causing damage or hazard to
structures, equipment and personnel of the sewage works; or
   (D)   Solid or viscous substances in quantities or of a size capable of
causing obstruction to the flow in sewers, or other interference with the
proper operation of the wastewater facilities, such as, but not limited to,
ashes, cinders, sand, mud, grass, straw, shavings, metal, glass, rags,
feathers, tar, plastics, wood, unground garbage, whole blood, paunch manure,
hair and fleshings, bones, entrails and paper dishes, cups, milk containers and
the like, either whole or ground by garbage grinders.
(Ord. 18-04-01, passed 4-24-2018)
§ 53.031 HARMFUL WASTES PROHIBITED.
   (A)   No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged the following
described substances, materials, waters or wastes if it appears likely in the
judgment of the Village Engineer that the wastes can harm or interfere with
either the sanitary sewers, sewage treatment process or equipment; pass through
the treatment process and have an adverse effect on the receiving stream; or
can otherwise endanger life, limb, public property or constitute a nuisance. In
forming his or her opinion as to the acceptability of these wastes, the Village
Engineer will give consideration to such factors as the quantities of subject
wastes in relation to flows and velocities in the sanitary sewers, material of
construction of the sanitary sewers, nature of the sewage treatment process,
capacity of the sewage treatment plant, degree of treatability of wastes in the
sewage treatment plant, and maximum limits established by regulatory agencies.
   (B)   The substances prohibited are:
      (1)   Any liquid or vapor having a temperature higher than 150°F (65°C);
      (2)   Any waters or wastes containing toxic or poisonous materials; fats,
wax, grease or oils, whether emulsified or not, in excess of 100 mg/l or
containing substances which may solidify or become viscous at temperatures
between 32 and 150°F (0 and 65°C);
      (3)   Any garbage that has not been properly shredded. The installation
and operation of any garbage grinder equipped with a motor of three-fourths
horsepower or greater shall be subject to the review and approval of the
Village Engineer;
      (4)   Any waters or wastes containing strong acid, iron pickling wastes,
or concentrated plating solution whether neutralized or not;
      (5)   Any waters or wastes containing iron, chromium, copper, zinc or
similar objectionable or toxic substances; or wastes exerting an excessive
chlorine requirement, to the degree that any material received in the composite
sewage at the sewage treatment works exceeds the limits established by the
Village Engineer for those materials;
      (6)   Any waters or wastes containing phenols or other taste or odor-
producing substances, in concentrations exceeding limits which may be
established by the Village Engineer as necessary after treatment of the
composite sewage, to meet the requirements of the state, federal or other
public agencies of jurisdiction for the discharge to the receiving waters;
      (7)   Any radioactive wastes or isotopes of a half-life or concentration
that may exceed limits established by the Village Engineer in compliance with
applicable state or federal regulations;
      (8)   Any mercury or any of its compounds in excess of 0.0005 mg/l as Hg
at any time except as permitted by the Village Engineer in compliance with
applicable state and federal regulations;
      (9)   Any cyanide in excess of 0.025 mg/l at any time except as permitted
by the Village Engineer in compliance with applicable state and federal
regulations;
      (10)   Materials which exert or cause:
         (a)   Unusual concentrations of inert suspended solids (such as, but
not limited to, Fullers earth, lime slurries and lime residues) or of dissolved
solids (such as, but not limited to, sodium chloride and sodium sulfate);
         (b)   Excessive discoloration (such as, but not limited to, dye wastes
and vegetable tanning solutions);
         (c)   Unusual BOD, chemical oxygen demand, total solids, suspended
solids or chlorine requirements in such character or quantities as to
constitute a significant load on the sewage treatment works; or
         (d)   Unusual volume of flow or concentrations of wastes constituting
“slugs” as defined herein.
      (11)   Waters or wastes containing substances which are not amenable to
treatment or reduction by the sewage treatment processes employed, or are
amenable to treatment only to such degree that the sewage treatment plant
effluent cannot meet the requirements of agencies having jurisdiction over
discharge to the receiving waters;
      (12)   Any substance which will cause the wastewater treatment plant to
violate its NPDES permit or the receiving water quality standards; and
      (13)   In no case shall a substance discharged to the wastewater
treatment plant cause it to be in noncompliance with sludge use or disposal
criteria, guidelines or regulations developed under the Federal Act; or any
criteria, guidelines or regulations affecting sludge use or disposal developed
pursuant to the Resource Conservation and Recovery Act, Solid Waste Disposal
Act, Clean Water Act, Toxic Substances Control Act or state criteria applicable
to the sludge management method being used.
(Ord. 18-04-01, passed 4-24-2018)
§ 53.032 SPECIFIC DISCHARGE LIMITATIONS.
   Discharges from each separate discharge of a user, as measured under the
provisions of this chapter, shall not contain in excess of the following
concentrations based upon a monthly average. No 24-hour composite sample shall
exceed two times the standard, and no grab sample shall exceed five times the
standard.
Pollutant Concentration (mg/l) Pollutant Concentration (mg/l)
Pollutant    Concentration (mg/l) Pollutant         Concentration (mg/l)
Arsenic      0.25                 Lead              0.1
Barium       2.0                  Manganes e        1.0
Boron        1.0                  Mercury           0.003
Cadmium      0.15                 Nickel            1.0
Chromium     0.3                  Oil, grease, fats 100.0
(hexavalent)
Chromium     1.0                  Selenium          1.0
(trivalent)
Copper       3.0                  Silver            0.1
Cyanide      0.025                Zinc              1.0
Flouride     2.5                  Chlorine Demand   30.0
Iron         2.0                  Phenols           0.3
 
(Ord. 18-04-01, passed 4-24-2018)
§ 53.033 COMPATIBLE POLLUTANTS.
   For the compatible pollutants listed below, a user’s discharge shall not
exceed the concentrations listed below:
 
    Monthly Average of 24-Hour Composite Any 24-Hour Composite Sample or
    Samples                              Average of 3 Grab Samples
BOD 400 mg/l                             800 mg/l
SS  500 mg/l                             1,000 mg/l
More than 100 mg/l concentration of fat, oil or grease.
More than 25 mg/l concentration of petroleum oil, non-biodegradable oils or
product of mineral oil origins.
Wastes containing floatable fats, oils or grease of any origin.
 
(Ord. 18-04-01, passed 4-24-2018)
§ 53.034 VILLAGE REACTION TO HARMFUL WASTES.
   (A)   If any waters or wastes are discharged or proposed to be discharged to
the public sanitary sewers, which waters contain the substances or possess the
characteristics enumerated previously in this chapter, and/or which are in
violation of the standards of pretreatment provided in 40 C.F.R. pt. 403 (as
amended to date), and which in the judgment of the Village Engineer may have a
deleterious effect upon the sewage works, processes, equipment or receiving
waters, or which otherwise create a hazard to life or constitute a public
nuisance, the village may:
      (1)   Reject the wastes;
      (2)   Require pretreatment to an acceptable condition for discharge to
the public sanitary sewers;
      (3)   Require control over the quantities and rates of discharge; and/or
      (4)   Require payment to cover the added costs of handling and treating
the wastes not covered by existing taxes or sewer charges, under the provisions
of this chapter and other applicable ordinances.
   (B)   If the Village Engineer permits the pretreatment or equalization of
waste flows, the design and installation of the plants and equipment shall be
subject to the review and approval of the Village Engineer, and subject to the
requirements of all applicable codes, ordinances and laws.
(Ord. 18-04-01, passed 4-24-2018)
§ 53.035 SPECIAL ARRANGEMENTS.
   No statement contained in this subchapter shall be construed as preventing
any special agreement or arrangement between the village and any individual
user whereby a waste of unusual strength or character may be accepted by the
village for treatment, subject to payment therefor, in accordance with the
adopted sewer rate ordinance, by the individual user provided the payments are
in accordance with federal and state guidelines for user charge system.
(Ord. 18-04-01, passed 4-24-2018)
DISCHARGES; DISPOSAL
§ 53.045 PROTECTION OF SEWAGE WORKS FROM DAMAGE.
   (A)   Sewage works protected.
      (1)   No unauthorized person shall maliciously, willfully or negligently
break, damage, destroy, uncover, deface or tamper with any structure,
appurtenance or equipment which is a part of the sewage works. Any person
violating this provision shall be subject to immediate arrest under charge of
disorderly conduct.
      (2)   No unauthorized persons shall uncover, make connections with or any
opening into, use, alter or disturb any public sanitary sewer or appurtenance
thereof without obtaining a written permit from the Village Administrator.
   (B)   Spill containment. Each user having the ability to cause interference
with the wastewater treatment plant or to violate the regulatory provisions of
this chapter shall provide protection from accidental discharge to the
wastewater treatment plant of prohibited materials or other substances
regulated by this chapter. Facilities to prevent accidental discharge of
prohibited materials shall be provided and maintained at the owner or user’s
own cost and expense.
   (C)   Immediate notification. In the case of a discharge of compatible or
incompatible pollutants which causes a violation of the user’s discharge permit
or violation of the regulatory requirements of this chapter, it shall be the
responsibility of the user to immediately telephone and notify the village of
the incident. The notification shall include name of caller, location and time
of discharge, type of wastewater, concentration and volume.
   (D)   User’s liability. The user responsible for the spill or discharge of
pollutants in excess of the user’s discharge permit or violation of the
regulatory requirements of this chapter shall be liable for any expense, loss,
damage or other liability which may be incurred as a result of damage to the
wastewater treatment works, fish kills or any other damage to person or
property and to any fines, civil penalties or other liability which may be
imposed by this chapter or otherwise.
   (E)   Additional remedies. In addition to the remedies set forth elsewhere
in this chapter, if the village is fined by the IEPA or USEPA for violation of
the village’s NPDES permit or violation of water quality standards as the
result of a user’s discharge of a compatible or incompatible pollutant, then
the fine, including all village legal, engineering sampling, analytical testing
costs and any other related costs shall be charged to the responsible user. The
charge shall be in addition to, and not in lieu of, any other remedies the
village may have under this chapter, statutes, regulations, at law or in
equity.
   (F)   User’s responsibility. The user shall control production or all
discharges to the extent necessary to maintain compliance with all applicable
regulations upon reduction, loss or failure of any preliminary treatment or
flow-equalization facility until that facility is restored or an alternative
method of treatment is provided. This requirement applies in the situation
where, among other things, the primary source of power of the facility is
reduced, lost or fails.
(Ord. 18-04-01, passed 4-24-2018) penalty, see §
53.999
Cross-reference:
   Disorderly conduct, see §
131.16
§ 53.046 USE OF THE PUBLIC SEWERS.
   (A)   Unpolluted discharges. No person shall discharge, or cause to be
discharged, any storm water, surface water, groundwater, roof runoff,
subsurface drainage, sump pump discharge water, uncontaminated cooling water,
unpolluted industrial process waters, or swimming pool overflow water to any
public sanitary sewer.
   (B)   Storm water. Storm water and all other unpolluted drainage shall be
discharged to those sewers that are specifically designated as storm drains, or
to a natural outlet approved by the village. Industrial cooling water or
unpolluted process waters may be discharged on approval of the Village
Administrator, to a storm drain, or natural outlet.
   (C)   Separators.
      (1)   Grease, oil and sand separators shall be provided when, in the
judgment of the Village Engineer, they are necessary for the proper handling of
any liquid wastes containing grease in excessive amounts, or any flammable
wastes, sand or other harmful ingredients; except that the separators shall not
be required for private living quarters or dwelling units. All separators shall
be of a type and capacity approved by the Village Engineer, and shall be
located as to be readily and easily accessible for cleaning and inspection.
      (2)   Separators shall be constructed of impervious materials, capable of
withstanding abrupt and extreme changes in temperature, capable of supporting
traffic loading where appropriate, and shall be approved by the Village
Engineer. They shall be of substantial construction, watertight and equipped
with easily removable covers which when bolted in place shall be gas-tight and
watertight. Separators shall be cleaned at regular intervals as required to
prevent the material from entering the public sanitary sewer system and shall
be maintained by the owner, at his or her expense, in continuously efficient
operation at all times. The Village Building Inspector shall be allowed access
at any time for inspection of separators and owners of those separators found
not to be operated or maintained properly shall be deemed in violation of this
chapter and liable for penalties as provided in this chapter.
      (3)   It shall be the duty of the customer, owner and occupant of any
premises on which a separator is installed to inspect, maintain, and repair the
device at least annually or more frequently if recommended by the manufacturer
or required by use. A maintenance log shall be maintained and include:
         (a)   Date of each inspection.
         (b)   Inspection results.
         (c)   Servicing performed and date completed.
      (4)   Whenever a separator is found to be defective or in need of
maintenance it shall be repaired or maintained at the customer’s expense
without delay.
      (5)   Separators shall not be bypassed, made inoperative or removed.
      (6)   Annually, the information in division (C)(3) of this section shall
be submitted to the village on the form provided by the village for its
records.
   (D)   Installation of a separator, their inspection and maintenance, and
reports to the village shall be at the customer’s expense.
(Ord. 18-04-01, passed 4-24-2018) Penalty, see §
53.999
§ 53.047 WASTEWATER HAULERS.
   (A)   Permitted haulers. Wastewater haulers shall have a valid wastewater
hauler discharge permit or license issued by the State Department of Public
Health before discharging wastes at the wastewater treatment plant.
   (B)   Discharge location. Wastewater haulers shall discharge all sanitary
wastes at the location at the wastewater treatment plant designated by the
wastewater plant operator. Each wastewater hauler shall provide his or her own
hoses, clamps, couplers and the like necessary to empty the contents of his or
her vehicle into the village’s wastewater dumping station.
   (C)   Discharge requirements. All wastewater being discharged by this
wastewater hauler at the wastewater treatment plant shall comply with §§
53.030 through
53.035.
   (D)   Discharge procedures. All procedures and requirements for discharging,
for cleanliness and for general sanitary operation on village property as
prescribed by the village shall be strictly adhered to by all wastewater
haulers.
   (E)   Wastewater separation. Wastewater from a domestic level user shall not
be mixed with wastewater from an industrial user.
   (F)   Prohibited access. In addition to remedies available to the village as
set forth elsewhere in this chapter, failure of a wastewater hauler to comply
with the provisions of this section shall be grounds for prohibiting further
use or access to the wastewater treatment plant.
   (G)   Fees. The Village Board shall determine appropriate fees for
discharges from wastewater haulers.
(Ord. 18-04-01, passed 4-24-2018)
INDUSTRIAL PRETREATMENT
§ 53.060 PRETREATMENT STANDARDS.
   (A)   Upon the promulgation of the National Categorical Pretreatment
Standards (NCPS) for a particular industrial user, the standard, if more
stringent than the limitations imposed under this chapter for sources in that
category, shall, when effective, immediately supersede the limitations and
conditions imposed under this chapter and the standard shall be compiled with
by all industrial users subject to the National Categorical Pretreatment
Standards. The Village Administrator shall notify all known effected users of
the applicable reporting requirements under 40 C.F.R. § 403.12.
   (B)   The village reserves the right to establish by ordinance more
stringent limitations or requirements on discharges to the wastewater treatment
plant.
(Ord. 18-04-01, passed 4-24-2018)
§ 53.061 INDUSTRIAL DISCHARGE PERMITS REQUIRED.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any industrial user to discharge wastewater
to the village public sanitary sewers without a permit issued by the village in
accordance with the provisions of this chapter.
   (B)   Users required to obtain an industrial wastewater discharge permit
shall complete and file with the village an application in a form to be
prescribed and furnished by the village, and accompanied by a fee to be
determined by the Village Board of Trustees. In support of the application, the
user shall submit, in units and terms appropriate for evaluation, the following
information:
      (1)   Name, address and location;
      (2)   SIC number according to the Standard Industrial Classification
Manual, Bureau of the Budget, 1972, as amended;
      (3)   Wastewater constituents and characteristics including, but not
limited to, those set forth in this chapter as determined by a reliable
analytical laboratory;
      (4)   Time and duration of pollutant discharges;
      (5)   Average and maximum wastewater flow rates, including monthly and
seasonal variations, if any;
      (6)   Site plans showing all pipe sizes, manholes, and location of
sanitary sewer and storm drains leaving the building or premises, together with
all connections to lateral sanitary sewers and storm drains;
      (7)   Listing of each process activity;
      (8)   Line diagram and basic information, including capacity of existing
or proposed spill containment areas and installation;
      (9)   Total number of employees and hours of operation of a plant;
      (10)   Proposed or actual hours of operation of pretreatment system and
the name of the IEPA certified pretreatment operator;
      (11)   Name of authorized representative of the industrial user;
      (12)   User’s source of intake water together with the types of usage and
disposal sources of water and the estimated volumes of each category;
      (13)   Listing of raw materials and chemicals that are being used in the
manufacturing process and are capable of being discharged into the wastewater
treatment facilities;
      (14)   If additional user operation and maintenance or pretreatment
techniques or installation will be required to meet the applicable pretreatment
standards, the user shall indicate the shortest schedule by which the user will
provide the additional pretreatment. The completion date in this schedule shall
not be later than the compliance date established for the applicable
pretreatment standard; and
      (15)   Any other information as may be deemed by the Village Engineer to
be necessary to evaluate the permit application.
(Ord. 18-04-01, passed 4-24-2018)
§ 53.062 PERMIT ISSUED.
   The village will evaluate the data furnished by the user and may require
additional information within 45 days of submission by the user. After
evaluation and acceptance of the data furnished, the Village Board of Trustees
shall issue the appropriate discharge permit subject to terms and conditions
provided herein. No interim or temporary permit will be issued by the Village
Board of Trustees. Users submitting information required in this subchapter
shall not be deemed to have a permit until the Village Board of Trustees issues
such a permit under the provisions of this chapter.
(Ord. 18-04-01, passed 4-24-2018)
§ 53.063 PERMIT MODIFICATIONS.
   Within 180 days after the effective date of a National Categorical
Pretreatment Standard, or 180 days after a final administrative decision has
been made upon a categorical determination submission in accordance with §
403.6(a)(4) of the Industrial Pretreatment Regulations, whichever is later,
existing industrial users subject to the National Categorical Pretreatment
Standards and who have a current industrial discharge permit shall apply for a
revised permit.
(Ord. 18-04-01, passed 4-24-2018)
§ 53.064 CHANGE IN CONDITIONS.
   In the event the type, quality or volume of wastewater from the property for
which a discharge permit was previously granted is expected to materially and
substantially change as reasonably determined by the permittee or the village,
the permittee shall give a 30-day notice in writing to the village and shall
make a new application to the village prior to the change, in the same manner
and form as originally made, provided that information previously submitted and
unchanged need not be resubmitted by permittee. No permittees shall materially
and substantially change the type, quality or volume of its wastewater beyond
that allowed by its permit without prior approval of the village.
(Ord. 18-04-01, passed 4-24-2018)
§ 53.065 PERMIT TRANSFER.
   Wastewater discharge permits are issued to a specific user for the process
activity specified in the permit and shall not be assigned, transferred or sold
to a new owner or user.
(Ord. 18-04-01, passed 4-24-2018)
§ 53.066 PRETREATMENT FACILITIES REQUIRED.
   The owner of any property discharging industrial waste shall provide, at his
or her expense, any pretreatment facilities as may be necessary to reduce
objectionable characteristics or constituents to within the limits provided for
in §§
53.030 through
53.035 or any applicable National Categorical Pretreatment Standard. The
pretreatment standard for incompatible pollutants introduced into a treatment
works by a major contributing industry shall be that established by a
promulgated effluent limitations guideline defining the best practicable
control technology currently available pursuant to §§ 301(b) and 304(b) of the
Federal Act. Compliance with pretreatment standards shall be as provided for by
the Federal Act and subsequent rules and regulations as promulgated by the
Administrator.
(Ord. 18-04-01, passed 4-24-2018)
§ 53.067 APPROVALS.
   Plans, specifications and any other pertinent information relating to the
proposed pretreatment facilities shall be submitted for the approval of the
Village Engineer, and of the Illinois Environmental Protection Agency; and no
construction of the facilities shall be commenced until these approvals are
obtained in writing.
(Ord. 18-04-01, passed 4-24-2018)
§ 53.068 OWNER’S RESPONSIBILITIES.
   Where pretreatment or flow-equalizing facilities are provided, they shall be
maintained continuously in satisfactory and effective operation by the owner at
his or her expense.
(Ord. 18-04-01, passed 4-24-2018)
§ 53.069 CONTROL MANHOLE.
   Each industry shall be required to install a control manhole and, when
required by the Village Engineer, the owner of any property serviced by a
building sewer carrying industrial wastes shall install a suitable control
manhole together with the necessary meters and other appurtenances in the
building sewer to facilitate observation, sampling and measurement of the
wastes. The manhole, when required, shall be accessibly and safely located, and
shall be constructed in accordance with plans approved by the Village Engineer.
The manhole shall be installed by the owner at his or her expense, and shall be
maintained by him or her so as to be safe and accessible at all times.
(Ord. 18-04-01, passed 4-24-2018)
§ 53.070 DILUTION.
   No user shall increase the use of process water or, in any way, attempt to
dilute a discharge as a partial or complete substitute for adequate
pretreatment to achieve compliance with the limitations contained in the
National Categorical Pretreatment Standards (NCPS) (when effective), or in any
other pollutant-specific limitation developed by the village or state.
(Ord. 18-04-01, passed 4-24-2018) Penalty, see §
53.999
§ 53.071 COMPLIANCE.
   (A)   The owner of any property serviced by a building sewer carrying
industrial wastes shall provide laboratory measurements, tests and analyses of
waters and wastes at his or her own cost to illustrate compliance with this
chapter and any special conditions for discharge established by the Board of
Trustees or regulatory agencies having jurisdiction over the discharge.
   (B)   The number, type and frequency of laboratory analyses to be performed
by the owner shall be as stipulated by the Village Administrator, but no less
than once per year the industry must supply a complete analysis of the
constituents of the wastewater discharge to assure that compliance with the
federal, state and local standards are being met. The owner shall report the
results of measurements and laboratory analyses to the Village Engineer at
times and in a manner prescribed by the Village Administrator. The owner shall
bear the expense of all measurements, analyses and reporting required by the
village. At times when deemed necessary, the village reserves the right to take
measurements and samples for analysis by an outside laboratory service at a
cost which shall be charged to the owner.
(Ord. 18-04-01, passed 4-24-2018)
§ 53.072 TESTING STANDARDS.
   (A)   All measurements, tests and analyses of the characteristics of waters
and wastes to which reference is made in this chapter shall be determined in
accordance with the latest edition of IEPA Division of Laboratories Manual of
Laboratory Methods, and shall be determined at the control manhole provided, or
upon suitable samples taken at the control manhole. In the event that no
special manhole has been required, the control manhole shall be considered to
be the nearest downstream manhole in the public sewer to the point at which the
building sewer is connected. Sampling shall be carried out by customarily
accepted methods to reflect the affect of constituents upon the sewage works
and to determine the existence of hazards to life, limb and property. The
particular analyses involved will determine whether a 24-hour composite of all
outfalls of a premises is appropriate or whether a grab sample or samples
should be taken.
   (B)   Normally, but not always, BOD and suspended solids analyses are
obtained from 24-hour composites of all outfalls, whereas pHs are determined
from periodic grab samples.
(Ord. 18-04-01, passed 4-24-2018)
§ 53.073 SPECIAL ARRANGEMENTS.
   No statement contained in this chapter shall be construed as preventing any
special agreement or arrangement between the village and any individual user
whereby waste of unusual strength or character may be accepted by the village
for treatment, subject to payment therefor, in accordance with the adopted
sewer rate ordinance, by the individual user provided the payments are in
accordance with federal and state guidelines for user charge system.
(Ord. 18-04-01, passed 4-24-2018)
INSPECTION AND ENFORCEMENT; VARIANCES
§ 53.085 POWERS AND AUTHORITY OF INSPECTORS.
   (A)   Enforcement officer. The Village Administrator or other agent so
designated by the Village Board of Trustees is hereby authorized and directed
to administer and enforce all of the provisions of this chapter. Whenever
necessary, the Building Inspector, officials or staff of other departments of
the village shall give assistance as is consistent with the usual duties of
their respective departments.
   (B)   Permitted access to property. The Building Inspector, and other duly
authorized employees of the village, the Illinois Environmental Protection
Agency, and the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency, bearing proper
credentials and identification, shall be permitted to enter all properties for
the purpose of inspection, observation, measurement, sampling and testing as
may be required in pursuance of the implementation and enforcement of the terms
and provisions of this chapter.
   (C)   Limitations of authority. The Building Inspector or his or her
representative shall have no authority to inquire into any processes, including
metallurgical, chemical, oil refining, ceramic, paper, or other industries
beyond that point having a direct bearing on the kind and source of discharge
to the sanitary sewers or waterway or facilities for waste treatment.
   (D)   Safety rules observed and indemnification. While performing the
necessary work on private properties referred to in the above division, the
Building Inspector, or duly authorized employees of the village, the Illinois
Environmental Protection Agency, and the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency
shall observe all safety rules applicable to the premises established by the
company, and the company shall be held harmless for injury or death to the
village employees, and the village shall indemnify the company against
liability claims and demands for personal injury or property damage asserted
against the company and growing out of the gauging and sampling operating,
except as such may be caused by negligence or failure of the company to
maintain conditions as required by this chapter.
   (E)   Access onto easements. The Building Inspector and other duly
authorized employees of the village bearing proper credentials and
identification shall be permitted to enter all private properties through which
the village holds a duly negotiated easement for the purposes of, but not
limited to, inspection, observation, measurement, sampling, testing, repair and
maintenance of any portion of the sewage works lying within the easement. All
entry and subsequent work, if any, on the easement, shall be done in full
accordance with the terms of the duly negotiated easement pertaining to the
private property involved, and subject to the provisions of this chapter.
(Ord. 18-04-01, passed 4-24-2018)
§ 53.086 VARIANCES FROM REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   Variance allowed. To the extent consistent with the applicable
provisions of the Federal Act and the Illinois Environmental Protection Act
(Ch. III ½, Ill. Rev. Stat. 1983, §§ 1001 et seq.), the Village Board of
Trustees may grant variances beyond the limitations prescribed in this chapter,
provided that the petitioner has demonstrated that failure to receive a
variance would work an arbitrary or unreasonable hardship on the petitioner.
The burden of showing the arbitrary and unreasonable hardship shall be on
petitioner who shall, before the variance is granted, show the arbitrary and
unreasonable hardship to the Village Board of Trustees by clear and convincing
proof. In no case shall the Village Board of Trustees grant any variance whose
terms might or could cause an interference of the treatment process.
   (B)   Limitations. In granting a variance, the Village Board of Trustees may
impose any conditions, exceptions, time limitations, duration and other
limitations that the policies of this chapter, the Illinois Environmental
Protection Act and the Federal Act may require.
   (C)   Petition. Any user seeking a variance from any requirement of this
chapter shall do so by filing a petition for variance with the Village
Administrator. Within 21 days of receipt of the petition, notice of the
petition shall be published in the largest local newspaper once a week for
three weeks. If any person files a written objection to the granting of the
variance within 15 days from the date of publication of the petition in the
newspaper, then a hearing shall be held before the Village Board of Trustees
and the burden of proof shall be on the petitioner.
   (D)   Documentation required. The village shall specify information required
to be submitted by the petitioner. To enable the village to rule on the
petition for variance, the following information, where applicable, shall be
included in the petition:
      (1)   Clear and complete statement of the precise extent of the relief
sought, including specific identification of the particular provisions of this
chapter from which the variance is sought;
      (2)   A factual statement why compliance with this chapter was not or
cannot be achieved by the required compliance date or why compliance with this
chapter is not possible;
      (3)   Past efforts to achieve compliance, if any, including costs
incurred, results achieved and permit status;
      (4)   A concise factual statement of the reasons the petitioner believes
that compliance with the particular provisions of this chapter would impose an
arbitrary or unreasonable hardship; and
      (5)   Any other things as are required by the village.
   (E)   Consideration of petition. The Village Administrator shall investigate
the petition, consider the views of persons who might be adversely affected by
the granting of a variance and make a report to the Village Board of Trustees
of the disposition of the petition. If the Village Board of Trustees in its
discretion concludes that a hearing would be advisable, then a hearing shall be
held. The decision of the Village Board of Trustees concerning the requested
variance shall be final.
   (F)   Revocation. If the limits of a variance are exceeded or any terms of a
variance are violated by the person granted a variance, a violation of this
chapter is deemed to have occurred and the variance may be revoked on 30-days’
notice.
(Ord. 18-04-01, passed 4-24-2018)
§ 53.087 APPEALS.
   The Board of Trustees is hereby authorized to hear and decide any appeals of
the judgments, interpretations, permits or rulings given as a result of this
chapter. Any decision of the Board of Trustees on an appeal is final, and
subject to normal judicial review as provided by statute.
(Ord. 18-04-01, passed 4-24-2018)
VALIDITY
§ 53.100 VALIDITY OF CHAPTER.
   If any section, paragraph, clause, or provision of this chapter shall be
held to be illegal, invalid or unenforceable for any reason, the illegality,
invalidity, or unenforceability of that section, paragraph, clause, or
provision shall not affect any of the remaining provisions of this chapter.
(Ord. 18-04-01, passed 4-24-2018)
§ 53.999 PENALTY.
   (A)   Violations of this chapter.
      (1)   Notice of violation. Any person found to be violating any provision
of this chapter except §
53.045(A), or any other standards referred to herein, or who has failed to
comply with any provisions of this chapter and the orders, rules, regulations
and permits issued hereunder shall be served by the village a written notice
stating the nature of the violation and providing a reasonable time limit, but
not less than 30 days, for the satisfactory correction thereof. The offender
shall, within the period of time stated in the notice, permanently cease or
correct all violations. The village may revoke any permit for sewage disposal
as a result of any violation of any provision of this chapter.
      (2)   Penalty.
         (a)   Any person who shall continue any violation beyond the time
limit provided for in the written notice of the violation shall be guilty of a
misdemeanor, and upon conviction thereof shall be fined an amount not greater
than $500, but not less than $50 for each violation. Each day in which the
violation exists or continues shall be deemed a separate offense.
         (b)   In addition, the village may recover reasonable attorney’s fees,
court costs and other expenses of litigation by appropriate suit at law against
the person found to have violated or cause to have violated this chapter or the
orders, rules, regulations and permits issued hereunder.
      (3)   Liability of violators. Any person violating any of the provisions
of this chapter shall become liable to the village for any expense, loss or
damage occasioned by the village by reasons of such violation.
      (4)   Action by village. When, in the opinion of the Village Engineer,
the violation of this chapter presents an imminent and irreversible threat to
the public health, safety and welfare, or when the violation continues beyond
the time limit in which it was to be corrected, the village may correct the
violation and assess the costs thereof to the owner of the property on which
the violation occurs.
      (5)   Falsified information. Any person who knowingly makes any false
statements, representation, or certification in any application, record,
report, plan or other document filed or required to be maintained pursuant to
this chapter or wastewater discharge permit or who falsifies, tampers with or
knowingly renders inaccurate any monitoring device or method required under
this chapter, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction thereof,
shall be punished by a fine of not more than $1,000 or shall be incarcerated in
a penal institution other than the penitentiary for a period not to exceed six
months for each offense.
      (6)   Disconnection of service. Any person who shall violate any
provisions of this chapter shall, following a hearing before the Village Board
of Trustees, be subject to immediate disconnection of the sewer servicing the
property upon or in connection with which the violation occurred.
      (7)   Stop work order. In the event that the Village Building Inspector
observes or is made aware that a violation of this chapter has occurred or is
occurring on the premises of new construction for which a building permit was
issued, the Building Inspector is hereby authorized to suspend the building
permit and issue a stop work order preventing continued construction work at
the premises until such time as the violation has been corrected.
      (8)   Other remedies. The remedies herein above provided shall not be
exclusive and the village may seek whatever other remedies are authorized by
statute, at law or in equity, against any person violating the provisions of
this chapter.
(Ord. 18-04-01, passed 4-24-2018)
CHAPTER 54: WATER AND WASTEWATER USER CHARGE SYSTEMS
Section
Definitions
   
54.001   Definitions
Wastewater User Charge System
   
54.010   Charges and fees imposed
   
54.011   Wastewater charge
   
54.012   Billing charge
   
54.013   Special charge
   
54.014   Capital improvement charge
   
54.015   Debt service charge
   
54.016   User charge
   
54.017   Measurement of flow
   
54.018   Billable flow
   
54.019   Waste strength adjustment procedure
   
54.020   Non-metered users
   
54.021   Additional treatment charges
Water User Charge System
   
54.035   Charges and fees imposed
   
54.036   Water charge
   
54.037   Measurement of flow
   
54.038   Billable flow
Rates and Charges
   
54.045   Annual billable flow summary
   
54.046   Annual cost summaries
   
54.047   Calculation of charges
   
54.048   Annual review of rates
   
54.049   Adoption of rates
   
54.050   Wastewater capacity fees
   
54.051   Private water connection fees
   
54.052   Special project connection fees
Billing and Collection
   
54.060   Bills and payment for water and wastewater service
   
54.061   Delinquent bills
   
54.062   Lien; notice of delinquency
   
54.063   Foreclosure of a lien
   
54.064   Notice of charges
   
54.065   Miscellaneous terms
   
54.066   Liability of customers for payment
   
54.067   Complaints
Financial Matters
   
54.070   Revenues
   
54.071   Accounts
   
54.072   Annual audit
   
54.073   Notice of rates
Appeals
   
54.080   Clarifications
   
54.081   Disagreements
   
54.082   Appeals
General Provisions
   
54.095   Representative samples
   
54.096   Use of standard methods
   
54.097   Access to records
   
54.098   New accounts
Authority
   
54.110   Entry on property
   
54.111   Observe safety rules
   
54.112   Enforcement
Violations
   
54.125   Notice of violation
   
54.126   Liability of violators
Validity
   
54.140   Validity
   
54.999   Penalty
DEFINITIONS
§ 54.001 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ACT. The Federal Water Pollution Control Act (33 U.S.C. §§ 1251 et seq.) as
amended by the Federal Water Pollution Control Act of Amendments of 1972 (Pub.
L. 92-500) and (Pub. L. 93-243).
   ADMINISTRATOR. The Regional Administrator of Region V of the U.S.
Environmental Protection Agency.
   BILLABLE FLOW-WASTEWATER. The amount of wastewater discharged to the village
wastewater collection and treatment facilities, as determined by the village
after appropriate adjustments are made.
   BILLABLE FLOW-WATER. A user’s water usage, from all sources, as determined
by the village after appropriate adjustments are made.
   BILLING CHARGE-WASTEWATER. A charge on users of the wastewater facilities
levied per bill to recover the costs of meter reading, processing bills,
mailing costs and costs of collection.
   BILLING CHARGE-WATER. A charge on users of the water facilities levied per
bill to recover the costs of meter reading, processing bills, mailing costs and
costs of collection
   BIOCHEMICAL OXYGEN DEMAND (BOD). The quantity of oxygen utilized in the
biochemical oxidation of organic matter under standard laboratory procedures in
five days at 20°C, expressed in milligrams per liter.
   BOARD. The duly appointed and acting Board of Trustees of the Village of
Mahomet.
   CAPITAL IMPROVEMENT CHARGE-WASTEWATER. A charge levied on customers of the
wastewater facilities for the costs of improvement, extension, construction or
reconstruction of the wastewater treatment works and collection system.
   CAPITAL IMPROVEMENT CHARGE-WATER. A charge levied on customers of the water
facilities for the costs of improvement, extension, construction or
reconstruction of the water system.
   CAPITAL IMPROVEMENT RATE-WASTEWATER. The rate of charge 1evied on customers
of the wastewater facilities for the costs of improvement, extension,
construction or reconstruction of the wastewater treatment works and collection
system expressed in units of cost per 100 gallons of billable flow so that when
multiplied by a user’s monthly billable flow yields a user’s monthly capital
improvement charge.
   CAPITAL IMPROVEMENT RATE-WATER. The rate of charge 1evied on customers of
the water facilities for the costs of improvement, extension, construction or
reconstruction of the water system expressed in units of cost per 100 gallons
of billable flow so that when multiplied by a user’s monthly billable flow
yields a user’s monthly capital improvement charge.
   COMMERCIAL USER. For the purposes of the user charge system a user whose
principal activity is the purchase, sale, barter, or exchange of goods, wares,
merchandise, or providing a social, charitable, recreational, utilitarian, or
professional service whether for profit or not for profit, transit lodging,
retail and wholesale establishments, and including governmental agencies not
defined elsewhere in this chapter.
   CUSTOMER, CONSUMER. The party contracting for potable water service or
sanitary sewer service to a property. Interchangeable with USER.
   DEBT SERVICE CHARGE-WASTEWATER.  A charge on users of the wastewater
facilities levied for the payment of principal, interest, and other finance
costs related to all outstanding bonds, loans and other means of financing
construction.
   DEBT SERVICE CHARGE-WATER. A charge on users of the water facilities levied
for the payment of principal, interest, and other finance costs related to all
outstanding bonds, loans and other means of financing construction.
   DEBT SERVICE RATE-WASTEWATER. The rate of charge levied on users of the
wastewater facilities for the payment of all costs of bonds, loans and other
means of financing construction expressed in units of cost per 100 gallons of
billable flow so that when multiplied by a user’s monthly billable flow yields
a user’s monthly debt service charge.
   DEBT SERVICE RATE-WATER. The rate of charge levied on users of the water
facilities for the payment of all costs of bonds, loans and other means of
financing construction expressed in units of cost per 100 gallons of billable
flow so that when multiplied by a user’s monthly billable flow yields a user’s
monthly debt service charge.
   DIRECTOR. The Director of the Illinois Environmental Protection Agency.
   DOMESTIC USER. A user that discharges normal domestic sewage only as defined
in NORMAL DOMESTIC SEWAGE below.
   FEDERAL. The United States of America, and each and every present and future
department, agency, regulatory body or subdivision thereof.
   FEDERAL GRANT. The U.S. Government participation in the financing of the
construction of treatment works as provided for by Title II, Grants for
Construction of Treatment Works of the Act and implementing regulations.
   FLOW. The amount of hydraulic fluid entering the village’s wastewater
facilities measured in gallons, cubic feet or cubic meters.
   GOVERNMENTAL USER. For the purpose of the user charge system, penal
institutions and users involved in legislative, judicial, administrative or
regulating activities of federal, state and local governments.
   IEPA (ILLINOIS ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION AGENCY). That agency or agencies of
the state, any divisions thereof or successors thereto, authorized by present
and subsequent acts of the legislature thereof to regulate and control matters
in respect to the environment, and particularly in respect to the management,
maintenance and operations of the village’s facilities.
   INDUSTRIAL USER. For the purpose of the user charge system, a user involved
in manufacturing activities involving the mechanical or chemical transformation
of materials or substances into products where these activities usually occur
in establishments commonly described as plants, factories or mills and
characteristically use power driven machines and material handling equipment.
   INSTITUTIONAL USER. For the purposes of the user charge system, a user
involved in social, religious, or educational activities such as tax supported
schools, libraries or park districts, private or parochial schools and
churches.
   METER. A device which measures and registers the quantity of water supplied
to a customer.
   MILLIGRAMS PER LITER (mg/l). A unit of concentration of water or wastewater
constituent. It is 0.001 gram of the constituent in 1,000 milliliters of water.
   NON-DOMESTIC USER. A user whose wastewater contains BOD and/or suspended
solids at greater than the strengths established herein for domestic sewage.
   NORMAL DOMESTIC SEWAGE. Wastewater having a normal strength of 200 mg/l of
BOD, and 250 mg/l of suspended solids or less. DOMESTIC SEWAGE shall be
synonymous with sanitary sewage.
   NPDES PERMIT (NATIONAL POLLUTANT DISCHARGE ELIMINATION SYSTEM). Any permit
or equivalent document or requirements issued by the administrator or, where
appropriated by the director, after enactment of the Federal Clean Water Act to
regulate the discharge of pollutants pursuant to Section 402 of the Federal
Act.
   OPERATION AND MAINTENANCE COST-WASTEWATER. All costs, direct and indirect,
not including debt service, necessary to insure adequate wastewater collection
and treatment on a continuing basis, conforming to applicable regulations, and
providing optimal long-term facility management as determined by the village.
   OPERATION AND MAINTENANCE COST-WATER. All costs, direct and indirect, not
including debt service, necessary to insure adequate water supply on a
continuing basis, conforming to applicable regulations, and providing optimal
long-term facility management as determined by the village.
   OWNER. Whenever the same appears herein, means the person, firm, corporation
or association having the sole ownership and interest in any premises which is
or is about to be supplied with water service or wastewater service by the
village, and the word OWNERS means all so interested.
   PARCEL. Any acreage, tract, or subdivided portion of real estate, whether
improved or unimproved, and whether within or without the corporate limits of
the village.
   PAST DUE BILL. The customer’s bill is PAST DUE if unpaid after due date
printed on the bill.
   PERSON. Any individual, firm, company, partnership, corporation, joint stock
association, society, institution, enterprise, or the State of Illinois, a
city, village, unincorporated town, or any other agency or subdivision thereof,
and includes any trustee, receiver, assignee or personal representative
thereof.
   PERSONAL PROPERTY. Any equipment and appurtenances, whether fixed or
portable, utilized by the village’s wastewater treatment, or collection system,
or its water treatment and distribution system that has a service life of 20
years or less, and is owned by the village.
   POTABLE WATER. Water fit or suitable for drinking.
   PROPERTY. All real and personal property of any or every kind owned by the
village and included in PERSONAL PROPERTY or REAL PROPERTY.
   REAL PROPERTY. All real estate and sewers, interceptors, buildings,
structures, housings, water mains, valves, fire hydrants, and pump stations
resting on or contained in or under any easements or rights-of-way owned by the
village.
   REGULAR WATER SERVICE CONNECTION. A connection providing water service to a
premises for normal residential, commercial, industrial or public authority
purposes and for which the period of service may normally be expected to exceed
one year by an indefinite period.
   RENEWAL. The capital expenditure of village funds for the physical and/or
functional consumption of consumable assets relating to the capacity of the
village’s facilities.
   REPLACEMENT. Obtaining and installing equipment, accessories, or
appurtenances to maintain the capacity and performance of the village’s
facilities and payment therefor from village funds.
   RESIDENTIAL USER. For the purpose of the user charge system, a user whose
principal activity is providing dwelling units available for human habitation,
such as detached, semidetached and row houses, mobile homes, apartments and
permanent multi-family dwellings.
   SERVICE CONNECTION CHARGE. A charge made for reconnection of a service which
has been discontinued for nonpayment or other proper reason.
   SEWAGE. Used interchangeably with WASTEWATER.
   SEWER OPERATING AND MAINTENANCE ACCOUNT. The principal accounting
designation for all revenues received in the operation of the wastewater
system. SHALL is mandatory; MAY is permissive.
   SIGNIFICANT INDUSTRY. Any industry that contributes greater than 10% of the
design flow and/or design pollutant loading of the village’s wastewater
treatment works.
   STATE. The State of Illinois, and each and every present and future
department, agency, regulatory body or subdivision thereof.
   STATE ACT. The Illinois Anti-Pollution Bond Act of 1970 as amended to date.
   STATE GRANT. The State of Illinois participation in the financing of the
construction of treatment works as provided for by the Illinois Anti-Pollution
Bond Act and for making such grants as filed with the Secretary of State of the
State of Illinois.
   SURCHARGE. The assessment in addition to the basic user charge, debt service
charge, capital improvement charge, special charge and billing charge which is
levied on those users whose wastes are greater in strength than normal domestic
sewage as defined in NORMAL DOMESTIC SEWAGE.
   SUSPENDED SOLIDS (SS). Solids that either float on the surface of, or are in
suspension in water, sewage, or industrial waste, and which are removable by a
laboratory filtration device. Quantitative determination of suspended solids
shall be made in accordance with procedures set forth in the IEPA Division of
Laboratories Manual of Laboratory Methods.
   TEMPORARY WATER SERVICE CONNECTION. A connection providing water service to
a premises for any other purpose and for which the period of time usually less
than one year. Connections providing water for construction purposes are
included within this category.
   TENANT. Anyone occupying a premises under lease, oral or written, from the
owner and obtaining water service from mains of the village with the consent of
his or her landlord.
   USEFUL LIFE. The anticipated term in years of physical and/or functional
productivity as reasonably determined by the village for the wastewater
treatment facility, equipment and appurtenances thereto.
   USEPA (UNITED STATES ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION AGENCY). That agency or
agencies of the federal government, and divisions thereof or successors
thereto, authorized by present and subsequent acts of the congress thereof to
regulate and control matters in respect to the management, maintenance and
operations of the village’s facilities.
   USER. For the purpose of the user charge system, any parcel which is
connected to the village’s water or wastewater facilities.
   USER CHARGE. A charge levied on users of the wastewater facilities for the
costs of operation, maintenance, repair and replacement.
   USER CHARGE SYSTEM-WASTEWATER. The system of charges levied on users to
recover the costs of operation, maintenance and replacement on new and existing
wastewater collection/treatment facilities, pursuant to Section 204(b) of PL
95-217; and 40 C.F.R. Part 35.935-13 (9-27-1978 Federal Register).
   USER CHARGE SYSTEM-WATER. The system of charges levied on users to recover
the costs of operation, maintenance and replacement on new and existing water
supply and treatment facilities.
   USER CLASS. The type of user residential, institutional/governmental,
commercial or industrial as defined herein.
   USER RATE-WASTEWATER. The rate of charge levied on users of the wastewater
facilities for the costs of operation, maintenance, repair and replacement
expressed in units of cost per 100 gallons of billable flow so that when
multiplied by a user’s monthly billable flow yields a user’s monthly user
charge.
   USER RATE-WATER. The rate of charge levied on users of the water facilities
for the costs of operation, maintenance, repair and replacement expressed in
units of cost per 100 gallons of billable flow so that when multiplied by a
user’s monthly billable flow yields a user’s monthly user charge.
   VILLAGE. The Village of Mahomet, Illinois or any designated representative
thereof.
   VILLAGE ADMINISTRATOR. The person appointed by the President of the Board of
Trustees to enforce the provisions of this chapter. The Village Administrator
may designate other village employees to act on his/her behalf.
   WASTEWATER. The spent water of a community. It may be a combination of the
liquid and water-carried wastes from residences, commercial buildings,
industrial plants, and institutions together with any groundwater, surface
water, and storm water that may be present.
   WASTEWATER CHARGE. The charge per month levied on all users of the
wastewater facilities. The WASTEWATER CHARGE shall be computed as outlined in
this chapter and shall consist of the combination of a billing charge, a
special charge, a capital improvement charge, a debt service charge, and a user
charge.
   WASTEWATER FACILITY. All present and future wastewater transport and
treatment sites, structures and appurtenances of the village.
   WATER CHARGE. The charge per month levied on all users of the wastewater
facilities. The WATER CHARGE shall be computed as outlined in this chapter and
shall consist of the combination of a billing charge, a special charge, a
capital improvement charge, a debt service charge, and a user charge.
   WATER OPERATING AND MAINTENANCE ACCOUNT. The principal accounting
designation for all revenues received in the operation of the water system.
   WATER SUPPLY FACILITY. All present and future water transport pipes, valves,
structures and appurtenances of the village.
(Ord. 18-04-01, passed 4-24-2018)
WASTEWATER USER CHARGE SYSTEM
§ 54.010 CHARGES AND FEES IMPOSED.
   Pursuant to the Federal Water Pollution Control Act, as amended; federal
rules, regulations and guidelines promulgated pursuant to the Act; and pursuant
to Section 104b of the Illinois Environmental Protection Act, (111-1/2 Ill.
Rev. Stat. § 1046), there is hereby imposed and levied upon all users of the
village wastewater facilities charges and fees as are hereinafter fixed by
ordinance to be utilized by the village as hereinafter provided to pay for
operation, maintenance and replacement costs for the village wastewater
facilities as well as related and appropriate costs including, but not limited
to, financing costs, administrative costs and capital improvement costs.
(Ord. 18-04-01, passed 4-24-2018)
§ 54.011 WASTEWATER CHARGE.
   (A)   The wastewater charge for the use of and for service supplied by the
wastewater facilities of the village shall consist of the combination of a
billing charge, a special charge, a capital improvement charge, a debt service
charge, and a user charge.
 
Billing charge
+ Special charge
+ Capital improvement charge
+ Debt service charge
+ User charge
Wastewater charge
 
   (B)   Billing charge. All users shall be assessed a separate charge per bill
to recover the costs of meter reading, processing bills, mailing costs, and
costs of collection. The billing charge shall be sufficient to recover the
costs related to billing the users of the wastewater facilities and shall be
charged as a fixed amount per bill.
   (C)   Special charge. Any user may be assessed a separate charge to recover
costs on a monthly basis for special circumstances or individual situations.
Items for which a special charge may be assessed include, but are not limited
to: costs of monitoring, inspections, sampling or testing assessed to a non-
residential user; capacity fees; local improvement project payments; past due
wastewater charges; finance charges from unpaid bills; and account
establishment charges. A special charge will be assessed and included on the
bill for wastewater charges only by arrangement between the village and the
individual user and will be clearly indicated on the bill.
   (D)   Capital improvement charge. All users shall be assessed a separate
charge to provide for capital improvements to the wastewater facilities for the
improvement, extension, construction or reconstruction of the wastewater
treatment works and collection system. The capital improvement charge shall be
computed by apportioning the annual amount to be accrued on the basis of a
fixed charge per user per month; or, by multiplying the capital improvement
rate by a user’s monthly billable flow. The capital improvement rate shall be
in units of cost per 100 gallons of billable flow and computed by dividing the
annual amount to be accrued by the annual billable flow.
   (E)   Debt service charge. All users shall be assessed a separate charge to
retire any and all debts, charges or costs of financing including principal and
interest payments, depreciation and reserve funds, bond maintenance,
assessments or other charges which have been incurred for the construction of
the wastewater facilities. The debt service charge shall be computed by
apportioning all annual costs of financing or debt service of all outstanding
loans, bonds, or obligations to be accrued on the basis of a fixed charge per
user per month; or, by multiplying the debt service rate by a user’s monthly
billable flow. The debt service rate shall be in units of cost per 100 gallons,
and computed by dividing the annual amount to be accrued by the annual billable
flow.
   (F)   User charge. All users shall be assessed a separate charge for the
operation, maintenance, repair, and replacement of the wastewater facilities
based on actual usage of the facilities (proportionate share of flow to the
facilities) and the relative strength of the wastewater discharged to the
facilities. The user charge shall be computed by multiplying the user rate by a
user’s monthly billable flow. The user rate shall be in units of cost per 100
gallons of billable flow and computed by dividing the annual amount to be
accrued by the annual billable flow. The wastewater usage charge shall be
increased by a waste strength multiplier for certain types of use. Users which
discharge non-domestic strength wastewater shall pay a wastewater usage charge
that is the standard charge multiplied by the waste strength multiplier set
forth in §
54.020.
(Ord. 18-04-01, passed 4-24-2018)
§ 54.017 MEASUREMENT OF FLOW.
   The volume of flow used for computing wastewater charges shall be based on
metered water consumption read to the lowest even increment of 100 gallons.
   (A)   (1)   Users of the wastewater facilities of the village whose source
of potable water is the village water system are required to install a water
meter of a suitable type and size that is acceptable to the village.
      (2)   Users of the wastewater facilities of the village whose source of
potable water is in total or in part from a source other than the village water
system shall also be required to install a water meter of a suitable type and
size that is acceptable to the village. Water meters are required for the
purpose of determining the volume of water consumption as obtained from all
sources.
   (B)   The water meter installed upon a non-village source of potable water
shall be owned by the village, but shall be installed and maintained in proper
working order by the user. The village shall designate the location of the
water meter and shall inspect its installation. Following village approval of
the water meter installation, the meter shall not be removed or altered without
the consent of the village.
   (C)   Devices for measuring the volume of wastewater discharged to the
wastewater facilities of the village may be required by the village if the
volume of water consumption cannot otherwise be determined from water meters or
metered water records.
   (D)   Non-metered residential users shall be assigned a monthly billable
flow of not less than 10,000 gallons per month.
   (E)   Non-metered commercial use shall be assigned a monthly billable flow
of not less than 15,000 gallons per month.
(Ord. 18-04-01, passed 4-24-2018)
§ 54.018 BILLABLE FLOW.
   Billable flow shall be utilized to determine various charges for the use of
the wastewater facilities of the village. The basis for billable flow shall be
metered water consumption as read from water meters or from other village
approved flow measuring devices as modified by a waste strength adjustment
procedure.
(Ord. 18-04-01, passed 4-24-2018)
§ 54.019 WASTE STRENGTH ADJUSTMENT PROCEDURE.
   In order to more accurately apportion the costs of the wastewater facilities
of the village among its users, the relative strength of wastewater discharged
to the facilities must be considered. The base waste strength against which all
users shall be compared shall be normal domestic sewage. All users shall be
assigned a waste strength multiplier which, when multiplied by the adjusted
actual flow, will produce the user’s billable flow. For non-industrial users,
the waste strength multiplier shall be based on the biochemical oxygen demand
(BOD) and suspended solids (SS) characteristics of the waste stream only. The
waste strength multiplier of industrial users may be based on other
considerations and waste constituents and shall be determined by the village on
an individual basis. A user’s waste strength multiplier shall not be less than
1.0 and shall be determined by one of the fo1llowing methods:
   (A)   Standard classification system. The village shall assign all non-
industrial users a waste strength multiplier in accordance with an officially
adopted classification schedule.
      (1)   Schedule.
Classification Waste Strength Classification Waste Strength Multiplier
               Multiplier
Classification          Waste Strength Classification        Waste Strength
                        Multiplier                           Multiplier
Full service restaurant 1.7            Pharmacy              1
Fast food restaurant    1.3            Medical/dental/vet    1
                                       clinic
Pizzeria                1.5            Business office       1
Bar and grill           1.4            Residential           1
Car wash                1.1            Church                1
Service/gas station     1.1            Hotel/motel           1
Auto dealer             1.1            Day care center       1
Coin laundries          1              Retail commercial use 1
Grocery stores          1              Places of assembly    1
Hair salon/ barbers     1              Camps and resorts     1.1
Schools                 1.1            Long term care        1.1
                                       institutions
 
      (2)   The Village Engineer shall determine the waste strength multiplier
for any use classification not listed herein based upon industry standards or
via sampling and testing of the wastewater.
   (B)   Sampling and testing method. Any user disagreeing with the village’s
assignment of a waste strength factor from the standard classification system
may request an individual determination of actual waste strength based on
sampling and testing. The user requesting the individual determination shall
pay all costs associated with sampling and testing of the wastewater strength
including, but not limited to: access to waste piping including installation of
a manhole; acquisition of appropriate grab samples or composite samples;
testing for constituent concentrations; staff, Village Engineer or other
designated representative’s time; and all related expenses. The village shall
establish appropriate policies and procedures in advance of sampling and
testing. The waste strength multiplier to be assigned to a user based on
sampling and testing shall be determined in accordance with the following
relations:
 
Waste strength multiplier = BOD ratio + SS ratio         >1.0
                            2
Where:
BOD ratio =                 Concentration of BOD in mg/l >1.0
                            200 mg/l
SS ratio =                  Concentration of SS in mg/l  >1.0
                            250 mg/l
 
(Ord. 18-04-01, passed 4-24-2018)
§ 54.020 NON-METERED USERS.
   The village shall establish rates for non-metered users of the wastewater
facilities of the village. All users not having a water meter for determining
water consumption or other acceptable device for determining wastewater
contributions shall be subject to an established, fixed quantity of billable
flow representative of that user’s classification. The assigned billable flow
of non-metered users shall be reviewed annually by the village.
(Ord. 18-04-01, passed 4-24-2018)
§ 54.021 ADDITIONAL TREATMENT CHARGES.
   No provision contained in this chapter shall be construed to prevent or
prohibit the village from charging a user with additional costs incurred in
treating a substance not fully measured by the characteristics of biochemical
oxygen demand or suspended solids. The amount of additional costs to be charged
shall be determined by the village on a case-by-case basis.
(Ord. 18-04-01, passed 4-24-2018)
WATER USER CHARGE SYSTEM
§ 54.035 CHARGES AND FEES IMPOSED.
   There is hereby imposed and levied upon all users of the village water
supply and distribution facilities charges and fees as are hereinafter fixed by
ordinance to be utilized by the village as hereinafter provided to pay for
operation, maintenance and replacement costs for the village water treatment
and distribution facilities as well as related and appropriate costs including,
but not limited to, financing costs, administrative costs and capital
improvement costs.
(Ord. 18-04-01, passed 4-24-2018)
§ 54.036 WATER CHARGE.
   (A)   The water charge for the use of and for service supplied by the water
facilities of the village shall consist of the combination of a billing charge,
a special charge, a capital improvement charge, a debt service charge, and a
user charge.
 
   Billing charge
+   Special charge
+   User charge
Σ   Water charge
 
   (B)   Billing charge. All users shall be assessed a separate charge per bill
to recover the costs of meter reading, processing bills, mailing costs, and
costs of collection. The billing charge shall be sufficient to recover the
costs related to billing the users of the wastewater facilities and shall be
charged as a fixed amount per bill.
   (C)   User charge. All users shall be assessed a separate charge for the
operation, maintenance, repair, and replacement of the water facilities based
on actual usage of the facilities. The user charge shall be computed by
multiplying the user rate by a user’s monthly billable flow. The user rate
shall be in units of cost per 100 gallons of billable flow and computed by
dividing the annual amount to be accrued by the annual billable flow.
(Ord. 18-04-01, passed 4-24-2018)
§ 54.037 MEASUREMENT OF FLOW.
   The volume of flow used for computing water charges shall be based on
metered water consumption read to the lowest even increment of 100 gallons.
   (A)   Users of the public water works facilities of the village whose source
of potable water is the village water system are required to install a water
meter of a suitable type and size that is acceptable to the village.
   (B)   The water meter shall be owned by the village, and shall be maintained
in proper working order by the village. The village shall designate the
location of the water meter and shall inspect its installation. Following
village approval of the water meter installation, the meter shall not be
removed or altered without the consent of the village.
   (C)   Non-metered residential users shall be assigned a monthly billable
flow of not less than 10,000 gallons per month.
   (D)   Non-metered commercial uses shall be assigned a monthly billable flow
of not less than 15,000 gallons per month.
(Ord. 18-04-01, passed 4-24-2018)
§ 54.038 BILLABLE FLOW.
   Billable flow shall be utilized to determine various charges for the use of
the water facilities of the village. The basis for billable flow shall be
metered water consumption as read from water meters installed for each water
service.
(Ord. 18-04-01, passed 4-24-2018)
RATES AND CHARGES
§ 54.045 ANNUAL BILLABLE FLOW SUMMARY.
   The Village Collector shall annually cause to be prepared a summary of
annual billable flow of all users of the water and wastewater facilities of the
village according to the following four user groups: residential; commercial;
institutional/governmental; and industrial.
(Ord. 18-04-01, passed 4-24-2018)
§ 54.046 ANNUAL COST SUMMARIES.
   The Village Treasurer shall annually cause to be prepared estimates of
annual costs attributed to the water and wastewater facilities of the village
for the purpose of establishing various rates and charges. The following
separate estimates of annual cost shall be prepared:
   (A)   Billing and collection;
   (B)   Capital improvements;
   (C)   Debt service;
   (D)   Water and Wastewater facility operation, maintenance, repair and
replacement.
   (E)   Water facilities operation maintenance and repair and replacement.
(Ord. 18-04-01, passed 4-24-2018)
§ 54.047 CALCULATION OF CHARGES.
   Charges based on billable flow of users shall be determined by dividing
annual costs by the annual billable flow of all water and wastewater users and
annual billable flow of all water users. Charges based on users shall be
determined by dividing annual costs by the total number of users connected to
the water and wastewater facilities of the village.
(Ord. 18-04-01, passed 4-24-2018)
§ 54.048 ANNUAL REVIEW OF RATES.
   At least annually, the Village Treasurer shall review costs and expenses of
the water and wastewater facilities of the village and the water facilities of
the village, levels of income generated by the current fees and charges to
users of the water and wastewater facilities, and make projections of the
expenses and income for the ensuing year to determine if the existing rates are
adequate or appropriate. Fees and charges shall be revised as necessary to
reflect changes in costs and income.
(Ord. 18-04-01, passed 4-24-2018)
§ 54.049 ADOPTION OF RATES.
   Rates and charges to users of the water and wastewater facilities of the
village shall be adopted under separate ordinance. The separate ordinance shall
be revised and published as necessary to assure that adequate and appropriate
revenues are generated to meet the financial needs of the wastewater and water
facilities of the village.
(Ord. 18-04-01, passed 4-24-2018)
§ 54.050 WASTEWATER CAPACITY FEES.
   (A)   Capacity fees. There shall be a capacity fee required to connect a new
private sewer or building sewer service line to the Village of Mahomet’s public
sanitary sewer system.
      (1)   Basis of fee. The capacity fee shall be based upon estimated
wastewater usage for the property. One “unit” of wastewater usage shall be
equal to an average use of 100 gallons per day. The capacity fee for one unit
shall be as set from time to time by the Village Board of Trustees
      (2)   Number of units. For all types of occupancy, the capacity fee shall
be determined by multiplying the current capacity fee for a single unit by the
number of applicable units for the type of usage as noted in the following
table.
Use of Building                                                 Number of Units
RESIDENTIAL USES
Apartments - 1 bedroom                                          2
Apartments - 2 bedrooms                                         3
Apartments - 3 and 4 bedrooms                                   3.5
Assisted living facilities (per resident)                       1
Boarding and rooming houses                                     0.5
(per resident)
Community living facilities (per resident)                      1
Duplex - 1 or 2 bedroom                                         6
Duplex - 3 or 4 bedroom                                         7
Dormitories (per resident)                                      1
Fraternities and sororities (per resident)                      1
Mobile home                                                     3
Nursing homes (per resident)                                    1
Single-family home                                              3.5
Zero lot line single-family home                                3.5
COMMERCIAL USES
Airports (per passenger)                                        0.1
Automobile Dealership (per employee)                            0.2
Automobile Repair Shop (per employee)                           0.5
Bar and Grill (per indoor seat/per outdoor seat)                0.2/.05
Bar or tavern only (per indoor seat/per outdoor seat)           0.2/.05
Bathhouse and swimming pools (per visitor)                      0.1
Bed and breakfast (per bedroom) (plus base fee of 3.5 units)    0.2
Boarding school (per pupil)                                     1
Bowling alleys (no food service) (per lane)                     0.75
Bus stations (per passenger)                                    0.1
Car wash, automatic                                             20
Car wash, self service (per bay)                                4
Churches (per 20 sanctuary seats)                               1
Country clubs (per member)                                      0.3
Day care facility (per pupil)                                   0.1
Drive-in theater (per 20 car spaces)                            1
Factories (per person, per shift) (exclusive of industrial      0.3
wastes)
Fast food restaurant (per indoor seat/per outdoor seat)         0.25/.05
Gas stations (per pump)                                         0.50
Grocery Store (per employee)                                    0.3
Hair salon/barber                                               3.5
Hospitals (per bed space)                                       2
Laundromat (per machine)                                        4
Long term care institutions (per bed)                           1
Medical/Dental/Veterinarian Office (per employee)               0.75
Motels and hotels (per room)                                    0.4
Movie theater (per 20 seats)                                    1
Office building (per employee)                                  0.2
Ordinary restaurant (per indoor seat/per outdoor seat)          0.2/0.05
Park comfort station                                            0.25
Pharmacy (per employee)                                         0.2
Places of assembly (per 50 persons)                             1
Prison (per inmate)                                             1.5
Retail business under 1000 square feet (per employee per shift) 0.15
RV park / campground (per space)                                0.4
Schools (per pupil)                                             0.1
Retail/shopping center (per 1,000 square feet)                  1
Youth campground (per camper)                                   0.5
 
      (3)   Industries. The number of units shall be determined by applying to
the approved flow estimates made by the Engineer for the industry, and as
reviewed and approved by the Village Engineer and the Village Administrator.
The standard shall be of 0.2 pounds of biological oxygen demand and 100 gallons
of flow per one unit per day. Adjustments may also be made based upon suspended
solids and other elements of the wastewater. The capacity fee shall be the
number of units determined multiplied by the charge per unit. In the case of
industry, each charge is to be reviewed and adjusted at the end of the first
three years of full operation of the industry to the average annual operation
experience and settlement, therefore, shall be made within six months
thereafter.
      (4)   Multiple uses.
         (a)   Whenever a building or structure includes a combination of
multiple uses of more than one type of use (example - a bowling alley with a
bar) the capacity fee shall be determined by combining the estimated units for
each type of use and multiplying the number of units determined by the charge
per unit.
         (b)   Whenever a commercial property includes a building or structure
that is intended to contain a combination of multiple uses of more than one
type within several individual suites, than not less than the minimum capacity
fee shall be due at the time of initial building construction. As subsequent
suites within the building are occupied and the use within that suite
determined, an additional capacity fee shall be due and payable consistent with
the actual use of that suite.
      (5)   Other uses. All other uses not herein above classified are to be
determined by the Village Administrator with the recommendation of the Village
Engineer. The number of units shall be determined by considering the amount of
flow for the user and utilizing the standards of 0.2 pounds of biological
oxygen demand and 100 gallons of flow per one unit per day. The Village
Engineer shall use standard estimates of usage as published by the Illinois EPA
or other reputable sources when making his estimates of usage. The capacity fee
shall be the number of units determined multiplied by the charge per unit.
      (6)   Appeal of determination. In the event that the user disagrees with
the determination of the Village Administrator, the user may appeal that
decision to the Village of Mahomet Board of Trustees. The decision of the
Trustees shall be final.
   (B)   Minimum capacity fee. Regardless of the actual use of a building or
the actual wastewater usage therein, the minimum capacity fee shall be based
upon a minimum wastewater usage of not less than two units.
   (C)   Annual review. The Board of Trustees will review and consider an
increase to the capacity fee, annually, prior to May 1. If an increase is found
to be necessary, such increase would be effective May 1.
   (D)   Existing connections. A credit shall be given to the applicant for the
number of units being served through an existing private sewer connected to the
village facilities at the time the reconstruction or remodeling of the building
then served and/or to be served is commenced. This credit is to be applied
against the capacity fee charged. When the credit exceeds the capacity fee to
be charged, no refund of the excess will be issued.
   (E)   Permits. No connection of a private sanitary sewer extension or
building sewer shall be made to an existing village public sanitary sewer or to
another existing private sewer or building sewer draining to the village
wastewater treatment plant until the plans and specifications of said sewer
extension have been approved by the Village Administrator, or a designated
representative; a written permit for the connection has been issued by the
village; and the capacity fee therefore has been paid in full by the applicant
to the Treasurer of the Village. See the Chapter 53: Sewer Regulations for
further details concerning application for and issuance of connection permits.
(Ord. 18-04-01, passed 4-24-2018; Ord. 23-11-01, passed 11-28-2023)
§ 54.051 PRIVATE WATER SERVICE CONNECTION FEES.
   (A)   Connection fees. There shall be a connection fee required to connect a
new private water connection to the village’s public water supply system. The
connection fee shall be determined per service type, and shall be as set from
time to time by the Village Board of Trustees.
 
Service Type
3/4 to 1 inch service lines
1-1/4 to 1- ½ inch service lines
1-3/4 or 2 inch service lines
Per unit of usage per day for service lines larger than 2 inches in diameter
Fire service line
Temporary service connection
   
   (B)   Determining units of water usage. A UNIT of water usage shall consist
of 75 gallons of flow per day. The number of units of water usage shall be
determined by applying the approved flow estimates made by the Engineer for the
industry or business, and as reviewed and approved by the Village Engineer and
the Village Administrator. The Village Engineer may consult with published
industry standards to determine an estimate of water usage. The connection fee
shall be the number of units determined multiplied by the charge per unit. In
the case of industry, each charge is to be reviewed and adjusted at the end of
the first three years of full operation of the industry to the average annual
operation experience and settlement, therefore, shall be made within six
months.
   (C)   Multiple uses. Whenever a commercial property includes a building or
structure that is intended to contain a combination of multiple uses of more
than one type within individual suites, then each individual suite shall be
separately metered for water use. The connection fee due at the time of
building construction shall be not less than the fee needed for the water
service line extended to each suite of that building.
   (D)   Appeal of determination. In the event that the user disagrees with the
determination of the Village Administrator, the user may appeal that decision
to the Board of Trustees of the Village of Mahomet. The decision of the Board
of Trustees shall be final.
   (E)   Existing connections. A credit shall be given to the applicant for the
number of units being served through an existing private water service
connected to the village facilities at the time the reconstruction or
remodeling of the building then served and/or to be served is commenced. This
credit is to be applied against the connection fee charged. When the credit
exceeds the connection fee to be charged, no refund of the excess will be
issued.
   (F)   Permits. No connection of a private water service line or building
water service line shall be made to an existing village public water main or to
another existing private water service line connected to the Mahomet public
water system until the plans and specifications of said water service line
extension have been approved by the Village Administrator, or a designated
representative; a written permit for the connection has been issued by the
village; and the connection fee therefore has been paid in full by the
applicant to the Treasurer of the Village of Mahomet. See the
Chapter 52: Water Use Regulations for further details concerning application
for and issuance of connection permits.
(Ord. 18-04-01, passed 4-24-2018)
§ 54.052 SPECIAL PROJECT CONNECTION FEES.
   (A)   Special project connection fees.
      (1)   From time to time as may be warranted, the village may deem it
necessary to participate in the extension of sanitary sewer facilities or
public water main facilities to areas not currently served by village sanitary
sewers or water mains. Such extensions may be by participation in a local
improvement project, by agreement with some or all of the owners of the
properties to be served, or by other means.
      (2)   The Village of Mahomet may establish, by resolution of the Board of
Trustees, special project connection fees, which shall be charged in addition
to the normal connection fee outlined elsewhere herein. The special project
connection fee established shall be for the purpose of distributing the costs
of the water main extension or sanitary sewer extension to those properties
benefited by the extension in a fair and equitable manner.
      (3)   The special project connection fee may include the costs incurred
by the village on behalf of the property owners, including interest costs
incurred to the date of application. The properties that are benefited by the
facility extension and to which the special project connection fee is
applicable shall be identified by the village at the time of the establishment
of the fee.
      (4)   No connection of a private sanitary sewer extension or building
sewer shall be made to an existing village sanitary sewer until such time as
any special project connection fee due to the village has been paid. No
connection of a water service line shall be made to an existing village water
main until such time as any special project connection fee due to the village
has been paid. When the property benefited and to which the special project
connection fee is applicable includes land that is to be subdivided or
otherwise developed, the developer or subdivider of the property shall be
responsible for payment of all applicable special project connection fees prior
to connection of private sewers, public sanitary sewers, or building sewers to
the village public sanitary sewer system and prior to connection of water
service lines to the village water mains.
   (B)   Use of connection fees and capacity fees. Connection fees, capacity
fees and special project connection fees collected by the village shall be
deposited by the Treasurer of the Village in a Wastewater Capital Improvement
Fund or a Water System Capital Improvement Fund, as applicable for use in
extension, construction or reconstruction of the wastewater treatment works and
sanitary sewer collection system of the village or for use in the extension,
construction, or reconstruction of the village public water supply facilities.
(Ord. 18-04-01, passed 4-24-2018)
BILLING AND COLLECTION
§ 54.060 BILLS AND PAYMENT FOR WATER AND WASTEWATER SERVICE.
   (A)   Charges and fees for all users of the water and/or wastewater
facilities of the village shall be computed and billed monthly. The owner of
the premises, the occupant thereof and the user of the service or his or her
tenants, agents, heirs, and/or assigns shall be jointly and severally liable to
pay for the service to the premises and the service is furnished to the
premises by the village only upon the condition that the owner of the premises,
occupant and user or his or her tenants, agents, heirs, and/or assigns of the
services are jointly and severally liable to the village.
   (B)   Bills rendered by the village for use of the water and/or wastewater
facilities of the village shall show thereon the name of the user, the address
or parcel number sufficient to describe the property for which charges are
rendered, the basis upon which the charges are made, the amount due, when and
where payable, the period for which charge is made, a brief description of any
special charges incurred, and any additional information deemed necessary by
the Village Collector for the village’s purposes. If a delinquency exists, the
amount of penalty charged and the date of delinquency shall also be shown.
Bills for water service and/or wastewater service shall be rendered at least
monthly.
   (C)   Bills for water service and/or wastewater service shall be sent out by
the Village Collector on or near the tenth day month or as required by the bill
for the period which the service is billed. All water and wastewater bills are
due and payable at the Village Office within 30 days of the last day of the
month for the period which the service is billed. A late payment penalty of 10%
shall be added to all bills not paid by the due date.
   (D)   All accounts shall be paid at the Village Administrative Office.
   (E)   When the last day for payment of the net bill falls on a Sunday or a
legal holiday, the time for payment of the net bill will be automatically
extended to include the first full business day following.
   (F)   The basis for computing bills for metered service shall be the same as
indicated by the meter dials.
   (G)   Bills and notices will be mailed or delivered to the customer’s last
address as shown by the records of the village, when due. If the charges for
water usage are not paid within 30 days of the due date, then the bill shall be
deemed delinquent.
(Ord. 18-04-01, passed 4-24-2018)
§ 54.061 DELINQUENT BILLS.
   (A)   If the charges to a user of the water or wastewater facilities of the
village are not paid within 30 days of the due date, then said bill shall be
deemed delinquent. In addition to a late payment penalty, delinquent bills
shall be subject to interest charges of 1% per month or portion thereof for all
outstanding sums due and payable commencing from the date the bills are due and
payable.
   (B)   After a bill has been deemed delinquent, the Village Collector shall
prepare or cause to be prepared a notice that village services shall be
terminated at the end of ten days from the date of mailing or posting of the
notice. The notice shall be mailed by first class mail to the customer’s
address or shall be posted on the premises of the occupants. If at the close of
the business day of the tenth day following the mailing or posting of notice,
the water bill together with all penalties and interest charges are not paid,
then the service to the delinquent user shall be discontinued without further
notice. The service to the delinquent user shall not be reinstated until all
claims are settled. All costs of discontinuance of service and later
reinstatement shall be charged to and paid by the user.
(Ord. 18-04-01, passed 4-24-2018)
§ 54.062 LIEN; NOTICE OF DELINQUENCY.
   (A)   Whenever a bill for water and/or wastewater service remains unpaid
more than 60 days beyond the due date, the Village Collector shall file with
the County Recorder of Deeds a statement of lien claim. This statement shall
contain the legal description of the premises served, the amount of unpaid
bill, and a notice that the village claims a lien for this amount as well as
for all charges and costs incurred by the village subsequent to the period
covered by the bill, including all costs associated with filing the lien. If
the user whose bill is unpaid is not the owner of the premises and the Village
Collector has notice of this, notice shall be mailed to the owner of the
premises if his or her address is known to the Collector, whenever the bill
remains unpaid more than 60 days beyond the due date. The failure of the
Village Collector to record the lien or to mail such notice or the failure of
the owner to receive the notice shall not affect the right to foreclose the
lien for unpaid bills.
   (B)   If the Village Collector shall have filed a statement of lien claim
with the County Recorder of Deeds, then before the village will execute and
file a release of the lien claim with the County Recorder of Deeds, there shall
be paid to the Village Collector all outstanding amounts due to the Village,
including the late charge, interest, costs of discontinuance and reinstatement
of service, and all other charges to cover the village’s expenses in filing
notice and in recording and releasing the lien claim.
(Ord. 18-04-01, passed 4-24-2018)
§ 54.063 FORECLOSURE OF LIEN.
   Property subject to a lien for unpaid charges shall be sold for non-payment
of the same, and the proceeds of the sale shall be applied to pay the charges,
after deducting costs, as is the case in the foreclosure of statutory liens.
The foreclosure shall be by bill-in-equity in the name of the village. The
Village Attorney is hereby authorized and directed to institute such
proceedings in the name of the village in any court having jurisdiction over
such matters against any property for which the bill has remained unpaid 30
days after a lien has been filed as provided herein above.
(Ord. 18-04-01, passed 4-24-2018)
§ 54.064 NOTICE OF CHARGES.
   The failure of any user of the water and/or wastewater facilities of the
village to receive a bill or statement for charges shall not be grounds for
non-payment or reason to extend or defer the date upon which payment is due or
avoid the inclusion of penalties and interest. The owner of a property against
which a notice of lien has been recorded pursuant to the terms of this chapter
shall be deemed to have notice of the existence of the charge and shall be
responsible for ascertaining from the village all amounts, if any, due as
provided in this chapter and the payment thereof.
(Ord. 18-04-01, passed 4-24-2018)
§ 54.065 MISCELLANEOUS TERMS.
   (A)   In cases where the meter cannot be read for a limited period of time,
for any cause, the village will require a payment on account equal to the
estimated usual bill for the premises.
   (B)   In cases where, for any cause, the meter cannot be read for a period
exceeding three months, the village will turn off the water upon five days
written notice to the customer of its intention to do so, unless the customer
makes access to the meter possible.
   (C)   The quantity recorded by the meter shall be taken to be the amount of
water passing through the meter, which amount shall be conclusive to both the
customer and the village, except when the meter has been found to be
registering inaccurately or has ceased to register. In these cases, the
quantity may be determined by the average registration or by the average
registration of the new meter, whichever method is representative, in the
village’s opinion of the conditions existing during the period in question.
   (D)   No rebates from rates will be allowed for partial use of water from
wells, cisterns or other non-public water supply.
(Ord. 18-04-01, passed 4-24-2018)
§ 54.066 LIABILITY OF CUSTOMERS FOR PAYMENT.
   (A)   Customers are liable for payment for all water used and all wastewater
discharged on premises until written notice has been received at the village’s
office that the use of the water is no longer desired. Customers are liable for
all water shown to have passed through the meter, whether by use, wastage or
leakage. Where more than one tenant is supplied through a single meter, the
application for the water service must be made by the owner of the property or
his or her duly authorized agent. Customers are liable for all water shown to
have been delivered to the premises either by registration of a meter or
determined by other means. Customers are liable for all wastewater discharged
from the premises as determined by registration of a meter or determined by
other means.
   (B)   When a property is leased to the customer by the property owner, the
owner shall also be liable for payment for all water used and wastewater
discharged on the premises until written notice has been received at the
village’s offices that use of water is no longer desired.
(Ord. 18-04-01, passed 4-24-2018)
§ 54.067 COMPLAINTS.
   (A)   Complaints with regard to the character of the service furnished, of
the reading of meters or of the bills rendered must be made at the Village
Office, in writing, and a record of the complaint must be kept by the village,
giving the name and address of the complainant, the date, the nature of the
complaint and the remedy of the complaint.
   (B)   In case a customer shall file written objections to any bill within
ten days of the date of same, full payment of the bill shall be delayed until
an investigation has been undertaken to determine the validity of the
objection. The Village Administrator shall, within 10 days, investigate the
objection and prepare a written response outlining the results of the
investigation. The bill shall not be considered delinquent until the
investigation has been completed. The village will accept payment of the net
bill within 15 days after the customer has been notified of the results of the
necessary investigation before the account will be declared delinquent.
(Ord. 18-04-01, passed 4-24-2018)
FINANCIAL MATTERS
§ 54.070 REVENUES.
   All revenues and monies derived from the operation of the water and
wastewater facilities of the village shall be deposited in the appropriate
operating and maintenance account. All such revenues and monies shall be held
by the Village Treasurer separate and apart from his or her private funds and
separate and apart from all other funds of the village. The Village Treasurer
shall administer the fund in every respect in the manner provided by statute of
the Revised Cities and Villages Act, effective January, 1942, as amended to
date.
(Ord. 18-04-01, passed 4-24-2018)
§ 54.071 ACCOUNTS.
   (A)   The Village Treasurer shall establish a proper system of accounts and
shall keep proper books, records and accounts in which complete and correct
entries shall be made of all transactions relative of the water and wastewater
facilities, and at regular annual intervals shall cause to be made an audit by
an independent auditing concern of the books to show the receipts and
disbursements of the water and wastewater facilities.
   (B)   The funds and monies deposited in the water or wastewater operating
and maintenance accounts of the village shall be paid out by the Village
Treasurer upon due authorization of the Village Board of Trustees for the
following purposes:
      (1)   Operation, maintenance, repair and replacement of the existing
water or wastewater facilities.
      (2)   Debt service.
      (3)   Bond reserve accounts.
      (4)   Depreciation account.
      (5)   Equipment replacement fund.
      (6)   Capital improvement fund to provide for future initial construction
or rehabilitations to the water system, wastewater treatment plant or
collection system, generally considered as public benefit.
(Ord. 18-04-01, passed 4-24-2018)
§ 54.072 ANNUAL AUDIT.
   (A)   The adequacy of the water or wastewater service charge shall be
reviewed not less often than annually by certified public accountants for the
village in their annual audit report. The water or wastewater service charges
shall be revised periodically to reflect a change in local capital or debt
service costs or a change in operation and maintenance costs including
replacement costs.
   (B)   In addition to the customary operating statements, the annual audit
reports shall also reflect the revenues and operating expenses of the water and
wastewater facilities, including a replacement cost, to indicate that
wastewater service charges under the wastewater cost recovery system do, in
fact, meet these regulations. In this regard, the financial information to be
shown in the audit report shall include the following:
      (1)   Flow data showing total gallons received at the wastewater plant
for the current fiscal year.
      (2)   Billing data to show total number of gallons billed per fiscal
year.
      (3)   Debt service for the next succeeding fiscal year.
      (4)   Number of users connected to the system.
      (5)   Number of non-metered users.
      (6)   A list of users discharging non-domestic and industrial wastes and
volume of waste discharged.
(Ord. 18-04-01, passed 4-24-2018)
§ 54.073 NOTICE OF RATES.
   Each user shall be notified by the village in conjunction with a regular
bill, of the rate and that portion of the user charges which are attributable
to water facilities and/or wastewater treatment facilities, including
operation, maintenance and replacement.
(Ord. 18-04-01, passed 4-24-2018)
APPEALS
§ 54.080 CLARIFICATIONS.
   Any user of the water and wastewater facilities of the village with a
question concerning a bill received for services may seek additional
information for clarification from the Village Collector. The method for
computation of rates and service charges established by this chapter shall be
made available to a user within ten days of receipt of a written request for
such.
(Ord. 18-04-01, passed 4-24-2018)
§ 54.081 DISAGREEMENTS.
   After clarification from the Village Collector, any user that is in
disagreement with a bill or any item or information on a bill or disagrees with
any provision of this chapter may present his or her case to the Village
Administrator or other designated administrative representative of the village.
The Village Administrator shall review the details of the disagreement in light
of the provisions of this chapter. Any disagreement over the method used or in
the computations of a user’s bill shall be addressed and remedied by the
Village Administrator within ten days after notification by a formal written
appeal outlining the discrepancies. The Village Administrator shall cause a
modification to be made in the bill and a new bill issued or shall uphold the
existing bill as issued. There shall be no relief from late payment charges or
penalties for disagreements.
(Ord. 18-04-01, passed 4-24-2018)
§ 54.082 APPEALS.
   After review and determination by the Village Administrator, any user that
is still in disagreement with a bill or any item or information on a bill or
disagrees with any provisions of this chapter may appeal his or her case to the
Board of Trustees. The Board of Trustees shall review all details of the
disagreement including the administrative representative’s determination. The
Board of Trustees shall cause a modification to be made in a bill and a new
bill issued or shall uphold the existing bill as issued. There shall be no
relief from late payment charges, interest or penalties for appeals with the
exception of the time between the Board of Trustees hearing of the disagreement
and its decision. Decisions of the Board of Trustees shall be final.
(Ord. 18-04-01, passed 4-24-2018)
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 54.095 REPRESENTATIVE SAMPLES.
   In order to determine the content of wastewater discharged from a user into
the wastewater facilities of the village for the purpose of determining the
waste strength multiplier, representative samples shall be secured by the
village. Representative samples shall be defined as those taken on a 24-hour
composite basis or those taken as a composite of three grab samples taken at
intervals of not less than two hours between samples. Representative samples
shall be taken by or under the supervision of the village. The user shall be
required to provide adequate sampling manholes and/or other required facilities
for collecting composite samples or grab samples and shall be responsible for
all costs related to providing those facilities.
(Ord. 18-04-01, passed 4-24-2018)
§ 54.096 USE OF STANDARD METHODS.
   All measurements, tests, and analysis of the characteristics of water and
wastes to which reference is made in this chapter shall be determined in
accordance with the latest edition of Standard Methods for the Examination of
Water and Sewage or a method approved by the Illinois Environmental Protection
Agency.
(Ord. 18-04-01, passed 4-24-2018)
§ 54.097 ACCESS TO RECORDS.
   The Illinois Environmental Protection Agency or its authorized
representative shall have access to any books, documents, papers and records of
the village which are applicable to the village system of user charges for the
purpose of making audit, examination, excerpts and transcriptions thereof to
insure compliance with the terms of the special and general conditions to any
state grant and federal regulations and conditions of any federal grant.
(Ord. 18-04-01, passed 4-24-2018)
§ 54.098 NEW ACCOUNTS.
   Upon notification of a new user to the water facilities and/or the
wastewater facilities of the village, the village shall establish a new account
and shall cause an initial meter reading for user charge purposes to be
accomplished within five days of notification. The village shall establish
rates for the establishment of new accounts sufficient to cover the costs of
initiating a new account and reading of the meter, payment of which shall be
the sole responsibility of the user. The new account charge may be included on
the first bill to the user.
(Ord. 18-04-01, passed 4-24-2018)
AUTHORITY
§ 54.110 ENTRY ON PROPERTY.
   Any duly authorized employee or agent of the Village bearing proper
credentials and identification shall at any time be permitted to enter upon all
properties connected to the facilities of the Village for water supply and
wastewater treatment service for the purpose of inspecting, observing,
measuring, sampling and testing, as may be required in pursuance of the
implementation and enforcement of the terms and provisions of this chapter.
(Ord. 18-04-01, passed 4-24-2018)
§ 54.111 OBSERVE SAFETY RULES.
   While performing the necessary work on private properties referred to in
this chapter, the duly authorized employees of the village shall observe all
safety rules applicable to the premises established by the user, and the user
shall be held harmless for injury or death to the village employees, and the
village shall indemnify the user against loss or damage to its property by
village employees and against liability claims and demands for personal injury
or property damage asserted against the user and growing out of the gauging and
sampling operation, except as such may be caused by negligence or failure of
the user to maintain safe conditions.
§ 54.112 ENFORCEMENT.
   (A)   The officers of the village are hereby authorized and directed to
execute, acknowledge, deliver and accept, as appropriate, all documents and
instruments desirable or necessary to effect the performance in connection with
this chapter. The President, Village Administrator, Village Clerk, Treasurer,
and other officials and employees of the village are hereby authorized and
directed on behalf of the village to do such things as may be necessary or
desirable to carry out the transactions contemplated by this chapter without
further act or deed on the part of the corporate authorities.
(Ord. 18-04-01, passed 4-24-2018)
VIOLATIONS
§ 54.125 NOTICE OF VIOLATION.
   Any person found to be violating any provision of this chapter shall be
served by the village with written notice stating the nature of the violation
and provided a reasonable time limit for the satisfactory correction thereof.
The offender shall, within the period of time stated in the notice, permanently
cease all violations. The village may revoke any permit for sewage disposal or
terminate waste disposal service as a result of any violation of any provision
of this chapter. The village may turn off water service as a result of any
violation of any provision of this chapter.
(Ord. 18-04-01, passed 4-24-2018)
§ 54.126 LIABILITY OF VIOLATORS.
   Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall become
liable to the village by reason of the violation. The violation of any of the
terms and provisions of this section is hereby declared by the Village Board of
Trustees to be a public nuisance.
(Ord. 18-04-01, passed 4-24-2018)
VALIDITY
§ 54.140 VALIDITY OF CHAPTER.
   If any section, paragraph, clause, or provision of this chapter shall be
held to be illegal, invalid or unenforceable for any reason, the illegality,
invalidity, or unenforceability of that section, paragraph, clause, or
provision shall not affect any of the remaining provisions of this chapter.
(Ord. 18-04-01, passed 4-24-2018)
§ 54.999 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person who shall continue any violation beyond the time limit
provided for in §
54.125 shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and on conviction thereof shall be
fined in the amount not exceeding $500 for each violation. Each day in which
any such violation shall continue shall be deemed a separate offense.
   (B)   Any person, firm, or corporation convicted of violating or failing to
comply with any of the terms or provisions of §
54.125 shall be subject to a fine of not less than $100 nor more than $500. The
village is hereby authorized and empowered to institute and prosecute any and
all proceedings, suits, and actions necessary to collect any and all fines and
penalties herein provided for and is also hereby authorized and empowered to
institute and prosecute any and all suits at law or in equity as may be
appropriate or necessary to prevent or abate unlawful connections to the
village public sanitary sewer system or the village public water supply system
in violation of the provisions of this chapter.
(Ord. 18-04-01, passed 4-24-2018)
CHAPTER 55: WATER AND WASTEWATER RATES AND FEES
Section
General Provisions
   
55.001   Wastewater user rates and fees
   
55.002   Water user rates and fees
   
55.003   Wastewater connection fees
   
55.004   Private water service connection fees
   
55.005   Miscellaneous fees and charges
Special Project Connection Fees
   
55.020   East Mahomet Interceptor Sanitary Sewer Project
Violations
   
55.035   Notice of violation
   
55.036   Liability of violators
Validity
   
55.050   Validity of chapter
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 55.001 WASTEWATER USER RATES AND FEES.
   (A)   Pursuant to the Federal Water Pollution Control Act, as amended;
federal rules, regulations, an guidelines promulgated pursuant to the Act; and
pursuant to Section 104b of the Illinois Environmental Protection Act (111-1.2
Ill. Rev. Stat. §1046), there is hereby imposed and levied upon all users of
the village wastewater facilities charges and fees as are hereinafter fixed by
ordinance to be utilized by the village as hereafter provided to pay for
operation, maintenance and replacement costs for the village wastewater
facilities as well as related and appropriate costs including, but not limited
to, financing costs, administrative costs, and capital improvement costs.
   (B)   The wastewater rates (the “rates”) to be paid by users of the
village’s wastewater system, based upon the monthly waste water use per gallon
of water, shall be as follows:
 
Wastewater facility charge $5.00 per month per customer
Plus                        
Wastewater usage charge    $1.11 per 100 gallons of water use
 
   (C)   The wastewater usage charge herein combines the user charge rates for
the capital improvement rate, debt service rate, and user rate, as established
elsewhere herein into a single combined charge.
   (D)   A special charge of $0.15 per 100 gallons of wastewater use is hereby
established for users located outside the village’s corporate limit. This
special charge shall be in addition to the standard wastewater usage charge.
   (E)   The wastewater usage charge shall be increased by a waste strength
multiplier for certain type of use. Users which discharge non-domestic strength
wastewater shall pay a wastewater usage charge that is the standard charge
multiplied by the waste strength multiplier set forth in §
54.020.
   (F)   The rates established above in divisions (B) through (E) hereof may be
stated in bills therefor submitted to users or to the person to whom the bills
are to be sent broken down into such elements or subparts as shall be desirable
or necessary to comply with generally accepted accounting principles, sound
engineering principles or the requirements of the Illinois Environmental
Protection Agency or other authority having jurisdiction in that connection.
(Ord. 18-04-01, passed 4-24-2018; Ord. 21-04-02, passed 4-27-2021; Ord. 23-04-
01, passed 4-25-2023)
§ 55.002 WATER USER RATES AND FEES.
   (A)   There is hereby imposed and levied upon all users of the village water
supply and distribution facilities charges and fees as are hereinafter fixed by
ordinance to be utilized by the village as hereafter provided to pay for
operation, maintenance and replacement costs for the village water treatment
and distribution facilities as well as related and appropriate costs including,
but not limited to, financing costs, administrative costs, and capital
improvement costs.
   (B)   The water rates (the “rates”) to be paid by users of the village’s
waterworks system, based upon the monthly consumption per-gallon of water,
shall be as follows:
 
Water facility charge:         $5.00 per month per customer
   Plus
Water usage charge:
   $.68 per 100 gallons of uFor water use up to 50,000 gallons
   $.58 per 100 gallons of uFor water use over 50,000 gallons
 
   (C)   With respect to users located outside of the village’s corporate
limits, the applicable water usage charge shall be as follows:
 
Water facilities charge:       $5.00 per month per customer
   Plus
Water usage charge:
   $.75 per 100 gallons of uFor water use up to 50,000 gallons
   $.65 per 100 gallons of uFor water use over 50,000 gallons
 
   (D)   With respect to users of outside use only water meters located inside
the village’s corporate limits, the applicable water usage charge shall be as
follows:
 
Water facilities charge:       $8.00 per month per customer
   Plus
Water usage charge:
   $.68 per 100 gallons of uFor water use up to 50,000 gallons
   $.58 per 100 gallons of uFor water use over 50,000 gallons
 
   (E)   The rates established above in divisions (B), (C) and (D) hereof may
be stated in bills therefor submitted to users or to the person to whom the
bills are to be sent broken down into such elements or subparts as shall be
desirable or necessary to comply with generally accepted accounting principles,
sound engineering principles or the requirements of the Illinois Environmental
Protection Agency or other authority having jurisdiction in that connection.
(Ord. 18-04-01, passed 4-24-2018; Ord. 19-03-02, passed 3-26-2019; Ord. 20-03-
04, passed 3-17-2020; Ord. 21-04-02, passed 4-27-2021; Ord. 23-04-01, passed 4-
25-2023)
§ 55.003 WASTEWATER CAPACITY FEES.
   (A)   Capacity fees. There shall be a capacity fee required to connect a new
private sewer or building sewer service line to the Village of Mahomet's public
sanitary sewer system.
      (1)   Basis of fee. The capacity fee shall be based upon estimated
wastewater usage for the property. One "unit" of wastewater usage shall be
equal to an average use of 100 gallons per day. The capacity fee for one unit
shall be $900 per unit of estimated wastewater usage.
      (2)   Number of units. For all types of occupancy, the capacity fee shall
be determined by multiplying the current capacity fee for a single unit by the
number of applicable units for the type of usage. See
Chapter 54: Water and Wastewater User Charge System for further details.
      (3)   Regardless of use or type of occupancy the minimum capacity fee
shall be based upon two units of usage.
      (4)   Existing connections. A credit shall be given to the applicant for
the number of units being served through an existing private sanitary sewer
service connected to the village facilities at the time of reconstruction or
remodeling of a building then service and/or to be served is connected. This
credit is to be applied against the capacity fee charged. When the credit
exceeds the capacity fee to be charged, no refund of the excess will be issued.
(Ord. 18-04-01, passed 4-24-2018; Ord. 20-03-04, passed 3-17-2020; Ord. 21-04-
02, passed 4-27- 2021; Ord. 23-04-01, passed 4-25-2023)
§ 55.004 PRIVATE WATER SERVICE CONNECTION FEES.
   (A)   Connection fees. There shall be a connection fee required to connect a
new private water connection to the village’s public water supply system. The
connection fee shall be determined by the fee schedule set forth below:
 
Service Type                                                     Connection fee
3/4 ID to 1 inch ID service lines                                $1,200
1-1/4 ID to 1-1/2 inch ID service lines                          $2,375
1-3/4 ID to 2 inch ID service lines                              $4,675
Per unit of usage per day for service lines larger than 2 inches $275
ID
Fire service line                                                $750
 
   (B)   Determining units of water usage. A UNIT  of water usage shall consist
of 75 gallons of flow per day. The number of units of water usage shall be
determined by applying the approved flow estimates made by the engineer for the
industry or business, and as reviewed and approved by the Village Engineer and
the Village Administrator. The Village Engineer may consult with published
industry standards to determine an estimate of water usage. The connection fee
shall be the number of units determined multiplied by the charge per unit. In
the case of industry, each charge is to be reviewed and adjusted at the end of
the first three years of full operation of the industry to the average annual
operation experience and settlement, therefore, shall be made within six
months.
   (C)   Regardless of use or service type the minimum connection fee shall be
$1,000 for connection fees when determined by units of usage.
   (D)   Existing connections. A credit shall be given to the applicant for the
number of units being served through an existing private water service
connected to the village facilities at the time of reconstruction or remodeling
of a building then service and/or to be served is connected. This credit is to
be applied against the capacity fee charged. When the credit exceeds the
connection fee to be charged, no refund of the excess will be issued.
   (E)   See
Chapter 54: Water and Wastewater User Charge Systems for further details.
(Ord. 18-04-01, passed 4-24-2018; Ord. 20-03-04, passed 3-17-2020; Ord. 21-04-
02, passed 4-27- 2021; Ord. 23-04-01, passed 4-25-2023)
§ 55.005 MISCELLANEOUS FEES AND CHARGES.
   Miscellaneous charges and fees shall be as follows:
   (A)   Non-metered residential users shall be assigned a minimum monthly
billable flow of not less than 10,000 gallons per month.
   (B)   Non-metered commercial uses shall be assigned a minimum monthly
billable flow of not less than 15,000 gallons per month.
   (C)   An inspection fee of $50 will be charged for each inspection of each
direct connection to any village water main by any water service within the
village or located outside the corporate limits of the village.
   (D)   An inspection fee of $50 will be charged for each inspection of each
direct connection to any village sanitary sewer by any building sewer or
private service line within the village or located outside the corporate limits
of the village.
   (E)   In the event that a water or wastewater system connection does not
pass initial inspection, a reinspection fee of $50 shall be due and payable for
each instance of reinspection.
   (F)   A one-time new account and service application fee of $20 for each
type of service shall be due and payable at the time of application for water
and/or wastewater service ($40 for both water and wastewater service).
   (G)   A past due/delinquent notice charge of $10 shall accrue for each
delinquent payment notice issued.
   (H)   A late payment charge of 10% of the amount of the bill shall be due
and payable for all past due bills.
   (I)   A delinquent charge of 1% per month shall be due and payable for all
delinquent bills that are more than 30 days past due.
   (J)   A fee of $30 shall be due and payable for restoring water and/or
wastewater service in the event that service was disconnected due to late
payment, due to non-payment, or due to violation of village code requirements.
The fee shall be paid before service is restored.
   (K)   A fee of $10 shall be due and payable for restoring water and/or
wastewater service in the event that the service was discontinued at the
customer’s request.
   (L)   A fee of $50 shall be due and payable for testing a meter upon request
of a customer when it is determined that the meter is operating correctly. No
fee shall be applicable if the meter is found to be inaccurate.
   (M)   A fee of $500 shall be due and payable for application for extension
of the public water system for instances that do not involve the subdivision of
land.
   (N)   A fee of $25 shall be due and payable for any payment paid by check
which is returned by the bank for insufficient funds.
   (O)   A fee of $500 shall be due and payable for application for extension
of the wastewater system for instances that do not involve the subdivision of
land.
   (P)   A fee of $50 shall be due and payable for the installation of a
temporary water meter and temporary connection to the village water supply
system.
   (Q)   A connection fee of $500 shall be due and payable for the installation
of a private fire service connection.
   (R)   A well drilling permit application fee of $100 shall be due and
payable for the construction of a private well.
   (S)   A private on-site wastewater system permit application fee of $100
shall be due and payable for the construction of a private wastewater disposal
system.
   (T)   An industrial discharge connection application fee of $500 shall apply
to all industrial wastewater connections. The industrial discharge connection
application fee shall be in addition to the standard wastewater connection fee.
   (U)   An inspection fee of $50 shall be charged for each inspection of a
private on-site wastewater treatment system.
   (V)   A meter installation fee shall be charged for the initial installation
of a water meter for any customer. The meter installation shall be set by the
Village Administrator on or about May 1 of each year. The fee shall be the
actual cost to purchase the meter plus an additional $25 handling charge.
   (W)   A deposit of $100 shall be due and payable for the installation of a
secondary meter for outside water use, in addition to the standard meter fee.
(Ord. 18-04-01, passed 4-24-2018)
SPECIAL PROJECT CONNECTION FEES
§ 55.020 EAST MAHOMET INTERCEPTOR SANITARY SEWER PROJECT.
   (A)   Service area. The areas that benefit from the installation of the East
Mahomet Interceptor Sanitary Sewer are generally in the southeast section of
the village, both within and outside the corporate limits, are depicted on the
map entitled “Proposed East Mahomet Interceptor Sewer Service Area” dated
August 30, 2007 which is marked ‘Exhibit A’ attached to Ordinance 07-1002, and
which is hereby adopted by reference.
   (B)   Recapture fees. A fee of $700 per acre for any new development or new
subdivision within the service area of the East Mahomet Interceptor Sanitary
Sewer is hereby imposed. The developer is responsible for the payment of the
fee to the village at the time a final plat or site development plan is
submitted to the village for approval.
   (C)   Use of recapture fees. The fees collected hereunder by the village
shall be deposited by the Treasurer of the Village in the Wastewater System
Capital Improvement Fund, for use in the extension, construction or
reconstruction of the wastewater treatment works and the sanitary sewer
collection system of the village.
(Ord. 18-04-01, passed 4-24-2018)
VIOLATIONS
§ 55.035 NOTICE OF VIOLATION.
   Any person found to be violating any provision of this chapter shall be
served by the village with written notice stating the nature of the violation
and provided a reasonable time limit for the satisfactory correction thereof.
The offender shall, within the period of time stated in the notice, permanently
cease all violations. The village may revoke any permit for sewage disposal or
terminate waste disposal service as a result of any violation of any provision
of this chapter. The village may turn off water service as a result of any
violation of any provision of this chapter.
(Ord. 18-04-01, passed 4-24-2018)
§ 55.036 LIABILITY OF VIOLATORS.
   Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall become
liable to the village by reason of the violation. The violation of any of the
terms and provisions of this section is hereby declared by the Village Board of
Trustees to be a public nuisance.
(Ord. 18-04-01, passed 4-24-2018)
VALIDITY
§ 55.050 VALIDITY OF CHAPTER.
   If any section, paragraph, clause, or provision of this chapter shall be
held to be illegal, invalid or
unenforceable for any reason, the illegality, invalidity, or unenforceability
of that section, paragraph, clause, or provision shall not affect any of the
remaining provisions of this chapter.
(Ord. 18-04-01, passed 4-24-2018)
TITLE VII: TRAFFIC CODE
   Chapter
      
70.   PARKING REGULATIONS
      
71.   TRAFFIC CODE
CHAPTER 70: PARKING REGULATIONS
Section
   
70.01   Title and purpose
   
70.02   Definitions
   
70.03   Stopping, standing or parking
   
70.04   Persons with disabilities
   
70.05   Manner of parking at curb; marking of spaces; parking within lines
   
70.06   Parking in alley; driveways
   
70.07   Parking for certain purposes prohibited
   
70.08   Vehicles; parking on private property
   
70.09   Restrictions in residential areas
   
70.10   Certain vehicles in areas other than residence districts
   
70.11   Parking time prohibitions
   
70.12   Snow routes
   
70.13   Responsibility for parking violations
   
70.14   Parking Code hearings
 
   
70.99   Penalty
§ 70.01 TITLE AND PURPOSE.
   This chapter shall be and constitute the “Parking Code Ordinance of the
Village”, which is adopted pursuant to state statutes authorizing the empowered
municipalities to adopt all or any portion of the Illinois Vehicle Code by
reference (ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 20-204); enact regulations with respect to
streets and highways under their jurisdiction and within the reasonable
exercise of the police power (ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-208); and enact
regulations with respect to the use of the streets and other municipal property
(ILCS Ch. 65, Act 5, § 11-80-2). This chapter shall be in effect for that
purpose on and after its effective date as provided herein. This chapter may be
known and cited as the “Village Parking Code”.
(Ord. 07-12-03, passed 12-18-2007)
§ 70.02 DEFINITIONS.
   Whenever any words and phrases used in this chapter are not defined herein
but are defined in the Illinois Vehicle Code (ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, §§ 1-101 et
seq.), as supplemented and amended, any definition therein shall be deemed to
apply to the words and phrases used in this chapter, except when the context
otherwise requires. The following words and phrases when used in this chapter
shall, for the purpose of this chapter, have the meanings respectively ascribed
to them in this section below, except when the context otherwise requires.
   CORPORATE AUTHORITIES. The President and Board of Trustees of the village.
   DIRECTOR OF STREETS AND ALLEYS. The Director of Streets and Alleys of the
village or his or her designee.
   DISABILITIES REGISTRATION PLATE OR PARKING DEVICE. Any valid registration
plate issued to a person with disabilities or to a disabled veteran by the
Secretary of State pursuant to §§ 3-616 or 3-609 of the Illinois Vehicle Code
or any valid parking decal or device issued by any unit of local government
pursuant to § 11-1301.2 of the Illinois Vehicle Code, or any other license
plate or parking decal or device issued by another jurisdiction, including any
state or local authority thereof, district, territory or foreign country
designating that a motor vehicle is operated by a person with disabilities or a
disabled veteran.
   ILLINOIS VEHICLE CODE. The Illinois Vehicle Code (ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, §§ 1-
101 et seq.), as supplemented and amended.
   RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT. Any territory in the village limits, including all
streets and highways thereto, zoned as RS, R-1, R-2 or R-3.
   VILLAGE. The Village of Mahomet, Champaign County, Illinois.
(Ord. 07-12-03, passed 12-18-2007)
§ 70.03 STOPPING, STANDING OR PARKING.
   (A)   Except when necessary to avoid conflict with other traffic, or in
compliance with law or the directions of a police officer or official traffic-
control device, no person shall:
      (1)   Stop, stand or park a vehicle:
         (a)   On the roadway side of any vehicle stopped or parked at the edge
or curb of a street;
         (b)   On a sidewalk;
         (c)   Within an intersection;
         (d)   On a crosswalk;
         (e)   On any railroad tracks;
         (f)   In any fire lane;
         (g)   At any place where official signs prohibit stopping;
         (h)   Alongside or opposite any street excavation or obstruction when
stopping, standing or parking would obstruct traffic;
         (i)   In any place where the vehicle would reduce to less than 18 feet
the width of the roadway available for use by moving traffic;
         (j)   Upon any bridge or viaduct or upon any street or highway under a
bridge or viaduct;
         (k)   Between a safety zone and the adjacent curb, or within 20 feet
of a point on the curb immediately opposite the ends of a safety zone;
         (l)   On any area of any street or highway between the roadway and the
front lot or property line; and/or
         (m)   In a public parking area if the vehicle does not display a
current annual registration sticker or current temporary permit pending
registration.
      (2)   Stand or park a vehicle, whether occupied or not, except
momentarily to pick up or discharge passengers:
         (a)   In front of a public or private driveway;
         (b)   Within 15 feet of a fire hydrant;
         (c)   Within 20 feet of a crosswalk at an intersection;
         (d)   Within 30 feet upon the approach to any flashing signal, stop
sign, yield sign or traffic control signal located at the side of a roadway;
         (e)   Within 20 feet of the driveway entrance to any fire station and
on the side of a street opposite the entrance to any fire station within 75
feet of the entrance (when properly sign-posted); and/or
         (f)   At any place where official signs prohibit standing.
      (3)   Park a vehicle, whether occupied or not, except temporarily for the
purpose of and while actually engaged in loading or unloading property or
passengers:
         (a)   Within 50 feet of the nearest rail of a railroad crossing; or
         (b)   At any place where official signs prohibit parking.
   (B)   Any violation of this section is a Class A violation.
(Ord. 07-12-03, passed 12-18-2007) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 70.04 PERSONS WITH DISABILITIES.
   (A)   Any motor vehicle bearing a disabilities registration plate or parking
device:
      (1)   Shall be exempt from any ordinance imposing time limitations on
parking, except limitations of one-half hour or less, on any street;
      (2)   May park, in addition to any other lawful place, in any parking
place specifically reserved for the vehicles by the posting of an official sign
as provided under § 11-301 of the Illinois Vehicle Code; and
      (3)   Shall remain subject to the laws which prohibit parking in “no
stopping” and “no standing” zones in front of or near fire hydrants, driveways,
public building entrances and exits, bus stops and loading areas, and is
prohibited from parking where the motor vehicle constitutes a traffic hazard,
whereby the motor vehicle shall be moved at the instruction and request of a
law enforcement officer to a location designated by the officer or in an area
that expressly prohibits parking at any time or during certain hours.
   (B)   Parking privileges granted by this section shall be strictly limited
to the person to whom the special registration plates, special decal or device
were issued and to qualified operators acting under his or her express
direction while the person with disabilities is present. A person to whom
privileges were granted shall, at the request of a police officer or any other
person invested by law with authority to direct, control or regulate traffic,
present an identification card with a picture as verification that the person
is the person to whom the special registration plates, special decal or device
was issued.
   (C)   Parking spaces granted by this section shall be marked with a sign
posted in plain view and the sign shall state the fine amount. These spaces
shall also be marked by painting the handicap symbol in between the lines which
designate that space.
   (D)   This section shall apply to both village property and private
property.
   (E)   Any violation of this section is a Class C violation.
(Ord. 07-12-03, passed 12-18-2007) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 70.05 MANNER OF PARKING AT CURB; MARKING OF SPACES: PARKING WITHIN LINES.
   (A)   Except as otherwise provided in this section, every vehicle stopped or
parked upon a two-way roadway shall be so stopped or parked with the right-hand
wheels parallel to and within 12 inches of the right-hand curb or as close as
practicable to the right edge of the right-hand shoulder.
   (B)   Except when otherwise provided in this section, every vehicle stopped
or parked upon a one-way roadway shall be so stopped or parked parallel to the
curb or edge of the roadway, in the direction of authorized traffic movement,
with its right-hand wheels within 12 inches of the right-hand curb or as close
as practicable to the right edge of the right-hand shoulder, or with its left-
hand wheels within 12 inches of the left-hand curb or as close as practicable
to the left edge of the left-hand shoulder.
   (C)   Vehicles shall be parked at the angle to curb upon streets that have
been marked for angle parking.
   (D)   No person shall park any vehicle across any line or marking
delineating an individual parking space or park any vehicle in a position that
the entire vehicle shall not be entirely within the area so designated by the
lines or markings.
   (E)   Any violation of this section is a Class A violation.
(Ord. 07-12-03, passed 12-18-2007) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 70.06 PARKING IN ALLEY; DRIVEWAYS.
   (A)   Except as otherwise provided in this section, no person shall stop,
stand or park a vehicle within an alley in a manner or under conditions as to
leave available less than ten feet of the width of the alley for the free
movement of vehicular traffic or to stop, stand or park a vehicle within an
alley in a position as to block the driveway entrance to any abutting property.
   (B)   Except as otherwise provided in this section, no person shall stop,
stand or park a vehicle within an alley in a position so as to block a driveway
to any abutting property.
   (C)   This section shall not be applicable to the following vehicles while
in service: utility vehicles, freight carriers or other delivery vehicles,
licensed garbage haulers or governmental or emergency vehicles.
   (D)   Any violation of this section is a Class A violation.
(Ord. 07-12-03, passed 12-18-2007) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 70.07 PARKING FOR CERTAIN PURPOSES PROHIBITED.
   (A)   No person shall park a vehicle upon any street or highway for the
principal purpose of:
      (1)   Displaying the vehicle for sale;
      (2)   Washing, greasing or repairing the vehicle, except repairs
necessitated by an emergency; or
      (3)   Selling merchandise from the vehicle.
   (B)   Any violation of this section shall be a Class A violation.
(Ord. 07-12-03, passed 12-18-2007) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 70.08 VEHICLES; PARKING ON PRIVATE PROPERTY.
   (A)   No person shall park any motor vehicle on private property without the
consent of the owner of the private property.
   (B)   No person shall park any vehicle on private property except on a weed-
free surface made of gravel, crushed stone, asphalt, Portland Cement concrete
or brick pavers as approved by the Zoning Administrator. Unless located on a
commercially zoned lot, no person shall park any motor vehicle in the front
yard of any lot containing a residential structure, except on a driveway which
complies with the requirements of this section.
   (C)   No owner, occupant or person in control of private property shall
knowingly allow or permit any vehicle to be parked on private property except
on a weed-free surface made of gravel, crushed stone, asphalt, Portland Cement
or brick pavers as approved by the Zoning Administrator. Unless located on a
commercially zoned lot, no owner, occupant or person in control of private
property shall knowingly allow or permit any vehicle to be parked in the front
yard of any residential structure except on a driveway which complies with the
requirements of this section.
   (D)   Any violation of this section is a Class B violation.
(Ord. 07-12-03, passed 12-18-2007) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 70.09 RESTRICTIONS IN RESIDENTIAL AREAS.
   (A)   Except as otherwise provided in this section, no person shall park,
except in a fully enclosed structure, any truck exceeding 8,000 pounds gross
vehicle weight rating (GVWR), truck tractor, semitrailer, pole trailer,
trailer, bus, recreational vehicle, boat, camping trailer, commuter van, house
trailer, motor home, mini-home, van camper, travel trailer or truck camper on
any street or highway in a residential district for a longer period than is
necessary for the reasonably expeditious loading or unloading of any like
vehicle. The vehicles bearing the license plate designations of RV, RT or TA
shall be irrefutably presumed to be a vehicle prohibited from parking.
   (B)   The provisions of this section shall not be applicable to any vehicle
parked pursuant to a permit issued by the Village Clerk for a designated period
of time not to exceed 72 hours. The permit shall be issued upon written
application and shall set out the time period for which it is valid. The permit
shall be affixed to the inside of the driver’s side of the windshield. Failure
to so affix the permit shall subject the owner of the vehicle to the imposition
of a parking fine as if the vehicle were parked on the street without a permit
having been issued. No more than five permits shall be issued for any one
vehicle within one calendar year.
   (C)   The provisions of this section shall not be applicable to any vehicle
that has as its primary purpose the excavation of earth from, the placement of
construction materials on, or the removal of debris or earth from a site for
which a permit for the activity has been issued by the village for the
construction, installation, maintenance or repair of any physical improvement
upon a site when any vehicle is parked on or immediately adjacent to the site
during any like activity.
   (D)   Any violation of this section is a Class B violation.
(Ord. 07-12-03, passed 12-18-2007) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 70.10 CERTAIN VEHICLES IN AREAS OTHER THAN RESIDENCE DISTRICTS.
   (A)   No person shall park any truck exceeding 8,000 pounds gross vehicle
weight rating (GVWR), truck trailer, semitrailer, pole trailer, trailer, bus,
recreational vehicle or boat on any street or highway in any area of the
village other than in a residence district for a longer period than four hours
or for such time as is necessary for the reasonably expeditious loading or
unloading of the vehicle.
   (B)   The provisions of this section shall not be applicable to any vehicle
which has as its primary purpose: the excavation of earth from, the placement
of construction materials on, or the removal of debris or earth from a site for
which a permit for the activity has been issued by the village for the
construction, installation, maintenance or repair of any physical improvement
upon a site; when any vehicle is parked on or immediately adjacent to the site
during any like activity.
   (C)   Any violation of this section is a Class B violation.
(Ord. 07-12-03, passed 12-18-2007) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 70.11 PARKING TIME PROHIBITIONS.
   (A)   No person shall park any vehicle on a residential street or alley in
the village for a period longer than 72 hours.
   (B)   No person shall park any vehicle on any street for a period of time
longer than authorized by a properly posted sign.
   (C)   Any violation of this section is a Class A violation.
(Ord. 07-12-03, passed 12-18-2007) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 70.12 SNOW ROUTES.
   (A)   After notice to local media by the Superintendent of the
Transportation Department that a two-inch snowfall has accumulated, no person
shall park any motor vehicle on either side of streets designated as snow
routes until a time as the Director of Streets and Alleys gives similar notice
that parking may be resumed. All snow routes will be signed and publicized by
the village before activation of the snow routes.
   (B)   Any violation of this section is a Class A violation.
   (C)   Any vehicle parked on any street or highway or any part thereof so
designated as a snow route in violation of this section may be ordered by any
police officer of the village or the Director of Streets and Alleys to be towed
by a towing service at the expense of the registered owner or operator of any
like vehicle.
   (D)   The Superintendent of the Transportation Department is hereby
authorized and directed to provide a news release to local media (radio,
television and newspaper) at the beginning of any period occurring after a
snowfall in which there is an accumulation of two inches of snow or more of the
village’s intent to plow or remove the snow from the designated snow routes and
to tow vehicles which may be standing or parked thereon in violation of this
section.
(Ord. 07-12-03, passed 12-18-2007) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 70.13 RESPONSIBILITY FOR PARKING VIOLATIONS.
   (A)   Whenever any vehicle shall have been parked in violation of any of the
provisions of the Village Parking Code, the person in whose name the vehicle is
registered shall be prima facie responsible for the violation.
   (B)   The regulations set forth in the Village Parking Code apply to the
operator, the person in charge of and the owner of any vehicle in violation.
   (C)   Every person in whose name a vehicle is registered pursuant to law and
who leases the vehicle to one or more others, after receiving written notice of
a violation involving the vehicle, shall upon request provide police officers
as have authority of the violation, and the court having jurisdiction thereof,
with a written statement of the name and address of the lessee at the time of
the violation and the identifying number upon the registration plates and
registration sticker of the vehicle.
   (D)   No person who is the lessor of a vehicle pursuant to a written lease
agreement shall be liable for any violation involving the vehicle during the
period of the lease; provided that upon the request of the appropriate
authority received within 120 days after the violation occurred, the lessor
provides within 60 days after the receipt the name and address of the lessee.
The driver’s license number of a lessee may be subsequently individually
requested by the appropriate authority if needed for enforcement.
(Ord. 07-12-03, passed 12-18-2007) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 70.14 PARKING CODE HEARINGS.
   (A)   Persons receiving a notice of violation may request a hearing waiver
and submit a notarized statement to the Village Administration Building to
contest a violation notice. The request must be received within the ten days
allotted for payment of fines. After the ten-day period, violators shall be
subject to the higher fine amounts listed herein.
   (B)   Persons receiving a notice of violation may request a hearing to
contest a violation notice. The request must be received within the ten days
allotted to pay the fine on the notice or the persons shall be subject to the
higher fine amounts listed herein.
   (C)   Hearings will be held before an appointed Hearing Officer for the
village. The Hearing Officer will preside at each hearing and his or her
decision to either dismiss or uphold the violation will be the final ruling on
the violation. If the violation is upheld, the violator will be required to pay
the original fine amount within ten days of the hearing date. Failure of the
person to make the payment shall be subject to the increased fine amounts and
court costs in §
70.99 below.
(Ord. 07-12-03, passed 12-18-2007)
§ 70.99 PENALTY.
   A written notice of violation shall be issued for all violations under the
sections herein. The notice shall state that the vehicle has been in violation.
The notice shall also indicate that each person may pay as the penalty for, and
in full satisfaction of the violation, within ten days from the time the
violation notice was issued, the initial fine amount indicated thereon. The
fine may be paid by placing a check or money order in an envelope and
depositing it in the courtesy box maintained for that purpose at the Police
Department. The failure of that person to make the payment or request
adjudication by mail within ten days of issuance shall render the person
subject to the increased fine amount indicated below if paid within 30 days
from the violation or prior to the village filing suit in the Circuit Court for
the violation, whichever is later. The notice shall also state that failure to
pay the appropriate fine within the time indicated in this section for such
shall render the person subject to the penalties provided for in this section
plus the court costs associated with filing of suit in Circuit Court. The
minimum fines for violating sections of this chapter shall be as follows:
 
               Class A Violations Class B Violations Class C Violations
Within 10 days $30                $50                $250
After 10 days  $60                $100               $350
 
(Ord. 07-12-03, passed 12-18-2007)
CHAPTER 71: TRAFFIC CONTROL
Section
   
71.01   Closing streets; commands
   
71.02   Designation of employees
   
71.03   Failure to comply
   
71.04   Stop and yield intersections
 
   
71.99   Penalty
§ 71.01 CLOSING STREETS; COMMANDS.
   The Police Chief or Village Administrator or their designee shall have
authority to declare any street or any part thereof a closed street and the
authority to place appropriate signs or devices in the roadway indicating and
helping protect the same. When an authorized Village of Mahomet employee or
duly appointed volunteers provides a signal or verbal command, or a sign is
erected indicating any street or part thereof as a closed street, no person
shall drive a vehicle upon the street or part thereof except drivers of
vehicles having business or whose residences are within closed area and have
been provided authorization, and then any driver shall exercise the greatest
care in driving upon the street or portion thereof.
(Ord. 21-07-01, passed 7-27-2021) Penalty, see §
71.99
§ 71.02 DESIGNATION OF EMPLOYEES.
   The Police Chief or Village Administrator are hereby empowered to designate
Village of Mahomet employees or duly appointed volunteers with the authority to
direct traffic. While engaged in directing traffic and while wearing devices or
emblems identifying them as employees of the Village of Mahomet, no motorist
shall disregard the directions of such designated employees while they are
directing traffic.
(Ord. 21-07-01, passed 7-27-2021)
§ 71.03 FAILURE TO COMPLY.
   No person shall fail or refuse to comply with or to perform any act
forbidden by any lawful order, signal, or direction of a traffic or police
officer, or a person authorized to direct traffic.
(Ord. 21-07-01, passed 7-27-2021) Penalty, see §
71.99
§ 71.04 STOP AND YIELD INTERSECTIONS.
   (A)   The following locations are designated as stop or yield intersections
as per the following Table A.
   (B)   Where stop signs are erected as herein provided, every operator of a
vehicle shall come to a complete stop of the vehicle at the sign or at a
clearly marked stop line before entering the nearest crosswalk, if any, or the
intersection, except when directed to proceed by a police officer or traffic
control aide.
   (C)   Where a yield right-of-way sign has been erected at an intersection,
the driver of a vehicle facing the sign shall slow down to a speed reasonable
for the existing conditions or shall stop if necessary and shall yield the
right-of-way to other vehicles which have entered the intersecting roadway
either from the right or left or which are approaching so closely on the
intersecting roadway as to constitute an immediate hazard, but thereafter may
proceed at such lime as a safe interval occurs.
   (D)   That the operation of vehicles on said streets and at said
intersection shall be in compliance with the provisions of the Illinois Vehicle
Code, ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, §§ 1-101 et. seq., as amended.
   (E)   Penalty. Any person violating any provision of the above schedules
shall be subject to fines as provided by law.
   (F)   Village staff is directed to cause the appropriate traffic signs to be
erected at the intersections of such streets as specified in Table A as soon as
reasonably practicable, if not done so already. Said signage, as designated by
Table A, shall become effective when such signs are so erected.
TABLE A
STOP SIGN AND YIELD SIGN LOCATIONS
General               Traffic      Stop or  Intersection            Codified
Location or Direction Command/     Yield On With         # of Signs Ordinance
Subdivision           Sign Erected
TABLE A
STOP SIGN AND YIELD SIGN LOCATIONS
General                Traffic
Location or Direction  Command/ Stop or     Intersection # of Signs Codified
Subdivision            Sign     Yield On    With                    Ordinance
                       Erected
Timber      Westbound  Stop     W State St  Turkey Farm  1          Ord 25-01-
Ridge                                       Rd                      03
Timber      Westbound  Stop     Westbrook   Turkey Farm  1          Ord 25-01-
Ridge                           Dr          Rd                      03
Timber      Eastbound  Stop     Westbrook   Timber Ridge 1          Ord 25-01-
Ridge                           Dr          Rd                      03
Timber      Westbound  Stop     Highland Dr Timber Ridge 1          Ord 25-01-
Ridge                                       Rd                      03
Timber      Eastbound  Stop     Highland Dr Edgewood Dr  1          Ord 25-01-
Ridge                                                               03
Timber      Northbound Yield    Hillside Dr Ridgewood Rd 1          Ord 25-01-
Ridge                                                               03
Timber      Southbound                                              Ord 25-01-
Ridge       ,          Stop     Hillside Dr W State St   2          03
            Northbound
West State  Northbound Stop     Northwood   W State St   1          Ord 25-01-
St                              Dr                                  03
West State  Northbound Stop     Hilltop Ct  W State St   1          Ord 25-01-
St                                                                  03
West State  Northbound Stop     Timberview  W State St   1          Ord 25-01-
St                              Dr                                  03
Dale Valley Southbound Stop     Maywood Dr  W State St   1          Ord 25-01-
                                                                    03
Dale Valley Westbound  Yield    Sunset Dr E Maywood Dr   1          Ord 25-01-
                                                                    03
Dale Valley Eastbound  Yield    Sunset Dr W Maywood Dr   1          Ord 25-01-
                                                                    03
Western     Northbound Stop     Western     W State St   1          Ord 25-01-
Hills                           Hills Dr                            03
Western     Eastbound  Stop     Clover Ln   Western      1          Ord 25-01-
Hills                                       Hills Dr                03
Colony      Northbound Stop     Colony      Western      1          Ord 25-01-
Grove                           Grove       Hills Dr                03
Northridge  Southbound Stop     Northridge  W State St   1          Ord 25-01-
                                Ct                                  03
Northridge  Westbound  Stop     Northridge  Northridge   1          Ord 25-01-
                                Dr          Ct                      03
                                            Cedar Ridge
Northridge  Eastbound  Stop     Northridge  Ct/ N        1          Ord 25-01-
                                Dr          Northridge              03
                                            Dr
                                N                                   Ord 25-01-
Northridge  Eastbound  Stop     Northridge  Crowley Rd   1          03
                                Dr
Timberview  Northbound Stop     Craig Dr    W State St   1          Ord 25-01-
                                                                    03
Timberview  Northbound Stop     Dianne Ct   Craig Dr     1          Ord 25-01-
                                                                    03
Timberview  Northbound Stop     Raymond Dr  Craig Dr     1          Ord 25-01-
                                                                    03
Timberview  Southbound Stop     Raymond Ct  Craig Dr     1          Ord 25-01-
                                                                    03
Timberview  Eastbound  Stop     Craig Dr    Dianne Ln    1          Ord 25-01-
                                                                    03
Timberview  Northbound Stop     Dianne Ln   W State St   1          Ord 25-01-
                                                                    03
Timberview  Westbound  Stop     Richard Ct  Raymond Dr   1          Ord 25-01-
                                                                    03
Timberview  Northbound Stop     Richard Dr  Dianne Ln    1          Ord 25-01-
                                                                    03
Timberview  Northbound Stop     Marcella Dr Dianne Ln    1          Ord 25-01-
                                                                    03
Timberview  Northbound Stop     Clayton Dr  Dianne Ln    1          Ord 25-01-
                                                                    03
Timberview  Northbound Stop     Barbara Dr  Dianne Ln    1          Ord 25-01-
                                                                    03
Timberview  All-Way    Stop     Raymond Dr  Dianne Ln /  4          Ord 25-01-
                                / Dianne Ln Raymond Dr              03
Timberview  Northbound Stop     Jennifer Dr Dianne Ln    1          Ord 25-01-
                                                                    03
Timberview  Westbound  Stop     Jennifer Ct Jennifer Dr  1          Ord 25-01-
                                                                    03
Timberview  Northbound Yield    Evergreen   Jennifer Ct  1          Ord 25-01-
                                Ct                                  03
Timberview  Southbound Stop     Barbara Dr  Oda Dr       1          Ord 25-01-
                                                                    03
Timberview  Southbound Stop     Raymond Dr  Oda Dr       1          Ord 25-01-
                                                                    03
Timberview  Eastbound  Stop     Oda Dr      Jennifer Dr  1          Ord 25-01-
                                                                    03
W Main St   Southbound Stop     Richard Dr  W Main St    1          Ord 25-01-
                                                                    03
W Main St   Southbound Stop     Marcella Dr W Main St    1          Ord 25-01-
                                                                    03
W Main St   Southbound Stop     Jennifer Dr W Main St    1          Ord 25-01-
                                                                    03
W Main St   All-Way    Stop     Turner Dr / W Main St /  4          Ord 25-01-
                                W Main St   Turner Dr               03
US 150 (W   Southbound Stop     Wood Glen   US 150 (W    1          Ord 25-01-
Oak St)                         Dr          Oak St)                 03
Wood Glen   Northbound Yield    Wood Glen   Taylor St    1          Ord 25-01-
                                Dr                                  03
Wood Glen   Northbound Stop     Taylor St   W Dunbar St  1          Ord 25-01-
                                                                    03
Wood Glen   Northbound Stop     Taylor St   W Dunbar St  1          Ord 25-01-
                                                                    03
Wood Glen   All-Way    Stop     Turner Dr / W Dunbar St  4          Ord 25-01-
                                W Dunbar St / Turner Dr             03
US 150 (W   Northbound Stop     Hickory St  US 150 (W    1          Ord 25-01-
Oak St)                                     Oak St)                 03
Zindar's    Eastbound  Stop     Hickory St  Hickory St   1          Ord 25-01-
Industrial                                                          03
                                Crowley Rd  W State St /            Ord 25-01-
W State St  All-Way    Stop     / W State   Crowley Rd   3          03
                                St
W State St  Northbound Stop     Tamula Dr   W State St   1          Ord 25-01-
                                                                    03
Fairview    Westbound  Yield    North St    Turner Dr    1          Ord 25-01-
                                                                    03
Fairview    Eastbound  Yield    North St    McKinley Dr  1          Ord 25-01-
                                                                    03
Fairview    Southbound Stop     Turner Dr   W Main St    1          Ord 25-01-
                                                                    03
Fairview    Southbound Stop     McKinley Dr W Main St    1          Ord 25-01-
                                                                    03
W Main St   Southbound Stop     School Dr   W Main St    1          Ord 25-01-
                                                                    03
W Dunbar St Northbound Stop     West St     W Dunbar St  1          Ord 25-01-
                                                                    03
W Union St  Northbound Stop     Market St   W Union St   1          Ord 25-01-
                                                                    03
US 150 (W   Southbound Stop     Turner Dr   US 150 (W    1          Ord 25-01-
Oak St)                                     Oak St)                 03
US 150 (W   Southbound                      US 150 (W               Ord 25-01-
Oak St)     ,          Stop     Market St   Oak St)      2          03
            Northbound
Division    All-Way    Stop     State St /  Division St  4          Ord 25-01-
Street                          Division St / State St              03
Division    All-Way    Stop     Main St /   Division St  4          Ord 25-01-
Street                          Division St / Main St               03
Division    Westbound  Stop     Maple St    Division St  1          Ord 25-01-
Street                                                              03
Division    Westbound, Stop     Dunbar St   Division St  2          Ord 25-01-
Street      Eastbound                                               03
Division    Westbound, Stop     Union St    Division St  2          Ord 25-01-
Street      Eastbound                                               03
Division    Westbound, Stop     Sangamon St Division St  2          Ord 25-01-
Street      Eastbound                                               03
IL 47 (S    Westbound,          Washington                          Ord 25-01-
Division    Eastbound  Stop     St          Division St  2          03
St)
W of        Westbound  Yield    Hickory St  West St      1          Ord 25-01-
Division St                                                         03
W of        Eastbound  Stop     Hickory St  Washington   1          Ord 25-01-
Division St                                 St                      03
W of        Northbound Stop     Market St   Washington   1          Ord 25-01-
Division St                                 St                      03
IL 47 (S    Westbound,          Jefferson                           Ord 25-01-
Division    Eastbound  Stop     St          Division St  2          03
St)
IL 47 (S                                                            Ord 25-01-
Division    Westbound  Stop     Walnut St   Division St  1          03
St)
IL 47 (S                                                            Ord 25-01-
Division    Westbound  Stop     Peacock Dr  Division St  1          03
St)
IL 47 (S                                                            Ord 25-01-
Division    Westbound  Stop     Fawn Dr     Division St  1          03
St)
Lakes at    Southbound Stop     River Bluff Riverbend    1          Ord 25-01-
Riverbend                       Dr          Blvd                    03
Lakes at    Eastbound  Yield    River Bluff River Bluff  1          Ord 25-01-
Riverbend                       Ct          Dr                      03
Lakes at    Northbound Stop     Deerfield   Riverbend    1          Ord 25-01-
Riverbend                       Dr          Blvd                    03
Lakes at    Southbound Stop     Morel Ct    Riverbend    1          Ord 25-01-
Riverbend                                   Blvd                    03
Lakes at    Eastbound  Yield    Beaver Lake Beaver Lake  1          Ord 25-01-
Riverbend                       Ct          Dr                      03
Lakes at    Southbound          Beaver Lake Riverbend               Ord 25-01-
Riverbend   ,          Stop     Dr          Blvd         2          03
            Northbound
                                CR 150E /   Mid America             Ord 25-01-
CR 150E     All-Way    Stop     Mid America Rd / CR 150E 3          03
                                Rd
CR 150E     Eastbound  Stop     CR 2000N    CR 150E      1          Ord 25-01-
                                                                    03
IL 47 (S    Westbound,          Riverbend                           Ord 25-01-
Division    Eastbound  Stop     Blvd/ South Division St  2          03
St)                             Mahomet Rd
IL 47 (S    Westbound,          Mid America                         Ord 25-01-
Division    Eastbound  Stop     Rd/ Country Division St  2          03
St)                             Ridge Dr
IL 47 (S                        Copperhill                          Ord 25-01-
Division    Westbound  Stop     Dr          Division St  1          03
St)
Wendover    Northbound Stop     Dorchester  Dorchester   1          Ord 25-01-
Heights                         Ct          Dr                      03
Wendover    Westbound  Stop     Weathering  Dorchester   1          Ord 25-01-
Heights                         Dr          Dr                      03
Wendover    Westbound  Stop     Andover Dr  Weathering   1          Ord 25-01-
Heights                                     Dr                      03
E State     Southbound Stop     Dorchester  E State St   1          Ord 25-01-
Street                          Dr                                  03
E State     Northbound Stop     Augusta Dr  E State St   1          Ord 25-01-
Street                                                              03
E State     Northbound Stop     Augusta Dr  E State St   1          Ord 25-01-
Street                                                              03
E State                         Franklin St E State St /            Ord 25-01-
Street      All-Way    Stop     / E State   Franklin St  3          03
                                St
E State     Southbound Stop     Andover Dr  E State St   1          Ord 25-01-
Street                                                              03
E State     Southbound Stop     Jefferson   E State St   1          Ord 25-01-
Street                          St                                  03
E State     Westbound  Stop     Locust St   Jefferson St 1          Ord 25-01-
Street                                                              03
Franklin                        Franklin St Lincoln St /            Ord 25-01-
Street      All-Way    Stop     / Lincoln   Franklin St  3          03
                                St
Franklin    Northbound Stop     Elm St      Franklin St  1          Ord 25-01-
Street                                                              03
Franklin    Southbound          Jefferson                           Ord 25-01-
Street      ,          Stop     St          Franklin St  2          03
            Northbound
E Main      Northbound Stop     Walnut St   E Main St    1          Ord 25-01-
Street                                                              03
E Main      Northbound Stop     Center St   E Main St    1          Ord 25-01-
Street                                                              03
E Main      All-Way    Stop     Lincoln St  E Main St /  4          Ord 25-01-
Street                          / E Main St Lincoln St              03
E Main      All-Way    Stop     Elm St / E  E Main St /  4          Ord 25-01-
Street                          Main St     Elm St                  03
E Main      Southbound          Jefferson                           Ord 25-01-
Street      ,          Stop     St          E Main St    2          03
            Northbound
IL 47       Westbound,                      IL 47                   Ord 25-01-
(Lombard    Eastbound  Stop     E Main St   (Lombard St) 2          03
St)
Maple       Westbound, Stop     Maple St    Walnut St    2          Ord 25-01-
Street      Eastbound                                               03
Maple       Westbound  Stop     Maple St    Center St    1          Ord 25-01-
Street                                                              03
E Dunbar    All-Way    Stop     Walnut St / E Dunbar St  4          Ord 25-01-
Street                          E Dunbar St / Walnut St             03
E Dunbar    Southbound                                              Ord 25-01-
Street      ,          Stop     Center St   E Dunbar St  2          03
            Northbound
E Dunbar    Westbound, Stop     E Dunbar St Lincoln St   2          Ord 25-01-
Street      Eastbound                                               03
E Dunbar    Northbound Stop     Vine St     E Dunbar St  1          Ord 25-01-
Street                                                              03
E Dunbar    Eastbound  Stop     E Dunbar St Elm St       1          Ord 25-01-
Street                                                              03
Union       Southbound                                              Ord 25-01-
Street      ,          Stop     E Union St  Walnut St    2          03
            Northbound
Union       Southbound                                              Ord 25-01-
Street      ,          Stop     Center St   E Union St   2          03
            Northbound
Union       Southbound Stop     Lincoln St  E Union St   1          Ord 25-01-
Street                                                              03
Union       Southbound                                              Ord 25-01-
Street      ,          Stop     Vine St     E Union St   2          03
            Northbound
Union       Westbound, Stop     E Union St  Elm St       2          Ord 25-01-
Street      Eastbound                                               03
Union       Northbound Stop     Jefferson   E Union St   1          Ord 25-01-
Street                          St                                  03
US 150 (E   Southbound                      US 150 (E               Ord 25-01-
Oak St)     ,          Stop     Walnut St   Oak St)      2          03
            Northbound
US 150 (E   Southbound                      US 150 (E               Ord 25-01-
Oak St)     ,          Stop     Center St   Oak St)      2          03
            Northbound
US 150 (E   Southbound                      US 150 (E               Ord 25-01-
Oak St)     ,          Stop     Vine St     Oak St)      2          03
            Northbound
US 150 (E   Southbound                      US 150 (E               Ord 25-01-
Oak St)     ,          Stop     Elm St      Oak St)      2          03
            Northbound
US 150 (E   Southbound          Jefferson   US 150 (E               Ord 25-01-
Oak St)     ,          Stop     St          Oak St)      2          03
            Northbound
E Sangamon  Westbound, Stop     Walnut St   E Sangamon   2          Ord 25-01-
St          Eastbound                       St                      03
E Sangamon                      Center St / E Sangamon              Ord 25-01-
St          All-Way    Stop     E Sangamon  St / Center  4          03
                                St          St
E Sangamon  Southbound Stop     Vine St     E Sangamon   1          Ord 25-01-
St                                          St                      03
E Sangamon  Eastbound  Stop     E Sangamon  Elm St       1          Ord 25-01-
St                              St                                  03
Adams       Westbound  Stop     Adams St    Walnut St    1          Ord 25-01-
Street                                                              03
Adams       Eastbound  Stop     Adams St    Marietta Dr  1          Ord 25-01-
Street                                                              03
E                               E                                   Ord 25-01-
Washington  Eastbound  Stop     Washington  Walnut St    1          03
St                              St
E Jackson   Eastbound  Stop     E Jackson   Walnut St    1          Ord 25-01-
St                              St                                  03
Sunnydale   Northbound Stop     Center St   Marietta Dr  1          Ord 25-01-
Acres                                                               03
Sunnydale   Southbound                                              Ord 25-01-
Acres       ,          Stop     Marietta Dr Peacock Dr   2          03
            Northbound
Sunnydale   All-Way    Stop     Center St / Peacock Dr / 4          Ord 25-01-
Acres                           Peacock Dr  Center St               03
Sunnydale   Southbound                                              Ord 25-01-
Acres       ,          Stop     Fawn Dr     Peacock Dr   2          03
            Northbound
Sunnydale   Eastbound  Stop     Peacock Dr  N & S Garden 1          Ord 25-01-
Acres                                       Ct                      03
Riverview   Southbound Stop     Marietta Dr Fawn Dr      1          Ord 25-01-
Sub                                                                 03
Riverview   Southbound Stop     Center St   Fawn Dr      1          Ord 25-01-
Sub                                                                 03
Riverview   Southbound Stop     Vista View  Fawn Dr      1          Ord 25-01-
Sub                             Ct                                  03
Country     Southbound Stop     Mitchell Dr South        1          Ord 25-01-
Ridge Sub                                   Mahomet Rd              03
Country     Northbound Stop     Southfield  South        1          Ord 25-01-
Ridge Sub                       Dr          Mahomet Rd              03
Country     Southbound                      South                   Ord 25-01-
Ridge Sub   ,          Stop     Deer Run Dr Mahomet Rd   2          03
            Northbound
Country     Eastbound  Stop     North Brook Orchard Dr   1          Ord 25-01-
Ridge Sub                       Ct                                  03
Country     Westbound  Stop     South Brook Orchard Dr   1          Ord 25-01-
Ridge Sub                       Ct                                  03
Country     Southbound Stop     Southfield  Orchard Dr   1          Ord 25-01-
Ridge Sub                       Dr                                  03
Country     Northbound Stop     Cypress     Orchard Dr   1          Ord 25-01-
Ridge Sub                       Pointe Ct                           03
Country     Westbound, Stop     Orchard Dr  Deer Run Dr  2          Ord 25-01-
Ridge Sub   Eastbound                                               03
Country     Westbound  Stop     Dove Dr     Orchard Dr   1          Ord 25-01-
Ridge Sub                                                           03
Country     Eastbound  Stop     Dove Dr     Blue Bird Dr 1          Ord 25-01-
Ridge Sub                                                           03
Country     Westbound  Stop     Hawk Dr     Orchard Dr   1          Ord 25-01-
Ridge Sub                                                           03
Country     Northbound Stop     Finch Dr    Hawk Dr      1          Ord 25-01-
Ridge Sub                                                           03
Country                         Hawk Dr /   Blue Bird Dr            Ord 25-01-
Ridge Sub   All-Way    Stop     Blue Bird   / Hawk Dr    4          03
                                Dr
Country     Westbound  Stop     Elk Dr      Orchard Dr   1          Ord 25-01-
Ridge Sub                                                           03
Country     Eastbound  Stop     Elk Dr      Finch Dr     1          Ord 25-01-
Ridge Sub                                                           03
Country     Westbound, Stop     Orchard Dr  Country      2          Ord 25-01-
Ridge Sub   Eastbound                       Ridge Dr                03
Country     Southbound Stop     Horizon Ct  Country      1          Ord 25-01-
Ridge Sub                                   Ridge Dr                03
Country                         Deer Run Dr Country                 Ord 25-01-
Ridge Sub   All-Way    Stop     / Country   Ridge Dr /   4          03
                                Ridge Dr    Deer Run Dr
Country                         Finch Dr /  Country                 Ord 25-01-
Ridge Sub   All-Way    Stop     Country     Ridge Dr /   4          03
                                Ridge Dr    Finch Dr
Country     Southbound Stop     Blue Bird   Country      1          Ord 25-01-
Ridge Sub                       Dr          Ridge Dr                03
Sangamon    Westbound  Stop     Isabella Dr Deer Run Dr  1          Ord 25-01-
Fields                                                              03
Sangamon    Southbound Stop     Finch Dr    Isabella Dr  1          Ord 25-01-
Fields                                                              03
Sangamon    Westbound  Stop     Wheatley Dr Deer Run Dr  1          Ord 25-01-
Fields                                                              03
Sangamon    All-Way    Stop     Collins Dr  Deer Run Dr  4          Ord 25-11-
Fields                                                              01
Sangamon    Eastbound  Stop     Wheatley Dr Dahlia Drive 1          Ord 25-11-
Fields                                                              01
IL 47                                       IL 47                   Ord 25-01-
(Lombard    Eastbound  Stop     Reserve Ct  (Lombard St) 1          03
St)
            Southbound                                              Ord 25-01-
Thornewood  ,          Stop     Quarry Rd   Reserve Ct   2          03
            Northbound
Thornewood  Westbound  Stop     Ashford Ct  Quarry Rd    1          Ord 25-01-
                                                                    03
Thornewood  Westbound  Stop     White Oak   Quarry Rd    1          Ord 25-01-
                                Rd                                  03
                                White Oak   Briarwood Ln
Thornewood  All-Way    Stop     Rd /        / White Oak  4          Ord 25-01-
                                Briarwood   Rd                      03
                                Ln
            Southbound          Cottonwoo d White Oak Rd            Ord 25-01-
Thornewood  ,          Stop     Dr & Ct     & Ct         2          03
            Northbound
Thornewood  Westbound  Stop     Woodberry   Briarwood Ln 1          Ord 25-01-
                                Dr                                  03
Thornewood  Southbound Stop     Cottonwoo d Woodberry Dr 1          Ord 25-01-
                                Dr                                  03
Thornewood  Westbound  Stop     Riverwood   Woodberry Dr 1          Ord 25-01-
                                Pt                                  03
Thornewood  Westbound  Stop     Ridgefield  Briarwood Ln 1          Ord 25-01-
                                Dr                                  03
Thornewood  Northbound Stop     Stoneridge  Ridgefield   1          Ord 25-01-
                                Ct          Dr                      03
Thornewood  Southbound Stop     Woodberry   Ridgefield   1          Ord 25-01-
                                Dr          Dr                      03
IL 47                           Oak Valley  IL 47                   Ord 25-01-
(Lombard    Westbound  Stop     Rd          (Lombard St) 1          03
St)
Thornewood  Northbound Stop     Stonecrest  Oak Valley   1          Ord 25-01-
                                Dr          Rd                      03
Thornewood  Northbound Stop     Brookhaven  Oak Valley   1          Ord 25-01-
                                Dr          Rd                      03
Thornewood  Northbound Stop     Garwood Dr  Oak Valley   1          Ord 25-01-
                                            Rd                      03
Thornewood  Eastbound  Stop     Oak Valley  Briarwood Ln 1          Ord 25-01-
                                Rd                                  03
IL 47                           Thornewoo d IL 47                   Ord 25-01-
(Lombard    Westbound  Stop     Dr          (Lombard St) 1          03
St)
Thornewood  Southbound Stop     Stonecrest  Thornewood   1          Ord 25-01-
                                Dr          Dr                      03
Thornewood  Southbound Stop     Brookhaven  Thornewood   1          Ord 25-01-
                                Dr          Dr                      03
Thornewood  Southbound Stop     Garwood Dr  Thornewood   1          Ord 25-01-
                                            Dr                      03
                                Thornewoo d Briarwood Ln
Thornewood  All-Way    Stop     Dr /        / Thornewood 3          Ord 25-01-
                                Briarwood   Dr                      03
                                Ln
Thornewood  Westbound  Stop     Forest      Briarwood Ln 1          Ord 25-01-
                                Ridge Rd                            03
Thornewood  Northbound Stop     Sandstone   Forest Ridge 1          Ord 25-01-
                                Ct          Rd                      03
Thornewood  Northbound Stop     Willowgrov  Forest Ridge 1          Ord 25-01-
                                e Ln        Rd                      03
Thornewood  Southbound Stop     Briarwood   Ravenwood Dr 1          Ord 25-01-
                                Ln                                  03
Thornewood  Southbound Stop     Buttonbush  Ravenwood Dr 1          Ord 25-11-
                                Ct                                  01
IL 47                           Briarcliff  IL 47                   Ord 25-01-
(Lombard    Westbound  Stop     Ln          (Lombard St) 1          03
St)
            Southbound          Beaver      Briarcliff              Ord 25-01-
Briarcliff  ,          Stop     Creek Ln    Ln           2          03
            Northbound
Briarcliff  Northbound Stop     Lake Point  Briarcliff   1          Ord 25-01-
                                Ln          Ln                      03
Briarcliff  Northbound Stop     Hillside Ln Briarcliff   1          Ord 25-01-
                                            Ln                      03
Briarcliff  Northbound Stop     Lakeside Ln Briarcliff   1          Ord 25-01-
                                            Ln                      03
Briarcliff  Northbound Stop     Riverview   Briarcliff   1          Ord 25-01-
                                Ln          Ln                      03
Briarcliff  Northbound Stop     Hawthorn Ln Briarcliff   1          Ord 25-01-
                                            Ln                      03
Briarcliff  Northbound Stop     Wildwood Ln Briarcliff   1          Ord 25-01-
                                            Ln                      03
IL 47                                       IL 47                   Ord 25-01-
(Lombard    Westbound  Stop     Eastwood Dr (Lombard St) 1          03
St)
            Southbound                                              Ord 25-01-
Eastwood    ,          Stop     East St     Franklin St  2          03
            Northbound
Eastwood    Eastbound  Stop     E Main St   East St      1          Ord 25-01-
                                                                    03
US 150 (E   Northbound Stop     McDougal Rd US 150 (E    1          Ord 25-01-
Oak St)                                     Oak St)                 03
Riverside   Westbound  Stop     Pin Oak Dr  McDougal Rd  1          Ord 25-01-
Sub                                                                 03
Riverside   Northbound Yield    Riverside   Riverside Dr 1          Ord 25-01-
Sub                             Ct                                  03
Riverside   Eastbound  Yield    Riverside   McDougal Rd  1          Ord 25-01-
Sub                             Dr                                  03
Riverside   Westbound  Yield    Sunrise Cir McDougal Rd  1          Ord 25-01-
Sub                                                                 03
Riverside   Westbound  Yield    Penny Ln    McDougal Rd  1          Ord 25-01-
Sub                                                                 03
US 150 (E   Northbound Stop     Sunny Acres US 150 (E    1          Ord 25-01-
Oak St)                         Rd          Oak St)                 03
Sunny Acres Eastbound  Stop     Timber Dr   Sunny Acres  1          Ord 25-01-
                                            Rd                      03
Sunny Acres Eastbound  Stop     Pin Oak Dr  Sunny Acres  1          Ord 25-01-
                                            Rd                      03
Sunny Acres Eastbound  Stop     Maple Tree  Sunny Acres  1          Ord 25-01-
                                Ln          Rd                      03
                                Oak Creek   Sunny Acres
Sunny Acres All-Way    Stop     Rd & Cir /  Rd / Oak     4          Ord 25-01-
                                Sunny Acres Creek Rd &              03
                                Rd          Cir
                                Sunny Acres South
Whisper     All-Way    Stop     Rd / South  Mahomet Rd / 4          Ord 25-01-
Meadow                          Mahomet Rd  Sunny Acres             03
                                            Rd
Whisper     Westbound  Stop     Farm Lake   Whisper      1          Ord 25-01-
Meadow                          Dr          Meadow Ln               03
Whisper     Eastbound  Stop     Farm Lake   Sunny Acres  1          Ord 25-01-
Meadow                          Dr          Rd                      03
Whisper     Westbound  Stop     Morningsid  Whisper      1          Ord 25-01-
Meadow                          e Ln        Meadow Ln               03
Whisper     Eastbound  Stop     Morningsid  Sunny Acres  1          Ord 25-01-
Meadow                          e Ln        Rd                      03
Harvest     Northbound Stop     Littlefield South        1          Ord 25-01-
Edge                            Ln          Mahomet Rd              03
Harvest     Southbound          Littlefield Country                 Ord 25-01-
Edge        ,          Stop     Ln          Ridge Dr     2          03
            Northbound
Harvest     Westbound  Stop     CR 425E     South        1          Ord 25-01-
Edge                                        Mahomet Rd              03
Harvest     Southbound Stop     Garner Dr   Country      1          Ord 25-01-
Edge                                        Ridge Dr                03
Harvest     Southbound Stop     Massey Dr   Country      1          Ord 25-11-
Edge                                        Ridge Dr                01
Harvest     Southbound                      Country                 Ord 25-11-
Edge        ,          Stop     Allis Dr    Ridge Dr     2          01
            Northbound
Harvest     Eastbound  Stop     Country     CR 425 E     1          Ord 25-11-
Edge                            Ridge Dr                            01
Prairieside Southbound Stop     Tinley      South        1          Ord 25-01-
                                Drive       Mahomet Rd              03
Prairieside Northbound Stop     Milton Ct   Tinley Drive 1          Ord 25-11-
                                                                    01
                                South
South                           Mahomet Rd  Churchill Rd
Mahomet     All-Way    Yield    (Roundabo   / South      4          Ord 25-01-
Road                            ut) /       Mahomet Rd              03
                                Churchill
                                Rd
                                South
South                           Mahomet Rd  Purnell Rd /            Ord 25-01-
Mahomet     All-Way    Yield    (Roundabo   South        3          03
Road                            ut) /       Mahomet Rd
                                Purnell Rd
South                           South       Prairieview             Ord 25-01-
Mahomet     Eastbound  Stop     Mahomet Rd  Road         1          03
Road
Oak Creek   Northbound Yield    Cross Creek Cross Creek  1          Ord 25-01-
                                Ct          Rd                      03
Oak Creek   Northbound Stop     Cross Creek Oak Creek Rd 1          Ord 25-01-
                                Rd                                  03
Oak Creek   Westbound  Yield    Walnut      Oak Creek Rd 1          Ord 25-01-
                                Creek Ct                            03
Oak Creek   Westbound  Yield    Hickory     Oak Creek Rd 1          Ord 25-01-
                                Tree Ct                             03
US 150 (E   Northbound Stop     Oak Creek   US 150 (E    1          Ord 25-01-
Oak St)                         Rd          Oak St)                 03
Conway Farm Southbound Stop     Alydar Dr   Cross Creek  1          Ord 25-01-
                                            Rd                      03
Conway Farm Southbound Stop     Cozzene Dr  Cross Creek  1          Ord 25-01-
                                            Rd                      03
Conway Farm Northbound Stop     Cozzene Dr  Alydar Dr    1          Ord 25-01-
                                                                    03
Conway Farm Eastbound  Stop     Alydar Dr   Cross Creek  1          Ord 25-01-
                                            Rd                      03
Conway Farm Eastbound  Stop     Caro Ct     Heather Dr   1          Ord 25-01-
                                                                    03
US 150 (E   Southbound                      US 150 (E               Ord 25-01-
Oak St)     ,          Stop     Heather Dr  Oak St)      2          03
            Northbound
Conway Farm Westbound  Stop     Patton Dr   Heather Dr   1          Ord 25-01-
                                                                    03
Conway Farm Westbound  Stop     Halo Dr     Heather Dr   1          Ord 25-01-
                                                                    03
Conway Farm Eastbound  Stop     Halo Dr     Roberto Rd   1          Ord 25-01-
                                                                    03
Conway Farm Westbound  Stop     Kassen Ave  Roberto Rd   1          Ord 25-01-
                                                                    03
                                Churchill
                                Rd
                                (Roundabo   Kassen Ave &            Ord 25-01-
Conway Farm All-Way    Yield    ut) /       Bulldog Dr / 4          03
                                Kassen Ave  Churchill Rd
                                & Bulldog
                                Dr
Conway Farm Eastbound  Stop     Delane Dr   Churchill Rd 1          Ord 25-01-
                                                                    03
Conway Farm Westbound, Stop     Patton Dr   Churchill Rd 2          Ord 25-01-
            Eastbound                                               03
Conway Farm Southbound Stop     Commercia l Patton Dr    1          Ord 25-01-
                                Dr                                  03
US 150 (E   Southbound          Cates Dr &  US 150 (E               Ord 25-01-
Oak St)     ,          Stop     Commercia l Oak St)      2          03
            Northbound          Dr
                                            Lake of the             Ord 25-01-
Windwood    Westbound  Stop     Windwood Dr Woods Rd (CH 1          03
                                            50)
Windwood    Northbound Stop     Windwood Dr Jeffery Dr   1          Ord 25-01-
                                                                    03
Lake of the                                 Lake of the             Ord 25-01-
Woods Rd    Eastbound  Stop     Pearl St    Woods Rd (CH 1          03
                                            50)
Lake of the                                 Lake of the             Ord 25-01-
Woods Rd    Eastbound  Stop     McDougal Rd Woods Rd (CH 1          03
                                            50)
Sandy Ridge Westbound  Stop     Heather Dr  Jeffery Dr   1          Ord 25-01-
                                                                    03
Sandy Ridge Westbound  Stop     Gladney Ct  Heather Dr   1          Ord 25-01-
                                                                    03
Sandy Ridge Northbound Stop     Amy Dr      Kimela Dr    1          Ord 25-01-
                                                                    03
Sandy Ridge Northbound Stop     Jody Dr     Kimela Dr    1          Ord 25-01-
                                                                    03
Sandy Ridge Westbound, Stop     Kimela Dr   Jeffery Dr   2          Ord 25-01-
            Eastbound                                               03
Sandy Ridge Southbound Stop     Jody Dr     Amy Dr       1          Ord 25-01-
                                                                    03
Sandy Ridge Northbound Yield    Sandy Ridge Amy Dr       1          Ord 25-01-
                                Rd                                  03
US 150 (E   Southbound Stop     Sandy Ridge US 150 (E    1          Ord 25-01-
Oak St)                         Rd          Oak St)                 03
Sandy Ridge Southbound Stop     Amy Dr      Jeffery Dr   1          Ord 25-01-
                                                                    03
Sandy Ridge Westbound  Stop     Amy Dr      Kimela Dr    1          Ord 25-01-
                                                                    03
Sandy Ridge Westbound  Stop     Oliger Dr   Heather Dr   1          Ord 25-01-
                                                                    03
Hunters     Southbound          Cole Ln &                           Ord 25-01-
Ridge       ,          Stop     Ct          Oliger Dr    2          03
            Northbound
Hunters     All-Way    Stop     Cates Dr /  Oliger Dr /  4          Ord 25-01-
Ridge                           Oliger Dr   Cates Dr                03
Hunters     Southbound Stop     Rapp Dr     Oliger Dr    1          Ord 25-01-
Ridge                                                               03
Hunters     Northbound Stop     Cates Dr    Rapp Dr      1          Ord 25-01-
Ridge                                                               03
Hunters     Westbound, Stop     Oliger Dr   Churchill Rd 2          Ord 25-01-
Ridge       Eastbound                                               03
Hunters     Westbound  Stop     Hunters     Cates Dr     1          Ord 25-01-
Ridge                           Ridge Ct                            03
Hunters     Westbound  Stop     Timberwolf  Cates Dr     1          Ord 25-01-
Ridge                           Ln                                  03
Hunters     Westbound, Stop     Hunters     Churchill Rd 2          Ord 25-01-
Ridge       Eastbound           Ridge Ct                            03
Hunters     Westbound, Stop     Timberwolf  Churchill Rd 2          Ord 25-01-
Ridge       Eastbound           Ln                                  03
US 150 (E   Southbound Stop     Purnell Dr  US 150 (E    1          Ord 25-01-
Oak St)                                     Oak St)                 03
JoNell      Westbound  Stop     Jones Ct    Purnell Dr   1          Ord 25-01-
                                                                    03
The Knolls  Eastbound  Stop     Patton Dr   Prairieview  1          Ord 25-01-
                                            Road                    03
US 150 (E   Southbound Stop     Farm Credit US 150 (E    1          Ord 25-01-
Oak St)                         Dr          Oak St)                 03
Prairieview Westbound  Stop     Farm Credit Farm Credit  1          Ord 25-11-
Commons                         entrance    Drive                   01
Prairieview Southbound Stop     Farm Credit US 150       2          Ord 25-11-
Commons                         Drive                               01
Summit                          Summit      Lake of the             Ord 25-01-
Ridge       Northbound Stop     Ridge Rd    Woods Rd (CH 1          03
                                            50)
Lake Ridge  Southbound Stop     Lake Ridge  Tin Cup Rd   1          Ord 25-01-
                                Ct          (CH 54)                 03
Fox Run     Northbound Stop     Fox Run Dr  Tin Cup Rd   1          Ord 25-01-
                                            (CH 54)                 03
Lake View   Northbound Stop     Aspen Ct    Juniper Dr   1          Ord 25-01-
                                                                    03
            Southbound          Red Bud Dr                          Ord 25-01-
Lake View   ,          Stop     & Ct        Juniper Dr   2          03
            Northbound
N                                           Prairieview             Ord 25-01-
Prairieview Eastbound  Stop     Clark St    Rd           1          03
Road
Prairie     Eastbound  Stop     Macon St    Prairieview  1          Ord 25-01-
Crossing                                    Rd                      03
Prairie     Westbound  Stop     Macon St    Red Bud Dr   1          Ord 25-01-
Crossing                                                            03
Prairie     Southbound Stop     Prairie     Macon St     1          Ord 25-01-
Crossing                        Crossing Dr                         03
Prairie     Westbound  Stop     Prairie     Red Bud Dr   1          Ord 25-01-
Crossing                        Grass Ln                            03
Prairie     Westbound  Stop     Rylan Rd    Red Bud Dr   1          Ord 25-01-
Crossing                                                            03
Prairie     Southbound Stop     Woodsprin g Kinley Dr    1          Ord 25-01-
Crossing                        Dr                                  03
                                            Lake of the             Ord 25-01-
Quail Run   Westbound  Stop     Dennis Dr   Woods Rd (CH 1          03
                                            50)
                                Quail Run   Lake of the             Ord 25-01-
Quail Run   Westbound  Stop     Dr          Woods Rd (CH 1          03
                                            50)
Cobble      Eastbound  Stop     Cobble      Lake of the  1          Ord 25-01-
Creek Farm                      Creek Dr    Woods Rd                03
Cobble      Southbound Stop     Cobble      West Lake Dr 1          Ord 25-01-
Creek Farm                      Creek Dr                            03
Deer Hollow Westbound  Stop     Slade Ln    Lake of the  1          Ord 25-01-
                                            Woods Rd                03
Deer Hollow Northbound Stop     John Dr     Slade Ln     1          Ord 25-01-
                                                                    03
Deer Hollow Eastbound  Stop     Deer Ct     John Dr      1          Ord 25-01-
                                                                    03
Ridge Creek Southbound Stop     Sweet Grass Slade Ln     1          Ord 25-01-
                                Dr                                  03
Ridge Creek Northbound Stop     Rolling     Slade Ln     1          Ord 25-01-
                                Hills Dr                            03
Ridge Creek Southbound Stop     Golden Rod  Slade Ln     1          Ord 25-01-
                                Dr                                  03
Ridge Creek Westbound  Stop     Blue Stem   Golden Rod   1          Ord 25-01-
                                Ct          Dr                      03
Ridge Creek Eastbound  Stop     Prairie     Golden Rod   1          Ord 25-01-
                                Rose Dr     Dr                      03
Ridge Creek Eastbound  Stop     Prairie     Sweet Grass  1          Ord 25-11-
                                Rose Dr     Dr                      01
 
(Ord. 25-01-03, passed 1-28-2025; Ord. 25-11-01, passed 11-25-2025)
§ 71.99 PENALTY.
   Any violation of this chapter shall be punishable by a fine of not less than
$150.
(Ord. 21-07-01, passed 7-27-2021)
TITLE IX: GENERAL REGULATIONS
   Chapter
      
90.   ALARM SYSTEMS
      
91.   STREETS AND SIDEWALKS
      
92.   ANIMAL CONTROL
      
93.   PUBLIC NUISANCES
      
94.   TREES
      
95.   PARKS AND RECREATION
      
96.   SMALL WIRELESS FACILITIES
      
97.   SPECIAL EVENTS
CHAPTER 90: ALARM SYSTEMS
Section
   
90.01   Definitions
   
90.02   Alarm registration required
   
90.03   Show-up fees
   
90.04   Violations
   
90.05   Limitation of liability
   
90.06   Effective date
 
   
90.99   Penalty
§ 90.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ALARM. An audible or mechanical or electrical signal from a detection system
which indicates a disturbance of the detection system or some other activity
that requires urgent attention.
   ALARM SYSTEM. Any assembly of equipment which is designed or functions to
provide an audible or mechanical or electrical signal which indicates a
disturbance or some other activity that requires urgent attention.
   ALARM USER. Any person who owns or is in control of premises protected or
intended to be protected by an alarm system.
   AUTOMATIC DIALING DEVICE. A device which is connected to a telephone line
and is programmed to transmit to a selected telephone number a voice message or
a code signal which indicates a need for an emergency response.
   CHIEF. The Village Marshal or the Marshal’s designee(s).
   EMERGENCY. The reasonable belief that immediate action by police officers
will prevent the commission of a crime or will prevent the escape of a person
who has committed a crime or will assist a person in need of immediate medical
attention.
   FACILITY AND PREMISES. The location or the structure or the property of an
alarm user, and includes any and all walk-up windows, drive-up facilities or
other auxiliary structures associated with and located within 100 feet of the
primary structure provided that the auxiliary structure is owned by the same
entity as the primary structure and is physically connected to the primary
structure. Each individually owned or operated business within a mall, shopping
center or cluster of stores shall be considered as one FACILITY AND PREMISES.
Each individually owned or occupied condominium, apartment or other area used
for residential purposes shall be considered as one FACILITY AND PREMISES.
   FALSE ALARM. The transmission of an alarm signal requesting an emergency
response by the Police Department of the village in instances where an
emergency situation does not, in fact, exist, and to which a police officer or
officers of the village may personally respond; provided, however, a FALSE
ALARM shall not include a situation in which the system has operable stand by
battery power and the transmission is caused by an electrical power outage or
is caused by a telephone line interruption. In case of a dispute, the burden of
establishing the electrical power outage or the telephone line interruption
shall be on the user asserting the cause.
   INTERCONNECT.  To connect an alarm system to a telephone line, either
through an automatic dialing device or through a mechanical device which
utilizes a telephone, for the purpose of transmitting an emergency message upon
activation or disturbance of an alarm system.
(Ord. 89-12-1, passed 12-19-1989)
§ 90.02 ALARM REGISTRATION REQUIRED.
   (A)   Each alarm user shall register with the Chief each facility or
premises at which an alarm system is located.
      (1)   The registration shall be made as follows:
         (a)   With respect to any alarm system installed prior to January 1,
1990, the registration shall be made on or before February 28, 1990; and
         (b)   With respect to any alarm system installed on or after January
1, 1990, the registration shall be made within five business days following the
date of the installation but, in any event, prior to the activation of the
alarm system by an alarm user.
      (2)   Each alarm user shall be required to register only one time for
each facility or premises. Any registration shall not be transferable, either
to a different alarm user or to a different facility or premises.
   (B)   All the registrations of alarm systems shall be made on forms to be
provided by the Chief and shall contain the information as may reasonably be
required by the Chief to accomplish the purposes of this chapter, including the
names and telephone numbers of the persons who are authorized by the alarm user
to secure the facility and premises upon which the alarm system is located and
exercise control over the alarm system during any hour of the day or night that
the alarm system may be activated or disturbed. It shall be the duty of any
alarm user to keep the names and telephone numbers of all the authorized
persons current.
   (C)   The fee for registration as an alarm user shall be a one-time fee of
$10. Governmental entities shall not be required to pay any registration fee
but shall be required to register as an alarm user as provided in this chapter.
(Ord. 89-12-1, passed 12-19-1989)
§ 90.03 SHOW-UP FEES.
   (A)   The village shall bill any alarm user of each facility or premises at
which an alarm system is located a show-up fee for responding to each false
alarm at the facility or premises which is caused by the alarm system of any
alarm user, in accordance with the following schedule:
      (1)   For all false alarms occurring within 30 days after registration of
the alarm system by the alarm user: no fee.
      (2)   For all false alarms occurring during any one-year calendar period
commencing January 1 of each year:
         (a)   One to four false alarms, no charge;
         (b)   Four to nine false alarms, $50 fee per false alarm; and
         (c)   Each false alarm after nine false alarms, $75 fee per false
alarm.
      (3)   For all false alarms occurring without registration as required by
this chapter, $75 fee per false alarm.
   (B)   All show-up fees shall be paid within 30 days of the date of billing
unless an appeal of the fees is filed in accordance with this chapter.
   (C)   Each individual facility or premises at which an alarm system is
located shall be counted separately and shall be billed show-up fees
accordingly.
   (D)   Any alarm user who is billed for show-up fees by the village may
appeal the billing of the fees to the Chief. Any appeal must be filed within 30
days from the date of billing.
   (E)   The Chief may direct abatement or refund of any billed show-up fee;
provided, however, that no abatement or refund of any billed show-up fee shall
be granted unless the alarm user is able to prove to the satisfaction of the
Chief that no false alarm occurred or that there is an error in the total
number of false alarms during any calendar year. Payment of the show-up fee
which is the subject of an appeal, if the appeal is denied, shall be due within
14 days from and after the Chief mails notice of the decision to the alarm
user.
(Ord. 89-12-1, passed 12-19-1989)
§ 90.04 VIOLATIONS.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any alarm user to interconnect, or for any
alarm user to allow the interconnection of, an automatic dialing device for an
alarm system to the telephone number or radio frequency assigned to the Village
Police Department or the telephone number or radio frequency assigned to any
police dispatching service used by the Village Police Department. See §
35.01 for the minimum fine.
   (B)   It shall be unlawful to use and maintain an alarm system without first
registering that alarm system with the Chief. See §
35.01 for the minimum fine.
   (C)   The following shall be prima facie proof of a violation of this
chapter:
      (1)   The receipt of a call from or in relation to an alarm system at a
facility or premises which is not registered by an alarm user as provided in
this chapter;
      (2)   A response by the Village Police Department to an alarm at a
facility or premises which is not registered by an alarm user as provided in
this chapter;
      (3)   The receipt of a call from an automatic dialing device by the
Village Police Department or its dispatching agency; and/or
      (4)   The interruption of the radio frequency assigned to the Police
Department or the Police Department’s dispatching agency by an automatic
detection device.
(Ord. 89-12-1, passed 12-19-1989) Penalty, see §
90.99
Cross-reference:
   Fine schedule, see §
35.01
§ 90.05 LIMITATION OF LIABILITY.
   Nothing contained within the provisions of this chapter shall be construed
or interpreted to mean or imply that the village or any of its officers,
employees or agents assumes any liability for any of the following:
   (A)   Any defect in the operation of any alarm system;
   (B)   Any failure or neglect to respond appropriately to an alarm from an
alarm system; or
   (C)   Any failure or neglect in connection with the installation and
operation of equipment, the transmission of an alarm by any means, prerecorded
alarm messages or the relaying of the alarms.
(Ord. 89-12-1, passed 12-19-1989)
§ 90.06 EFFECTIVE DATE.
   This chapter shall be in full force and effect from and after its passage,
approval and publication in accordance with the terms of ILCS Ch. 65, Act 5, §
1-2-4.
(Ord. 89-12-1, passed 12-19-1989)
§ 90.99 PENALTY.
   Any person violating the provisions of this chapter shall be punished by a
fine of not less than $50 nor more than $500. Each day that a violation is
allowed to continue under this chapter shall be considered as a separate
offense.
(Ord. 89-12-1, passed 12-19-1989)
CHAPTER 91: STREETS AND SIDEWALKS
Section
General Provisions
   
91.01   Sub-street utility excavation and trench backfill policy
   
91.02   Weight limits on village streets
Numbering of Buildings and Lots
   
91.15   General provisions
Moving Houses
   
91.30   Permit requirements; village approval
   
91.31   Effective date
 
   
91.99   Penalty
Cross-reference:
   Maintenance and construction, see
Chapter 150
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 91.01 SUB-STREET UTILITY EXCAVATION AND TRENCH BACKFILL POLICY.
   The village sub-street utility excavation and trench backfill policy is
hereby established. The policy shall become effective as of January 1, 1995 and
shall consist of the following provisions.
   (A)   Beginning on January 1, 1995 and thereafter, all street open cut
trenches made either to existing pavements or sidewalks or in future pavement
areas shall be backfilled utilizing one of two recommended methods: those being
the use of controlled low strength materials (CLSM) or, alternately, the
placement of thin (six-inch maximum) mechanically compacted lifts of CAS or
CA10 aggregate materials as approved by the village. Water jetting of the
aggregate backfill material will not be permitted. The proper backfill material
shall extend not less than two feet in each direction from the edge of the
pavement.
   (B)   CLSM is defined as a mixture of Portland Cement, fly ash, fine
aggregate and water. The mix shall be proportioned to provide a backfill
material which is self-compacting and capable of being excavated with hand
tools, if necessary, at a later date. Materials and proportioning shall comply
with the State Department of Transportation’s Special Provision for Controlled
Low-Strength Material as adopted on January 1, 1990 and revised on March 1,
1990, as amended from time to time.
   (C)   For both the CLSM and granular backfill methods, the top 12 inches of
the excavation shall be filled with soil of similar composition to that of the
adjacent subgrade. The 12 inches of soil shall be compacted to at least 95% of
maximum dry density. (AASHTO T99) with no more than 110% optimum moisture.
   (D)   For both the CLSM, operation limitations, measurement methods and
basis of payment, if applicable, shall all be in compliance with the IDOT
Special Provision for Controlled Low-Strength Material as adopted on January 1,
1990 and revised on March 1, 1990.
   (E)   When a trench is cut into an existing pavement or sidewalk, the
pavement shall be replaced in kind with a total thickness two inches greater
than existing to a maximum of ten inches. When restoring Portland Cement
concrete pavement, the entire slab into which the trench was cut shall be
removed and replaced. If the surface is either asphalt or oil and chip, a six-
inch thickness Portland Cement concrete base shall be installed and two inches
of bituminous concrete surface course shall be placed over the base.
Replacement pavement shall be installed no less than a distance of two feet in
each direction beyond the edge of the excavation trench.
   (F)   All utility structures (i.e., shut-off valves, vault boxes, lids,
poles, lines, markers and the like) that pose a threat to public safety shall
be replaced when directed by the Village Administrator or Water/Sewer
Superintendent. Failure to make the repairs within the approved time frame will
result in a penalty of $75 per day.
   (G)   Any pavement failures which may occur outside of the original restored
or repaired pavement or right-of-way area resulting from the utility activity
will be repaired by the responsible contractor or utility company.
   (H)   Any person, firm, corporation or entity which plans to install any
underground utilities within a present or proposed street or sidewalk right-of-
way area is required to notify the village administration office a minimum of
24 hours prior to beginning work. The notification shall include the exact
location and nature of the work to be performed. In emergency situations, the
village shall be notified immediately upon the responsible party’s decision
that excavation is required. Roadway or sidewalk area repairs or restoration
made without proper notification may require re-excavation and replacement with
approved backfill.
   (I)   Variance from any of the utility excavation policy provisions stated
above may be granted, on a case by case evaluation basis, by the Village
Administrator or the Village Engineer.
      (1)   All variances granted shall be specifically outlined in writing and
include a justification for the variance.
      (2)   Factors to be considered in rendering a variance decision may
include but not be limited to:
         (a)   Specific trench width and/or depth;
         (b)   Actual size of pavement slabs affected;
         (c)   Utility size;
         (d)   Conditions of surrounding soil and/or pavement;
         (e)   Extent of variance requested;
         (f)   Environmental circumstances at work site; and
         (g)   Extent of possible future public damage.
   (J)   Any questions, concerns or disputes regarding interpretation or
administration of this section may be referred by an affected party to the
Board of Trustees who, by majority vote, shall have final authority in
resolving the matters.
(Ord. 94-7-1, passed 7-26-1994) Penalty, see §
91.99
§ 91.02 WEIGHT LIMITS ON VILLAGE STREETS.
   (A)   Prohibition. It shall be unlawful to drive on any street any motor
vehicle with a weight, including load, in excess of 12,000 pounds.
   (B)   Exemption. Those vehicles 12,000 pounds and over making pickups or
deliveries to or from locations on posted village streets may travel upon
village streets, provided that:
      (1)   The shortest, most accessible route is used; and
      (2)   The drive presents evidence of load pickup and destination.
(Ord. 88-7-1, passed 7-11-1988) Penalty, see §
91.99
NUMBERING OF BUILDINGS AND LOTS
§ 91.15 GENERAL PROVISIONS.
   (A)   All lots, buildings and structures in the village shall be numbered in
accordance with an official address map approved by the Board of Trustees and
on file with the Village Clerk.
   (B)   The Village Engineer and Village Administrator are hereby designated
as the persons responsible for determining the official street number for each
lot and building and shall cause the number to be entered on the official map,
which shall be open to inspection by any interested person.
   (C)   The owners or occupants of every building, house or residence in the
village shall publicly display in a place visible from the street, other than
on the mail box, in figures at least two and one-half inches high and no more
than six inches high, an address sign indicating the official number of the
building, house or residence.
   (D)   Any person failing to properly number any building, house or residence
used or occupied by him or her shall be deemed to be in violation of this
section, if the failure continues for a period of ten days after receiving
notice from the Village Clerk indicating noncompliance with this section.
   (E)   All builders shall display the official lot number and street address
during building construction.
(Ord. 98-3-2, passed 3-24-1998) Penalty, see §
91.99
MOVING HOUSES
§ 91.30 PERMIT REQUIREMENTS; VILLAGE APPROVAL.
   With respect to the moving of houses in or through the village, regulations
applicable thereto shall be as follows.
   (A)   No house shall be moved without a permit. The permit fee shall be $50.
   (B)   The Village Engineer shall approve the date, time and route of any
move with a view to minimizing damage to property. The applicant in connection
with moving a house shall agree to pay the village’s costs of the Village
Engineer, police and other village services specifically and uniquely
applicable to the move. The contractor or person moving a house shall be bonded
with respect to moving in compliance with all applicable laws and without
damage to public or private property. The contractor or person shall have
public liability insurance for personal injury and property damage in an amount
of not less than $500,000.
   (C)   The contractor or person moving a house shall obtain all governmental
or utility authorizations in connection with the move.
   (D)   The contractor or person moving a house shall indemnify, defend and
save whole and harmless the village and all of its officers and employees from
claims, actions and damages of any kind whatsoever in connection with the move.
(Ord. 81-11, passed 7-13-1981) Penalty, see §
91.99
§ 91.31 EFFECTIVE DATE.
   This subchapter shall become effective ten days after its passage and
publication in pamphlet form on July 16, 1981, as required by law.
(Ord. 81-11, passed 7-13-1981)
§ 91.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which no
specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to §
10.99.
   (B)   (1)   Any person or entity who violates or fails to comply with any
provision of §
91.01 shall, upon conviction, be subject to a fine of not less than $100 nor
more than $500. Each day during which a violation exists or continues shall be
deemed a separate offense.
      (2)   The Village Administrator may determine and administratively assess
a fine for any improper backfill or failure to notify which he or she may find,
noting that the fine shall continue for each day that the violation continues.
The per diem improper backfill or failure to notify fine shall be $75 per day.
If the offender pays the administrative fine assessed and also terminates and
corrects the improper trench backfill, then no further proceedings shall be
required.
      (3)   The Village Administrator may also, in the event he or she finds
any improper backfill, issue a stop work order which shall require the
immediate cessation of any further work on the project accessed by or served by
the improper backfill, until the violations are remedied.
   (C)   Any person convicted of a violation of §
91.02 shall be fined in a sum of not less than $50 nor more than $500.
   (D)   Any person violating any of the provisions of §
91.15 shall be fined not less than $1 nor more than $500 for each offense; and
a separate offense shall be deemed committed on each day during or on which the
violation continues.
(Ord. 88-7-1, passed 7-11-1988; Ord. 94-7-1, passed 7-26-1994; Ord. 98-3-2,
passed 3-24-1998)
CHAPTER 92: ANIMAL CONTROL
Section
General Provisions
   
92.01   Definitions
   
92.02   Animal Control Warden; enforcement
   
92.03   Pound or animal control facility
   
92.04   Cruelty to animals prohibited
   
92.05   Keeping animals other than domestic pets
   
92.06   Livestock yards or structures
   
92.07   Keeping of dangerous animals prohibited
   
92.08   Keeping of vicious animals prohibited
Specific Provisions
   
92.20   Killing a dangerous or vicious animal
   
92.21   Diseased animals
   
92.22   Disturbing the peace
   
92.23   Exposing dead animals to view
   
92.24   Animals running at large; impoundment
   
92.25   Removal of excrement
   
92.26   Holding for reward strayed or stolen animals
   
92.27   Animal nuisance
   
92.28   Stray animals
   
92.29   Notice of impoundment
   
92.30   Redemption
   
92.31   Disposition when unredeemed
   
92.32   Monthly reports; disposition of fees
 
   
92.99   Penalty
Cross-reference:
   General village administrative provisions, see
Chapter 30 of this code of ordinances
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 92.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ANIMAL. Every other living creature other than a human being, including
domesticated and wild, male and female, singular and plural.
   AT LARGE. Off the premises of the owner and not under the control by leash
of the owner, owner’s family member or an authorized person. For the purposes
of this chapter, voice control shall not be considered in control.
   CAT. All members of the family Felidae.
   DANGEROUS ANIMAL. Any animal which when either unmuzzled, unleashed or
unattended by owner or authorized person, in a vicious or terrorizing manner,
approaches any person in an apparent attitude of attack upon streets, sidewalks
or any other public place.
   DOG. All members of the family Canidae.
   FOUND TO BE VICIOUS. The circuit court or other court of competent
jurisdiction has found the animal to be vicious as defined under this chapter
and has entered an order based on that finding.
   IMPOUNDED. Taken into custody of the pound in the village or county animal
control facility.
   LEASH. A cord, rope, strap or chain securely fastened to the collar or
harness of an animal and of sufficient strength to keep the animal under
control.
   LIVESTOCK. Any ass, bison, calf, cattle, chicken, donkey, duck, fowl, goat,
goose, horse, llama, mule, pony, sheep, swine or turkey.
   LIVESTOCK YARD OR STRUCTURE. Every concentrated enclosure area, shed or
structure used to house livestock.
   OWNER. Any person having a right of property in an animal who keeps or
harbors an animal, or who has the animal in his or her care, or acts as its
custodian, exerts control over it, or who knowingly permits an animal to remain
on or about premises owned, rented or controlled by the person.
   POUND or ANIMAL CONTROL FACILITY. Any facility approved by the President and
Board of Trustees for the purpose of enforcing this chapter and used as a
shelter for impounded, seized, stray, homeless, abandoned or unwanted animals.
   VICIOUS ANIMAL.
      (1)   Any individual animal that, unprovoked, inflicts bites or attacks a
human being or other animal either on public or private property;
      (2)   Any individual animal with a known propensity, tendency or
disposition to attack, without provocation, to cause injury or to otherwise
endanger the safety of human beings or domestic animals;
      (3)   Any individual animal that has as a trait or characteristic and a
generally known reputation for being vicious or dangerous, or for making
unprovoked attacks upon human beings or other animals, unless handled in a
particular manner or with special equipment;
      (4)   Any individual animal which attacks a human being or domestic
animal without provocation;
      (5)   Any individual animal which has been found to be a “dangerous
animal” upon two separate occasions;
      (6)   Any individual animal that has been trained as an attack or guard
dog and is found off the owner’s property; or
      (7)   Any individual animal that has been trained for fighting or is
owned, kept or used for the purpose of fighting.
(Ord. 08-07-01, passed 7-22-2008)
§ 92.02 ANIMAL CONTROL WARDEN; ENFORCEMENT.
   The Chief of Police shall be ex officio Animal Control Warden for the
village. Provision shall be made for the appointment of the animal control
officers as may be necessary, including village police officers and animal
control officers employed by contractual agreement or otherwise. Those persons
shall be authorized to investigate matters regarding the provisions of this
chapter and issue citations for violations of this chapter. The Animal Control
Warden is charged with enforcement of this chapter.
(Ord. 08-07-01, passed 7-22-2008)
§ 92.03 POUND OR ANIMAL CONTROL FACILITY.
   (A)   The President and Board of Trustees may designate a pound and/or
contract with an animal control facility for the impounding of all animals
delivered to the pound or animal control facility by the authority of the
Animal Control Warden.
   (B)   The pound shall maintain an enclosure or other suitable means for
impounding the animals in accordance with the provisions of this chapter and
the applicable provisions of the laws of the state. All the animals shall be
kept, maintained, humanely treated and fed by the pound until redeemed or
disposed of as provided in this chapter and the laws of the state.
(Ord. 08-07-01, passed 7-22-2008)
§ 92.04 CRUELTY TO ANIMALS PROHIBITED.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to commit cruelty to any animal. A
person commits cruelty to an animal when that person knowingly:
      (1)   Confines the animal in a manner so that is forced to stand, lie or
sit in its own excrement;
      (2)   Fails to provide an exercise quarter of at least 24 square feet;
      (3)   Fails to provide living quarters of sufficient size to exercise or
move about;
      (4)   Fails to provide quarters that are protected from excessive heat or
cold;
      (5)   Fails to keep an animal in a clean, sanitary and healthy manner;
      (6)   Deprives an animal of proper veterinary care or necessary
sustenance;
      (7)   Tethers an animal with a choke collar;
      (8)   Tethers an animal on a leash of less than 12 feet in length;
      (9)   Tethers an animal on a leash of a weight that prevents the animal
from moving about freely;
      (10)   Abandons, overworks, tortures or torments any animal;
      (11)   Unjustifiably kills, wounds or attempts to kill any domestic
animal in a cruel manner;
      (12)   Allows an animal to remain unattended by a competent person in a
motor vehicle when the outside ambient air temperature exceeds 80°F or confines
an animal in an area without adequate air circulation;
      (13)   Crops an animal’s ears, docks an animal’s tail or performs any
surgeries except as a licensed veterinarian of the state; or
      (14)   Causes, instigates, permits or attends any dogfight or other
combat between animals or between animals and humans.
   (B)   Any person who causes, instigates, permits, facilitates, aids, abets
or encourages any violation of this section shall be guilty of the violation.
   (C)   Animals that have been treated cruelly as defined in division (A)
above shall be impounded and may be given veterinary care at the owner’s
expense and may be euthanized at the owner’s expense when appropriate in the
judgment of the Animal Control Officer or veterinarian to prevent further
suffering, if there is a plea or finding of guilty, the defendant shall be
responsible for all costs, including any veterinary costs and the cost of
impoundment, from the date of impoundment through the conclusion of the court
proceedings. However, regardless of whether the owner is found guilty of the
charge(s) brought or not, the owner shall be responsible for any and all
veterinary costs incurred during impoundment.
(Ord. 08-07-01, passed 7-22-2008) Penalty, see §
92.99
§ 92.05 KEEPING ANIMALS OTHER THAN DOMESTIC PETS.
   (A)    Except as otherwise expressly provided for in this chapter, no person
shall keep, harbor or allow to be kept within village limits any livestock as
well as any other poultry or byproduct birds, any type of hoofed stock, any
type of farm animal including the pygmy or miniature variety, wolf, wolf-
hybrid, poisonous reptile or other animal normally wild and dangerous to human
life. It is no defense to a violation of this chapter that the owner or keeper
of the animal has attempted to domesticate the animal.
   (B)   The provisions of division (A) above shall not apply to:
      (1)   Any person involved in the interstate or intrastate transportation
of livestock to market; provided, however, the person does not remain within
the village limits for more than two hours;
      (2)   Any person authorized by the village to operate a circus, carnival,
special event, farmers market, riding stable, scientific or educational
institution, research laboratory, veterinary hospital or zoo;
      (3)   Any person maintaining property zoned Village F Forest Preserve
District, Village AG Agriculture District or Village AC Conservation District
and meeting the criteria of a “farm” as defined within the village zoning
ordinance; or
      (4)   Any person with a valid chicken coop license, in accordance with §
152.056.
(Ord. 08-07-01, passed 7-22-2008; Ord. 20-09-04, passed 9-22-2020)  Penalty,
see §
92.99
§ 92.06 LIVESTOCK YARDS OR STRUCTURES.
   No person shall maintain any livestock yard or structure within 100 feet of
any property line.
(Ord. 08-07-01, passed 7-22-2008) Penalty, see §
92.99
§ 92.07 KEEPING OF DANGEROUS ANIMALS PROHIBITED.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful to keep or harbor any dangerous animal in
violation of this chapter.
   (B)   The animals are hereby declared nuisances and are subject to
impoundment.
(Ord. 08-07-01, passed 7-22-2008) Penalty, see §
92.99
§ 92.08 KEEPING OF VICIOUS ANIMALS PROHIBITED.
   (A)   No person shall keep, harbor, sell or give away a vicious animal
within the village. The animals are hereby declared to be nuisances and are
subject to impoundment.
   (B)   An animal impounded under this section will not be returned to the
owner unless the animal is found not to be vicious. Animals subsequently found
to be vicious will be turned over by the village to an appropriate agent or
agency to be destroyed at the owner’s expense.
(Ord. 08-07-01, passed 7-22-2008) Penalty, see §
92.99
SPECIFIC PROVISIONS
§ 92.20 KILLING A DANGEROUS OR VICIOUS ANIMAL.
   If any dangerous or vicious animal shall be found running at large and
cannot be taken up or tranquilized and impounded, the animal may be slain by
any police officer or agent authorized to perform any duty under this chapter,
when it is necessary for the protection of any person or property.
(Ord. 08-07-01, passed 7-22-2008)
§ 92.21 DISEASED ANIMALS.
   No animal afflicted with a contagious or infectious disease shall be allowed
to be exposed in any public place whereby the heath of humans or animals may be
affected.
(Ord. 08-07-01, passed 7-22-2008)
Cross-reference:
   For the minimum fine, see §
35.01
§ 92.22 DISTURBING THE PEACE.
   (A)   No person owning an animal, or having custody of any animal, shall
permit the animal to disturb the peace and quiet of the neighborhood by barking
or making other loud or unusual noise.
   (B)   The offense specified in this section shall be an absolute liability
offense.
(Ord. 08-07-01, passed 7-22-2008)
Cross-reference:
   For the minimum fine, see §
35.01
§ 92.23 EXPOSING DEAD ANIMALS TO VIEW.
   (A)   No person shall haul, drag, transport or otherwise move any dead
animal along or upon any street, alley or other public place within the village
unless the dead animal is wholly covered so as to conceal the same from view.
   (B)   No person within the village shall skin or otherwise mutilate any dead
animal within the view of any public place or private property other than the
private property owned or controlled by the person.
(Ord. 08-07-01, passed 7-22-2008)
Cross-reference:
   For the minimum fine, see §
35.01
§ 92.24 ANIMALS RUNNING AT LARGE; IMPOUNDMENT.
   (A)   No owner of any animal shall allow or permit the animal to run at
large or to be on the public right-of-way or the property of another without
being securely restrained by a leash or other means.
   (B)   Any animal unlawfully running at large is hereby declared a nuisance
and may be impounded as provided in this chapter.
   (C)   The offense specified in this section shall be an absolute liability
offense.
(Ord. 08-07-01, passed 7-22-2008)
Cross-reference:
   For the minimum fine, see §
35.01
§ 92.25 REMOVAL OF EXCREMENT.
   (A)   No owner or person in control of an animal shall permit the animal to
deposit fecal matter on any public right-of-way or property of another, without
providing a means of disposing of the fecal matter. The owner or person in
control of the animal shall promptly remove all fecal matter deposited on any
property, other than that belonging to the owner or person in control of the
animal. This section shall not apply to support dogs or guide dogs for the
blind, visually handicapped or otherwise physically disabled persons.
   (B)   The offense specified in this section shall be an absolute liability
offense.
(Ord. 08-07-01, passed 7-22-2008)
Cross-reference:
   For the minimum fine, see §
35.01
§ 92.26 HOLDING FOR REWARD STRAYED OR STOLEN ANIMALS.
   No person shall harbor or hold for reward an animal which strayed upon the
person’s premises or which has been picked up on a public street, highway or
other public place unaccompanied by its owner or other person, or which has
been stolen from its owner.
(Ord. 08-07-01, passed 7-22-2008)
Cross-reference:
   For the minimum fine, see §
35.01
§ 92.27 ANIMAL NUISANCE.
   (A)   No person owning, possessing or harboring any animal within the
village shall permit the animal to become a nuisance.
   (B)   In addition to those nuisances set forth elsewhere in this chapter,
any animal shall be considered a nuisance and may be impounded under the
following circumstances:
      (1)   Any dog found in the village without proper rabies tags;
      (2)   Any animal found to be running at large and any animal which is
able to come in contact or menace any pedestrians on a public right-of-way or
adjacent private properties because of inadequate leashing or design of
enclosures on the property of the animal’s owner;
      (3)   Any female dog or cat that is readily accessible to a male animal
of the same species during periods of estrus (heat) for the female animal,
whether the animal is on or off the property of the animal’s owner, except as
part of a planned, supervised breeding; or
      (4)   Any animal owned, purchased or trained for the purpose of any show,
exhibition program or activity featuring or otherwise involving a fight with
another animal for the purposes of sport, wagering or entertainment.
(Ord. 08-07-01, passed 7-22-2008)
Cross-reference:
   For the minimum fine, see §
35.01
§ 92.28 STRAY ANIMALS.
   Any person who picks up a stray animal shall immediately notify the
village’s contracted animal control facility or pound.
(Ord. 08-07-01, passed 7-22-2008)
§ 92.29 NOTICE OF IMPOUNDMENT.
   (A)   Immediately after receiving any animal for impoundment, the pound or
animal control facility shall enter upon the records of the pound or animal
control facility the date of impounding, a description of the animal impounded,
and a record as to whether or not the animal has been inoculated and tagged
with a proper rabies tag as required by this chapter.
   (B)   Public notice shall be given by posting one copy of the description of
an animal and date of impoundment at the pound.
   (C)   If any impounded animal has tags identifying the owner thereof, the
animal control facility shall attempt to notify the owner within seven days of
receipt of the animal.
(Ord. 08-07-01, passed 7-22-2008)
§ 92.30 REDEMPTION.
   (A)   Except as otherwise provided herein, the owner of any impounded animal
may redeem the animal by paying an impoundment fee of $35, plus an additional
board fee of $10 per day for each day or any part thereof during which the
animal has been held in the pound or animal control facility, and by paying to
the animal control facility any state mandated costs, or other necessary
charges incurred in maintaining the animal. When the fees are paid and the
owner has given the pound or animal control facility satisfactory proof of
ownership of the animal, the pound or animal control facility shall release the
animal to the owner thereof.
   (B)   For the purposes of this section, a DAY shall be considered a calendar
day 24 hours beginning at midnight and continuing until the next midnight or
any part thereof.
   (C)   If any impounded animal does not have a current rabies tag, the owner
redeeming the animal shall, in addition to any of the above fees, pay the
necessary charges for rabies inoculation, micro-chipping and registration for
the current year, as required by law.
   (D)   Any impounded animal found to be vicious shall not be subject to
redemption, but shall be turned over by the village to an appropriate agent or
agency for humane destruction. Any animal impounded in relation to a dangerous
animal, vicious animal or cruelty to animal charge until the court hearing that
charge either dismisses that charge or it expressly authorizes the redemption
as part of any other order entered in that case.
(Ord. 08-07-01, passed 7-22-2008)
§ 92.31 DISPOSITION WHEN UNREDEEMED.
   Any animal not redeemed by the owner or any other person within seven days
after the impoundment or notice by the pound or animal control facility as
provided in §
92.27 above is hereby declared to be a public nuisance. The animal shall become
the property of the animal control facility.
(Ord. 08-07-01, passed 7-22-2008)
§ 92.32 MONTHLY REPORTS; DISPOSITION OF FEES.
   The animal control facility shall submit a monthly report in writing of the
pound and animal control facility activities to the village, indicating the
number of animals impounded, cost details, animal redemptions, fines and fees
collected, animals under quarantine and disposition of unclaimed animals.
(Ord. 08-07-01, passed 7-22-2008)
§ 92.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which no
specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to §
10.99.
   (B)   Fines for the applicable sections of this chapter are established and
published in §
35.01. Each day that a violation continues shall constitute a separate and
distinct violation or offense.
(Ord. 08-07-01, passed 7-22-2008)
CHAPTER 93: PUBLIC NUISANCES
Section
Burning
   
93.01   Purpose
   
93.02   Definitions
   
93.03   General restrictions
   
93.04   Administration and enforcement
Plants and Weeds
   
93.15   Weeds; declared a nuisance
   
93.16   Height
   
93.17   Barberry bushes
   
93.18   Removal; notice
   
93.19   Abatement
   
93.20   Lien
Abandoned and Inoperable Vehicles
   
93.35   Definitions
   
93.36   Abandoned and/or inoperable vehicles; towing
   
93.37   Hazardous dilapidated motor vehicles
   
93.38   Temporary possession of abandoned or unclaimed vehicle, and the like;
notification of police
   
93.39   Towing and impounding vehicles
   
93.40   Owner notification
Public Camping
   
93.45   Public camping as a nuisance
   
93.46   Regulation of public camping necessary to promote public health
   
93.47   Public camping not intended use of public property
   
93.48   Definitions
   
93.49   Public camping prohibited
   
93.50   Exceptions to prohibition
   
93.51   Removal of campsite
   
93.52   Disposition and release of personal property
   
93.53   Penalty for violation of public camping regulations
Swimming Pool Maintenance
   
93.55   Purpose
   
93.56   Definitions
   
93.57   General maintenance requirements
   
93.58   Administration and enforcement
Dirt-Bikes and Go-Karts
   
93.70   Purpose
   
93.71   Definitions
   
93.72   Prohibition
   
93.73   Exemptions
   
93.74   Presumption of accountability
   
93.75   Administration and enforcement
 
   
93.99   Penalty
Cross-reference:
   Fine schedule, see §
35.01
BURNING
§ 93.01 PURPOSE.
   The purpose of this subchapter is to prevent public and private nuisances
caused by fire and smoke.
(Ord. 09-05-02, passed 5-26-2009)
§ 93.02 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   BURN. To set or maintain any fire or instance of combustion outdoors.
   FUEL. Dry, seasoned wood logs, branches or charcoal briquettes, as well as
starter fluids or materials designed and used solely for the purpose of
starting a fire.
   LANDSCAPE WASTE. Leaves, grass, plants, tree limbs, shrubbery cuttings and
other materials accumulated as a result of the care of lawns, gardens,
shrubbery, vines and trees.
   RECREATIONAL FIRE ENCLOSURE. A pit on cleared earth enclosed on all sides by
masonry, concrete, rock materials or metal not exceeding 16 square feet or a
metal, masonry or ceramic container designed for those purposes not exceeding
16 square feet. Burn barrels of any sort are prohibited.
   RESPONSIBLE ADULT. An individual 18 years or older who is not under the
influence of drugs or alcohol or suffering from any other disability which
would impair his or her ability to properly supervise a fire.
   SMOLDER. To burn without flame resulting in dense smoke.
(Ord. 09-05-02, passed 5-26-2009)
§ 93.03 GENERAL RESTRICTIONS.
   (A)   Except as provided in divisions (B), (H) and (I) below, it shall be
unlawful to burn any papers, landscape waste organic refuse, garbage,
construction materials or any other materials at any time in the village.
   (B)   The recreational burning of fuel for pleasure, religious, ceremonial,
cooking, warmth or similar purposes may be allowed where the fire is contained
to a recreational fire enclosure on property for which the owner of the
property has consented to the fire. Any exceptions to recreational burning,
including bonfires exceeding the limitations of recreational fire enclosure,
shall require a permit. A permit may be acquired through the following process:
applicant submits a written request to the Village Administrator’s office at
least three work days in advance of the event. The Village Administrator
responds with a letter of approval or denial. This letter is forwarded to the
Fire Chief of the Cornbelt Fire Protection District and the Police Department.
This letter also must be kept by the applicant for presentation, if requested.
   (C)   It shall be unlawful to burn within 20 feet of any tree, fence, deck,
building or structure. A recreational fire enclosure may be used on a deck or
patio when it can be safely so used and is used in compliance with
manufacturer’s instruction.
   (D)   It shall be unlawful to burn on any public right-of-way, public
street, road, alley, sidewalk or other public property, except for designated
areas set aside for that purpose by the village.
   (E)   It shall be unlawful to permit any fire to smolder.
   (F)   It shall be unlawful to set or maintain any fire without the
supervision of a responsible adult at all times and without proper
extinguishing materials available.
   (G)   No fire shall contain any materials otherwise prohibited by the State
Environmental Protection Act of the State Pollution Control Board Rules and
Regulations. This includes, but is not limited to, wastes creating hazard or
explosion, tires, rubber, petroleum-based materials, rubbish, garbage or
materials containing asbestos. The State Environmental Protection Act also
authorizes the State Environmental Protection Agency to impose conditions on
permits that it may issue such as open burning permits for firefighter
training/fire extinguisher training; prairie and ecological landscape burns;
commercial/trade waste and open burning; and disaster debris and open burning.
   (H)   Nothing herein shall be construed to prevent burning by any
governmental entity when officially permitted by an appropriate state or
federal agency to do so.
   (I)   Nothing herein shall be construed to prevent burning of landscape
waste on the premises upon which the landscape waste was generated, by any
person maintaining a “farm” as defined within the village zoning ordinance and
properties maintained as a forest preserve by the County Forest Preserve
District.
(Ord. 09-05-02, passed 5-26-2009)
Cross-reference:
   For the minimum fine, see §
35.01
§ 93.04 ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT.
   (A)   It shall be the duty of the Village Administrator or his or her
designee or the Police Chief or his or her designee, to administer and enforce
the regulations contained herein.
   (B)   The Fire Chief of the Cornbelt Fire Protection District, or his or her
designee, and the Police Chief or his or her designee is permitted to prohibit
any or all outdoor fires when atmospheric conditions or local circumstances
make the fire hazardous.
(Ord. 09-05-02, passed 5-26-2009)
PLANTS AND WEEDS
§ 93.15 WEEDS; DECLARED A NUISANCE.
   Any weeds such as jimson, burdock, ragweed, thistle, cockleburr, wild
lettuce or other weeds of a like kind found growing in any lot or tract of land
in the village are hereby declared to be a nuisance, and it a shall be unlawful
to permit these weeds to grow or remain in any place.
(Ord. passed 3-12-1973) Penalty, see §
93.99
§ 93.16 HEIGHT.
   It shall be unlawful for anyone to permit any weed, grass or plant, other
than trees, bushes, flowers or other ornamental plant, to grow to a height
exceeding eight inches anywhere in the village. Any plant or weed exceeding
this height is hereby declared to be a nuisance.
(Ord. passed 3-12-1973) Penalty, see §
93.99
§ 93.17 BARBERRY BUSHES.
   It shall be unlawful and a nuisance to plant or permit the growth of the
bush of the species of tall, common or European barberry, further known as
Berberis vulgaris, or its horticultural varieties, within the village.
(Ord. passed 3-12-1973) Penalty, see §
93.99
§ 93.18 REMOVAL; NOTICE.
   It shall be the duty of the Police Department to serve or cause to be served
a notice upon the owner or occupant of any premises on which weeds or plants
are permitted to grow in violation of the provisions of this subchapter and to
demand the abatement of the nuisance within ten days.
(Ord. passed 3-12-1973)
§ 93.19 ABATEMENT.
   If the person so served does not abate the nuisance within ten days, the
Building Inspector may proceed to abate the nuisance, keeping an account of the
expense of the abatement, and the expense shall be charged and paid by the
owner or occupant.
(Ord. passed 3-12-1973)
§ 93.20 LIEN.
   (A)   The cost of the weed cutting shall be a lien upon the real estate
affected as provided by statute (Ill. Municipal Code, § 11-20-7).
   (B)   Whenever a bill for weed cutting remains unpaid 30 days after it has
been rendered to the property owner, the Clerk shall file within 60 days after
the cost and expense of weed cutting is incurred with the Recorder of Deeds of
the county, a notice of lien. The notice shall consist of a sworn statement
setting out:
      (1)   A description of the real estate sufficient for identification
thereof;
      (2)   The amount of money representing the cost and expense incurred or
payable for the service; and
      (3)   The date or dates when the cost and expense was incurred by the
municipality.
   (C)   A copy of the notice shall be mailed by the Clerk to the owner of the
premises, if his or her address is known to the Clerk.
   (D)   Property subject to a lien for unpaid bills shall be sold for
nonpayment of the same, and the proceeds of the sale shall be applied to pay
the charges, after deducting costs, as is the case in the foreclosure of
statutory liens. The foreclosure shall be in equity in the name of the village.
   (E)   The Village Attorney is hereby authorized and directed to institute
proceedings in the name of the village, in any court having jurisdiction over
the matter, against any property for which the weed-cutting bill has remained
unpaid 30 days after it has been rendered.
(Ord. passed 3-12-1973)
ABANDONED AND INOPERABLE VEHICLES
§ 93.35 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ABANDONED VEHICLE. Any vehicle that is in a state of disrepair rendering the
vehicle incapable of being driven, or any vehicle that has not been moved or
used for seven consecutive days. Any vehicle whose owner cannot be located or
whose ownership cannot be determined shall be considered abandoned.
(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-101.05)
   ALLEY. A public way within a block, generally giving access to the rear of
lots or buildings and not used for general traffic circulation.
(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-102)
   ANTIQUE VEHICLE. A motor vehicle that is more than 25 years of age or a bona
fide replica thereof.
(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-102.1)
   HAZARDOUS DILAPIDATED MOTOR VEHICLE. A motor vehicle that is in a general
state of deterioration, which poses a threat to the public’s health, safety and
welfare.
   HIGHWAY. The entire width between the boundary lines of every way publicly
maintained when any part thereof is open to the use of the public for purposes
of vehicular travel or located on public school property.
(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-126)
   IMPOUND. For the purpose of this chapter, the IMPOUNDING of a vehicle shall
mean a hold order placed on a vehicle until all fines, tow and storage charges
are paid prior to the vehicle’s release from the tow company.
   INOPERABLE VEHICLE. Any motor vehicle or other vehicle, including parts
thereof, incapable of or prohibited from being driven under its own motor power
due to the removal of the engine, wheels or other parts; or the damage,
disrepair or disuse of the vehicle. Vehicles without valid registration
properly displayed shall be deemed INOPERABLE.
(Ord. 89-8-1, passed 8-15-1989; Ord. 04-12-01, passed 12-21-2004)
Statutory reference:
   Hazardous dilapidated motor vehicles, see ILCS Ch. 65, Act 5, § 11-40-3.1
   Impounding, see ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 4-204
   Inoperable vehicle, see ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-40-3,
    ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-1004.5
§ 93.36 ABANDONED AND/OR INOPERABLE VEHICLES; TOWING.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to abandon a vehicle or permit an
inoperable vehicle to remain on any highway, alley, public property, and on
private property in view of the public in the village.
   (B)   Abandoned or inoperable vehicles located on a highway, obstructing a
lane of traffic, creating a traffic or safety hazard may be immediately towed
and impounded after reasonable attempts have been made to locate the owner or
licensed driver with lawful authority to take possession of the vehicle.
   (C)   Abandoned or inoperable vehicles located on a highway or alley and not
posing a traffic hazard may be towed and impounded within 24 hours after
reasonable attempts have been made to have the vehicle moved.
   (D)   Abandoned or inoperable vehicles on public or private property in view
of the public may be towed within seven days after issuance of notice from the
village.
(Ord. 89-8-1, passed 8-15-1989; Ord. 04-12-01, passed 12-21-2004)
Cross-reference:
   For the minimum fine, see §
35.01
§ 93.37 HAZARDOUS DILAPIDATED MOTOR VEHICLES.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to leave unattended any hazardous
dilapidated motor vehicles in public view except for private businesses
involved in junking or vehicle repair.
   (B)   Hazardous dilapidated motor vehicles that are unattended may be towed
and impounded immediately after a reasonable attempt has been made to have the
vehicle removed.
(Ord. 04-12-01, passed 12-21-2004) Penalty, see §
93.99
§ 93.38 TEMPORARY POSSESSION OF ABANDONED OR UNCLAIMED VEHICLE, AND THE LIKE;
NOTIFICATION OF POLICE.
   When a person comes into temporary possession of an abandoned, lost, stolen
vehicle, or unclaimed vehicle, not the owner of the vehicle, that person shall
immediately notify the Police Department. The Police Department shall tow and
impound the vehicle in accordance with provisions established in this
subchapter.
(Ord. 04-12-01, passed 12-21-2004)
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 4-202
§ 93.39 TOWING AND IMPOUNDING VEHICLES.
   (A)   Only police and other authorized village officials can have vehicles
towed which are in violation of this subchapter. They shall only use tow
companies that meet the standards outlined in ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 4-203.
   (B)   The officer or other village official authorizing the tow of any
vehicle found in violation of this subchapter shall complete required forms and
provide a copy of this form to the representative of the agency towing the
vehicle. This form shall contain all the information required by ILCS Ch. 625,
Act 5, § 4-204.
   (C)   Owners of vehicles towed for any violation of this subchapter are
required to obtain release from the Police Department before their vehicle will
be released by the towing agency. Owners shall provide valid identification,
proper documentation of proof of ownership, valid registration and insurance to
the Police Department prior to release of any hold. Owners must also have a
valid driver’s license in their possession or a licensed driver with them prior
to release of the vehicle.
   (D)   The Police Department shall notify the agency responsible for the tow
of the vehicle of the release of the hold and provide the towing agency with a
written release order signed by the official releasing the vehicle.
   (E)   Owners of vehicles shall be responsible to the towing service for
payment of applicable removal, towing, storage, processing charges and
collection costs associated with the vehicle prior to release by the towing
agency.
(Ord. 89-8-1, passed 8-15-1989; Ord. 04-12-01, passed 12-21-2004)
§ 93.40 OWNER NOTIFICATION.
   (A)   The Police Department shall notify by registered mail the last known
registered owner of any vehicle towed in accordance with this subchapter within
ten business days of their identification after searching State Police records
in accordance with ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 4-205. If after ten business days the
identity of the owner is still unknown, the Police Department shall notify the
owner within two business days of identification.
   (B)   If the Police Department is unable to identify the owner of any
vehicle towed in accordance with this subchapter, the Police Department shall
authorize the disposal of the vehicle as required by ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, §§ 4-
208 and 4-209.
(Ord. 89-8-1, passed 8-15-1989; Ord. 04-12-01, passed 12-21-2004)
PUBLIC CAMPING
§ 93.45 PUBLIC CAMPING AS A NUISANCE.
   Public camping, as the term is defined herein, is hereby declared to be a
nuisance within the village.
(Ord. 24-10-01, passed 10-22-2024)
§ 93.46 REGULATION OF PUBLIC CAMPING NECESSARY TO PROMOTE PUBLIC HEALTH.
   In an effort to address public health concerns, the President and Board of
Trustees of the village hereby declare it necessary or expedient for the
promotion of health or the suppression of diseases, to regulate public camping,
as that term is defined herein, within the village’s corporate limits.
(Ord. 24-10-01, passed 10-22-2024)
§ 93.47 PUBLIC CAMPING NOT INTENDED USE OF PUBLIC PROPERTY.
   Except for those parcels of property specifically designated by the village
in any subsequent ordinance, the village hereby declares that none of its
property is permitted nor intended to be used for public camping, as the term
is defined herein.
(Ord. 24-10-01, passed 10-22-2024)
§ 93.48 DEFINITIONS.
   The following definitions apply to this subchapter:
   BEDDING. A sleeping bag, or any other material, used for bedding purposes.
   CAMPSITE. Any physical space that is not within an established structure,
where bedding or any stove or fire is placed, established or maintained for the
purpose of maintaining a temporary place to live, whether or not such place
incorporates the use of any tent, lean-to, shack or any other structure, or any
vehicle or part thereof.
   EXEMPT PERSONAL PROPERTY. Items which would otherwise constitute personal
property under the terms of this subchapter, but which (i) has no apparent
utility or monetary value; (ii) personal property which is unsanitary to store
or otherwise maintain; (iii) any weapon possessed illegally; (iv) drug
paraphernalia; (v) items appearing to be stolen or otherwise appearing to be
evidence of a crime; (vi) items which the person cannot demonstrate the
requisite lawful authority to possess; and, (vii) any items of food which can
reasonably be expected to spoil or otherwise perish within the next 30 days.
   PERSONAL PROPERTY. Any item reasonably recognizable as belonging to a person
and having apparent utility or monetary value, except for exempt personal
property.
   PUBLIC CAMPING. To cause or participate in the establishment of, or the act
of remaining in or at, a campsite.
(Ord. 24-10-01, passed 10-22-2024)
§ 93.49 PUBLIC CAMPING PROHIBITED.
   (A)   No person may sleep, nor otherwise engage in public camping, on a
public sidewalk, street, alley, lane, other public right-of-way, park, bench,
or any other publicly-owned property, nor on or under any bridge or viaduct, at
any time.
   (B)   No person may sleep, nor otherwise engage in public camping, in any
pedestrian or vehicular entrance to public or private property abutting a
public right-of-way.
   (C)   No person may sleep, nor otherwise engage in public camping, on any
real property owned or otherwise maintained by the village.
   (D)   No person may park a vehicle overnight within the village for the
purpose of sleeping or otherwise engaging in public camping in said vehicle.
   (E)   For the purposes of this section, the act of parking or leaving a
vehicle parked for two consecutive hours, and/or remaining within a public
vehicle on any property under the jurisdiction of the village for the purpose
of public camping, for two consecutive hours without permission from the
President and Board of Trustees of the village, between the hours of midnight
and 6:00 a.m., shall be considered a violation of this subchapter.
(Ord. 24-10-01, passed 10-22-2024)
§ 93.50 EXCEPTIONS TO PROHIBITION.
   Notwithstanding the foregoing, it shall not be a violation to engage in
public camping when done (i) in a manner specifically authorized by this code;
(ii) after a formal declaration of the village in emergency circumstances; or,
(iii) upon resolution of the Village President and Board of Trustees of the
Village of Mahomet, the same may exempt a special event from the prohibitions
of this section, if Village President and Board of Trustees of the Village of
Mahomet finds such exemption to be in the public interest and consistent with
the goals and objectives of the Village President and Board of Trustees of the
Village of Mahomet, and with such conditions imposed as the Village President
and Board of Trustees of the Village of Mahomet deems necessary. Any conditions
imposed will include a condition requiring that the applicant provide evidence
of adequate insurance coverage and agree to indemnify the village for any
liability, damage or expense incurred by the village as a result of the
activities of the applicant. Any findings by the Village President and Board of
Trustees of the Village of Mahomet shall specify the exact dates and location
covered by the exemption.
(Ord. 24-10-01, passed 10-22-2024)
§ 93.51 REMOVAL OF CAMPSITE.
   Removal of a campsite in violation of this subchapter may occur under the
following circumstances:
   (A)   Prior to removing a campsite, the village shall post a notice, 24
hours in advance of the removal, unless immediate removal of the campsite is
deemed to be necessary for one of the reasons in divisions (A)(1) through (4),
below. If such immediate removal is undertaken, the basis for causing the
immediate removal of such campsite should be adequately documented by the
appropriate person(s).
      (1)   Immediate removal of the campsite is necessary to maintain access
to a property;
      (2)   Immediate removal of the campsite is necessary to maintain the
sanitary condition of a property;
      (3)   Immediate removal of the campsite is necessary because the campsite
is an obstruction to any public right-of-way; or
      (4)   Immediate removal of the campsite is necessary because the campsite
poses a risk to the health and safety of the village and its residents.
   (B)   Upon any action pursuant to §
93.51(A), above, the person causing such action to be taken shall inform an
appropriate agency delivering social services to homeless individuals in the
village, of the location of the campsite and the persons found to be in
violation of this subchapter, so said agency may determine whether or not it
would be appropriate to offer its services to those persons.
   (C)   If a 24-hour notice has been posted, and the 24-hour notice period has
passed, then the campsite, as well as all personal property thereon, shall be
removed by the appropriate person(s) acting on behalf of the village.
   (D)   No portion of this section shall be construed to prohibit any person
found to be engaging in public camping from removing their personal property
from the campsite; however, such personal property that constitutes exempt
personal property and which a reasonably prudent law enforcement officer,
exercising the applicable constitutional standard, would conclude that said
exempt personal property constitutes items appearing to be stolen or otherwise
appearing to be evidence of a crime, and/or items which the person cannot
demonstrate the requisite lawful authority to possess, may be retained and
stored as evidence.
(Ord. 24-10-01, passed 10-22-2024)
§ 93.52 DISPOSITION AND RELEASE OF PERSONAL PROPERTY.
   (A)   All personal property removed from any campsite which is not exempt
personal property shall be stored by the appropriate law enforcement agency of
the village, for a minimum of 30 days, during which time it shall be reasonably
available for and released to an individual confirming ownership.
   (B)   All exempt personal property may be disposed of or retained as
evidence by the appropriate law enforcement agency of the village.
(Ord. 24-10-01, passed 10-22-2024)
§ 93.53 PENALTY FOR VIOLATION OF PUBLIC CAMPING VIOLATIONS.
   (A)   The penalty for any person’s first violation of this subchapter within
a rolling 24-month period shall be $75.
   (B)   The penalty for any person’s second violation of this subchapter
within a rolling 24-month period shall be $150.
   (C)   The penalty for any person’s third violation of this subchapter within
a rolling 24-month period shall be $350.
   (D)   The penalty for any person’s fourth violation of this subchapter
within a rolling 24- month period shall be $500.
   (E)   The penalty for any person’s fifth violation of this subchapter within
a rolling 24-month period shall be $750.
   (F)   The penalty for any person’s sixth or subsequent violation of this
subchapter within a rolling 24-month period may be a monetary penalty of $750
or incarceration for a period not exceeding the maximum time allowed pursuant
to ILCS Ch. 65, Act 5, § 1-2-9.
   (G)   As a substitute for any monetary penalty assessed pursuant to
divisions (A) through (F), above, and if consented to by the village, the
penalty assessed to any person found in violation of this subchapter may be
that said person must engage in public service by cleaning the rights-of-way
and other public facilities of the village for an amount of time that, if the
person found to have violated this subchapter was being paid the minimum wage
under Illinois law, the amount paid for that person’s labors would have been
equal to the monetary penalty assessed under this subchapter.
   (H)   The village is hereby empowered to exercise all powers afforded to it,
at law or in equity, to collect any fines assessed against a person pursuant to
this subchapter, including but not limited to seeking incarceration of said
person for a period of time that conforms with ILCS Ch. 65, Act 5, § 1-2-9.
   (I)   In the imposition of any penalty pursuant to this section, the penalty
shall be mitigated by whether or not the person immediately removed all
personal property and litter, including but not limited to bottles, cans, and
garbage, from the campsite after the person was informed that the person was in
violation of this subchapter.
   (J)   A separate offense of this subchapter shall be deemed committed on
each day on which a violation occurs or continues.
   (K)   In addition to any other remedy provided by law or this subchapter,
any person found in violation of this section may be immediately removed from
the premises where the campsite is located.
(Ord. 24-10-01, passed 10-22-2024)
SWIMMING POOL MAINTENANCE
§ 93.55 PURPOSE.
   The purpose of this Subchapter is to prevent public and private health
hazards caused by improperly maintained swimming pools.
(Ord. 17-06-06, passed 6-27-2017
§ 93.56 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this Subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   SWIMMING POOL. An artificially created permanent pool or tank either above
grade, below grade, or partially below grade, which has a depth of more than 24
inches covering more than 25 square feet or that has a capacity of more than
200 gallons of water, created for the purpose of swimming, wading or water
recreation.
(Ord. 17-06-06, passed 6-27-2017
§ 93.57 GENERAL MAINTENANCE REQUIREMENTS.
   It shall be unlawful and a public nuisance if a swimming pool is not
maintained according to the following:
   (A)   Swimming pools and juvenile pools shall be maintained in sanitary
condition, in good repair, and shall not contain stagnant water.
   (B)   Swimming pools shall not harbor or become infested with mosquitoes,
vermin or other pests.
   (C)   No residential swimming pool shall be emptied in a manner which will
permit significant water to flow onto property owned by another person without
the advanced written consent of all effected property owners.
(Ord. 17-06-06, passed 6-27-2017 Penalty, see §
93.99
§ 93.58 ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT.
   It shall be the duty of the Village Administrator or his or her designee or
the Police Chief or his or her designee, to administer and enforce the
regulations contained herein.
(Ord. 17-06-06, passed 6-27-2017
DIRT-BIKES AND GO-KARTS
§ 93.70 PURPOSE.
   To protect the health, safety and welfare of Mahomet citizens in residential
neighborhoods from excessive and unnecessary noise, dust and fumes.
(Ord. 17-08-02, passed 8-22-2017
§ 93.71 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this Subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ATV. Any motorized off-highway vehicle designed to travel on three or more
low-pressure tires powered by one or more internal combustion engine(s).
   DIRT-BIKE. Any two-wheeled bicycle, minibike, trail bike and/or motorcycle
powered by one or more internal combustion engine(s).
   DWELLING. Any building or portion thereof designed and used exclusively for
residential purposes, within an area zoned for residential use or legally
nonconforming for such use under the Mahomet Zoning Code.
   GO-KART. Any vehicle with three or more wheels powered by one or more
internal combustion engine(s), excluding tractors, agricultural machinery and
vehicles used for the care and maintenance of property.
(Ord. 17-08-02, passed 8-22-2017
§ 93.72 PROHIBITION.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to operate or permit the operation of a
dirt-bike, ATV or go-kart on private property within the corporate limits of
the Village of Mahomet, if said operation is within 300 feet of a dwelling, as
defined herein.
(Ord. 17-08-02, passed 8-22-2017 Penalty, see §
93.99
§ 93.73 EXEMPTIONS.
   (A)   The provisions of this subchapter shall not apply to the operation of
a registered dirt-bike, ATV or go-kart on a public road or highway by a
licensed operator and shall also not apply to tractors, agricultural or
construction machinery and vehicles used for the care and maintenance of
property.
   (B)   The provisions of this subchapter shall not apply to the operation of
a registered dirt-bike, ATV or go-kart by a licensed operator for the purpose
of moving it directly to or from a dwelling and a public road or highway.
   (C)   The provisions of this chapter shall not preclude the starting and
stopping of engines equipped with a muffler on dirt-bikes, ATV or go-karts for
purposes of maintenance and repair by occupants so long as such activity is for
personal and not commercial use and so long as such activity does not disturb
the peace and tranquility of properties adjacent to or near the activity.
Operation and continuous use of a dirt-bike, ATV or go-kart, with or without a
muffler, shall not qualify as maintenance and repair as defined herein.
(Ord. 17-08-02, passed 8-22-2017
§ 93.74 PRESUMPTION OF ACCOUNTABILITY.
   The occupant of the property or residential unit on which the prohibited
activity takes place shall be presumed to have permitted the activity to occur
and shall be deemed responsible for the illegal activity and shall be subject
to the same punishment.
(Ord. 17-08-02, passed 8-22-2017
§ 93.75 ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT.
   It shall be the duty of the Village Administrator or his or her designee or
the Chief of Police or his or her designee, to administer and enforce the
regulations contained herein.
(Ord. 17-08-02, passed 8-22-2017
§ 93.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which no
specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to §
10.99.
   (B)   (1)   Any violation of any provision of §§
93.01,
93.02 and
93.04 shall be punished by a fine not less than $75, nor more than $750 for
each violation.
      (2)   For §
93.03, see §
35.01 regarding fines.
   (C)   Any person, firm or corporation violating any of the provisions of §§
93.15 through
93.20 shall be fined not less than $1 nor more than $500 for each offense; and
a separate offense shall be deemed committed on each day during or on which the
nuisance continues unabated after ten days from receipt of notice.
   (D)   For §
93.36, see §
35.01 regarding fines.
   (E)   Any violation of any provision of §§
93.55 through
93.58 shall be punished by a fine not less than $100, nor more than $750 for
each violation. Any day on which any violation occurs shall constitute a
separate offense.
   (F)   Any person violating §§
93.70 through
93.76 shall be punished by a fine not less than $100 nor more than $750. Any
day on which any violation occurs shall constitute a separate offense.
(Ord. passed 3-12-1973; Ord. 09-05-02, passed 5-26-2009; Ord. 17-06-06, passed
6-27-2017; Ord. 17-08-02, passed 8-22-2017)
CHAPTER 94: TREES
Section
   
94.01   Purpose, intent and definitions
   
94.02   Tree Commission; establishment, composition, appointment of members,
duties
   
94.03   Permits
   
94.04   Public nuisances
   
94.05   Interference with Tree Commission
   
94.06   Lien
   
94.07   Effective date
   
94.08   Review by Village Board
 
   
94.99   Penalty
   
Appendix A: Tree species
§ 94.01 PURPOSE, INTENT AND DEFINITIONS.
   (A)   Purpose. It is the purpose of this chapter to promote and protect the
public health, safety and general welfare by providing for the regulation of
the planting, maintenance and removal of trees and shrubs within the village.
Appendix A includes a list of acceptable and non-acceptable trees.
   (B)   Intent. It is the intent of the Village Tree Commission that the terms
of this chapter shall be construed so as to promote:
      (1)   The planting, maintenance, restoration and survival of desirable
trees and shrubs within the village; and
      (2)   The protection of community residents from personal injury and
property damage, and the protection of the village from property damage, caused
or threatened by the improper planting, maintenance or removal of trees and
shrubs located within the village.
   (C)   Definitions. For the purpose of this chapter, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.
      ISA or INTERNATIONAL SOCIETY OF ARBORICULTURE. Arborist’s certifying
agency that promotes proper tree care and research to consumers.
      PARK TREES. Trees in public parks having individual names and all areas
owned by the village, or to which the public has free access as a park.
      SHRUB. A woody plant of relatively low height, having several stems
arising from the base and lacking a single trunk.
      STREET TREES. Trees on land lying between property lines on either side
of all streets, avenues or ways within the village.
(Ord. 13-07-02, passed 7-23-2013)
§ 94.02 TREE COMMISSION; ESTABLISHMENT, COMPOSITION, APPOINTMENT OF MEMBERS,
DUTIES.
   (A)   Establishment. There is hereby created the Village Tree Commission,
hereinafter referred to as the “Commission.”
   (B)   Composition. The Commission will consist of three residents of the
village area, appointed annually by the Village President, by and with the
advice and consent of the Board of Trustees. These three Commissioners shall
serve without pay. Two of the Commission members shall be selected from among
persons experienced in forestry, horticulture, plant physiology, landscape
architecture, ecology or similar fields. The remaining Commissioner shall be a
citizen who has demonstrated an active interest in trees and/or other
improvements related to the community environment.
   (C)   Duties.
      (1)   Once a year, by the end of April, the Commission shall submit to
the Board of Trustees any plan it may have for planting and maintaining
publicly acquired trees for the following planting season. Plans submitted will
be for spring and fall planting. At the same time, the Commission shall give an
annual performance report on previously executed plans.
      (2)   The Commission shall advise the Public Works Director, who will
then be responsible for applying for any and all forms of assistance in
acquiring trees and maintenance of the existing street trees. The Commission
shall supervise the planting, maintenance, care and protection of all trees
planted in accordance with any plan approved by the Board of Trustees.
      (3)   The Public Works Department and the Village Building Inspector are
hereby made available to provide manpower, inspections, vehicles and equipment
as necessary to deliver, plant, inspect and maintain the trees under the
Commission’s supervision as allowed with the current budget.
(Ord. 13-07-02, passed 7-23-2013)
§ 94.03 PERMITS.
   (A)   Scope of requirement. No person(s) except the Commission, the Public
Works Department or designee may perform any of the following acts without
first obtaining from the village a permit, for which no fee shall be charged.
All acts must follow International Society of Arboriculture’s best management
practices.
      (1)   Plant on village-owned property, or treat, prune, remove or
otherwise disturb any tree or shrub located on village-owned property, except
that this provision shall not be construed to prohibit owners of property
adjacent to or attached to village-owned property from watering or fertilizing
without a permit any tree, shrub or other plant located on village-owned
property;
      (2)   Trim, prune or remove any tree or portions thereof if the tree or
portions thereof reasonably may be expected to fall on village-owned property
and thereby to cause damage to persons or property;
      (3)   Place on village-owned property, either above or below ground
level, a container for trees or shrubs;
      (4)   Damage, cut, tap, carve or transplant any tree or shrub located on
village-owned property; or
      (5)   Attach any rope, wire, nail, sign, poster or any other human-made
object to any tree or shrub located on village-owned property.
   (B)   Issuance. Within seven days of receipt of the application, the village
shall issue a permit to perform within 30 days of the day of issuance any of
the acts specified in division (A) above, for which a permit is requested
whenever:
      (1)   The acts would result in the abatement of a public nuisance;
      (2)   The acts are not inconsistent with the development and
implementation of the general plan for optimizing the tree and shrub resources
of the village;
      (3)   An application has been signed by the applicant and submitted to
the Village Office detailing the location, number, size and species of trees or
shrubs that will be affected by the acts, setting forth the purpose of the acts
and the methods to be used, and presenting any additional information that the
Commission may find reasonably necessary to a determination of whether the acts
are consistent with this chapter;
      (4)   The applicant agrees to perform the work for which the permit is
sought in accordance with the provisions of this chapter and with the
regulations and standards set forth by the Commission;
      (5)   The applicant certifies that he or she has read and understands
those provisions of this chapter which are pertinent to the work for which the
permit is sought;
      (6)   The applicant has made himself or herself familiar with Table I set
forth in Appendix A to this chapter, which contains a list of tree species or
the varieties acceptable and approved for planting on village property, with
approval of the Tree Commission;
      (7)   The applicant has made certain that the tree(s) or plants for which
he or she has secured an application are not of the unacceptable tree species
or their varieties contained in Table II, set forth in Appendix A to this
chapter, which shall not be planted on village property; and
      (8)   If the work for which a permit is issued entails the felling of any
tree or part thereof, located on private property, which, as a result of the
felling reasonably may be expected to fall upon village-owned property, and if
the felling is done by one other than the owner of the property on which the
felling is done, then the applicant shall agree to indemnify and to hold the
village harmless for all damages resulting from work conducted pursuant to the
permit, and shall deposit with the Village Clerk a liability insurance policy
in the amount of $100,000 per person/$300,000 per accident for bodily injury
liability and $50,000 aggregate for property damage liability, which policy
shall name the village as an additional insured.
   (C)   Maintenance. Watering, fertilization, insect control and pruning are
the responsibility of the Public Works Department or designee. Maintenance is
described as follows:
      (1)   Watering. Ample soil moisture shall be maintained following
planting. A thorough watering once in five to ten days, depending on soil type
and drainage provisions, is usually adequate during the growing season. A soil
auger can be used to check the adequacy of moisture in the soil ball and/or
backfill;
      (2)   Pruning. Pruning shall follow ISA or equivalent pruning standards.
Pruning newly planted trees shall consist of removing dead, broken or injured
branches; the suppression of rank, uneven growth that affects form. Water
sprouts shall be removed when they reach the diameter of a pencil. Pruning
shall be practiced as often thereafter as needed to assure sturdy crotch
development. Occasionally a tree will develop double leaders known as co-
dominant stems. These can lead to structural weaknesses, so it is best to
remove one. Any tree or shrub which overhangs any sidewalk, street or other
public place in the village in such a way as to impede or interfere with
traffic or travel on the public place shall be trimmed by the owner of the
premises on which the trees or shrubs grow so that the obstruction shall cease.
Tree crowns should be elevated as growth characteristics and location dictate.
Newly planted trees need not have lower branches removed until they are well
established;
      (3)   Excavations. In making excavations in street or other public
places, proper care shall be taken to avoid injury to the roots of any tree or
shrub, wherever possible.
      (4)   Tree topping. It shall be unlawful as a normal practice for any
person, firm or village department to top any street tree, park tree or other
tree on public property. TOPPING is defined as the severe cutting back of limbs
to stubs larger than three inches in diameter within the tree’s crown to such a
degree so as to remove the normal canopy and disfigure the tree. Trees severely
damaged by storms or other causes, or certain other causes or certain trees
under utility wires or other obstructions where other pruning practices are
impractical may be exempted from this section at the determination of the Tree
Commission.
      (5)   Removal of stumps. All stumps of street and park trees shall be
removed below the surface of the ground so that the top of the stump shall not
project above the surface of the ground.
   (D)   Public utility companies. Nothing in this section shall be construed
to exempt public utility companies or their agents from any of the requirements
of this chapter.
   (E)   Visibility. Please refer to current zoning regulations for details.
(Ord. 13-07-02, passed 7-23-2013)
§ 94.04 PUBLIC NUISANCES.
   (A)   Public nuisances. The following are hereby declared PUBLIC NUISANCES
under this chapter:
      (1)   Any dead or dying tree or shrub, whether located on village-owned
property or on private property;
      (2)   Any otherwise healthy tree or shrub, whether located on village-
owned property or private property, which harbors insects or diseases which
reasonably may be expected to cause injury or substantial harm to any tree or
shrub;
      (3)   Any tree, shrub, or portion thereof, whether located on village-
owned property or on private property, which by reason of location or condition
constitutes an imminent danger to the health, safety or welfare of the general
public;
      (4)   Any tree, shrub or portion thereof, whether located on village-
owned property or on private property, which obstructs the free passage of
pedestrian or vehicular traffic or which obstructs a street light or traffic
control sign; or
      (5)   Any tree, shrub or portion thereof, whether located on village-
owned property or on private property, which dangerously obstructs the view in
the visibility triangle (refer to current zoning regulations for details).
   (B)   Prohibited acts. It shall be unlawful and a violation of this chapter
for any person to do any of the following:
      (1)   Deposit, store or maintain on village-owned property any stone,
brick, sand, concrete, lumber, tile, pipe, other materials or vehicles that
will over time compact the soil causing an impediment to the free passage of
water, air and nutrients to the roots of any tree or shrub;
      (2)   Cause any gaseous, liquid or solid substance which, because of the
nature or amount, reasonably may be expected to be toxic or otherwise harmful
to trees, shrubs or other plants, to be located where the substance reasonably
may be expected to affect trees or shrubs located on village-owned property.
   (C)   Abatement. The following are the prescribed means of abating public
nuisances under this chapter.
      (1)   Any public nuisance under this chapter which is located on village-
owned property shall be pruned, removed or otherwise treated by the Public
Works Department or designee in whatever fashion is required to cause the
abatement of the nuisance within a reasonable time after its discovery.
      (2)   Any public nuisance under this chapter which is located on private
property shall be pruned, removed or otherwise treated by the property owner or
his or her agent in whatever fashion is required to cause the abatement of the
nuisance. No property owner may be found guilty of violating this provision
unless and until the following requirements of notice have been satisfied:
         (a)   The Commission shall direct the Public Works Department to send
a written notice to be sent by registered or certified mail to the owner of the
property upon which the nuisance is found;
         (b)   The notice shall describe with particularity the tree or shrub
which has been declared to be a public nuisance;
         (c)   The notice shall state with particularity the alternative
actions that the property owner may undertake to abate the nuisance;
         (d)   The notice will require the elimination of the nuisance within
30 days after receipt of the notice by the property owner; unless a more
appropriate timeframe is otherwise established by the village and agreed to by
both parties;
         (e)   The notice shall set forth the procedures by which the property
owner may be heard by the Tree Commission to protest the requirements that he
or she act to abate the nuisance; and
         (f)   If the property owner cannot be located following diligent
inquiry by the Commission, the notice shall be served upon the occupant or
person in charge of the property upon which the nuisance is located. In the
event that the nuisance is not abated within 30 days following receipt of
notice by the property owner, the Commission is authorized to cause the
abatement of the nuisance, and the reasonable cost of the abatement shall be
filed as a lien against the property on which the nuisance was located, and the
property owner of the property upon which the nuisance is located shall be
subject to prosecution under §
94.99. Nothing in this provision shall be construed to exempt any person from
the requirements of obtaining permits under §
94.03.
      (3)   The provisions of divisions (B)(1) and (B)(2) of this section
notwithstanding, the Commission is hereby empowered to cause the immediate
abatement of any public nuisance under this chapter, provided that the nuisance
is declared by the Commission to threaten imminent and serious danger of injury
or death to any person, and provided that the owner of the property on which
the nuisance is located cannot be found through the diligent efforts of the
Commission.
      (4)   The Commission is hereby empowered to seek from any court of
competent jurisdiction an order directing the immediate abatement of any public
nuisance under this chapter.
(Ord. 13-07-02, passed 7-23-2013) Penalty, see §
94.99
§ 94.05 INTERFERENCE WITH TREE COMMISSION.
   No person shall unreasonably hinder, prevent, delay or interfere with the
Tree Commission or its agents while engaged in the execution or enforcement of
this chapter.
(Ord. 13-07-02, passed 7-23-2013) Penalty, see §
94.99
§ 94.06 LIEN.
   (A)   The cost of any work performed by or on behalf of the village pursuant
to a property owner’s failure to comply with this chapter shall be a lien upon
the owner’s real estate. Whenever a bill for the work remains unpaid 30 days
after it has been rendered to the property owner, the Village Clerk shall file
within 60 days after the cost and expense of the work is incurred with the
Recorder of Deeds of the county, a notice of lien. The notice shall consist of
a sworn statement setting out:
      (1)   A description of the real estate sufficient for identification
thereof;
      (2)   The amount of money representing the cost and expense incurred or
payable for the work; and
      (3)   The date or dates when the cost and expense were incurred by the
village.
   (B)   A copy of the notice shall be mailed by the Village Administrator or
his or her designee to the owner of the premises at his or her last known
address, if his or her address is known, otherwise to the owner at the address
of the premises.
   (C)   Property subject to a lien for unpaid bills shall be sold for
nonpayment of the same, and the proceeds of the sale shall be applied to pay
the charges, after deducting costs, including reasonable attorney’s fees, as in
the case in the foreclosure of statutory liens. The Village Attorney is hereby
authorized to institute the proceedings in the name of the village, in any
court having jurisdiction over the matter, within two years from the date the
costs and expense were incurred.
(Ord. 13-07-02, passed 7-23-2013)
§ 94.07 EFFECTIVE DATE.
   This chapter shall be effective after its passage and approval as provided
by law, and after the expiration of ten days after its publication in pamphlet
form.
(Ord. 13-07-02, passed 7-23-2013)
§ 94.08 REVIEW BY VILLAGE BOARD.
   The Village Board shall have the right to review the conduct, acts and
decisions of the Tree Commission. Any person may appeal any ruling or order of
the Tree Commission to the Village Board who may hear the matter and make a
final decision.
(Ord. 13-07-02, passed 7-23-2013)
§ 94.99 PENALTY.
   Any person who violates any provision of this chapter or who fails to comply
with any notice issued pursuant to the provisions of this chapter, upon being
found guilty of violation, shall be subject to a fine of not less than $50 nor
more than $200 for each separate offense. Each day during which any violation
of the provisions of this chapter shall occur or continue shall be considered a
separate offense, and is subject to a fine. If, as the result of the violation
of any provision of this chapter, the injury, mutilation or death of a tree or
shrub located on village-owned property is caused, the cost of repair or
replacement of the tree or shrub shall be borne by the party in violation.
Replacement trees may be required; the size and number determined by the
Commission. All requests are reviewed by the Commission.
(Ord. 13-07-02, passed 7-23-2013)
APPENDIX A: TREE SPECIES
   Table
      
I.   Acceptable trees
      
II.   Trees not acceptable for planting
      
III.   Trees unacceptable species
TABLE I: ACCEPTABLE TREES.
   (A)      Large trees.
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/               SPACING: 40 feet minimum
a9ca1b11a123a719de15c1f9e2aa74391beab565/IMAGES/ PARKWAY WIDTH: 8 feet minimum
0-0-0-1281.jpg]
 
Scientific Name Common Name Cultivars
Scientific Name         Common Name            Cultivars
Acer saccharum          Sugar Maple
Alnus incana            Tag Alder
Celtis laevigata        Sugar Hackberry
Celtis occidentalis     Hackberry
Fagus grandifolia       American Beech
Fagus sylvatica         European Beech
Ginkgo biloba           Ginkgo (male)
Gymnocladus dioicus     Kentucky Coffee (male)
Liquidambar styraciflua Sweetgum
Liriodendron tulipifera Tuliptree
Magnolia acuminata      Cucumber Tree
Platanus acerifolia     London Planetree
Quercus alba            White Oak
Quercus bicolor         Swamp White Oak
Quercus coccinea        Scarlet Oak
Quercus imbricaria      Shingle Oak
Quercus macrocarpa      Bur Oak
Quercus Montana         Chestnut Oak
Quercus muehlenbergii   Chinquapin Oak
Quercus robur           English Oak
Quercus rubra           Red Oak
Quercus shumardii       Shumard Oak
Sassafras albidum       Sassafras
Taxodium distichum      Bald Cypress
Tilia heterophylla      Beetree Linden
Tilia tomentosa         Silver Linden
Tilia petiolaris        Pendent Silver Linden
Ulmus x                 Elm                    Resistance to Dutch Elm Disease
 
   (B)   Medium trees.
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/               SPACING: 35 feet minimum
a9ca1b11a123a719de15c1f9e2aa74391beab565/IMAGES/ PARKWAY WIDTH: 6 feet minimum
0-0-0-1283.jpg]
 
 
Scientific Name Common Name Cultivars
Scientific Name                    Common Name                  Cultivars
Acer Campestre                     Hedge Maple
Acer Miyabei                       Miyabei Maple
Acer platanoides                   Norway Maple
Acer rubrum                        Red Maple
Alnus glutinosa                    Black Alder
Carpinus betulus                   European Hornbeam
Cladrastis lutea                   Yellowwood
Corylus colurna                    Turkish Filbert
Eucommia ulmoides                  Hardy Rubber Tree
Gleditsia Triacanthos var. inermis Thornless Common Honeylocust
Maclura pomifera                   Osage Orange (male)
Magnolia kobus                     Kobus Magnolia
Nyssa sylvatica                    Black Gum
Phellodendron amurense             Amur Cork Tree
Prunus sargentii                   Sargent Cherry
Sophora japonica                   Pagodatree
Zelkova serrata                    Zelkova Tree
 
   Medium sized trees are better suited for planting on normal village parkways
than their larger counterparts. Large trees require more living space, and for
this reason it is recommended that they be planted on the private side of the
sidewalk whenever possible. The overall objective of proper tree selection is
to select the right tree for the right location in order that one may benefit
from the tree without being subject to future maintenance liabilities or
hazards.
   (C)   Small trees.
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/               SPACING: 25 feet minimum
a9ca1b11a123a719de15c1f9e2aa74391beab565/IMAGES/ PARKWAY WIDTH: 5 feet minimum
0-0-0-1285.jpg]
 
Scientific Name Common Name Cultivars
Scientific Name         Common Name                              Cultivars
Acer ginnala            Amur Maple (tree form)
Acer griseum            Paperback Maple
Acer palmatum           Japanese Maple
Acer triflorum          Three-flowered Maple
Acer truncatum          Purpleblow Maple
Amelanchier canadensis  Shadblow Serviceberry (tree form)
Amelanchier grandiflora Apple Serviceberry (tree form)
Amelanchier laevis      Allegheny Serviceberry (tree form)
Carpinus caroliniana    American Hornbeam
Cornus florida          Flowering Dogwood
Cornus kousa            Japanese Dogwood
Crataegus sp.           Hawthorn (thornless) (disease resistant)
Halesia carolina        Carolina Silverbell
Hamamelis virginiana    Common Witchhazel
Koelreuteria paniculata Goldenrain Tree
Malus sp.*              Flowering Crab
Ostrya virginiana       Ironwood
Parrotia persica        Persian Parrotia
Syringa reticulata      Japanese Tree Lilac
* Selected cultivars or varieties of suitable form and resistant to scab
disease.
 
   Small trees are appropriate in parkway locations where, due to space
limitations, larger trees cannot be properly utilized without creating
conflicts with existing trees. Height limitations imposed by overhead utilities
also necessitate the use of appropriate small trees to avoid line conflicts and
the necessity of excessive utility trimming that results in disfigured trees.
On the whole, small trees which tend to be more ornamental than their larger
counterparts can create an added aesthetic dimension to the streetscape.
(Ord. 86-10-3, passed 10-13-1986; Ord. 13-07-02, passed 7-23-2013)
TABLE II: TREES NOT ACCEPTABLE FOR PLANTING.
   (A)   The following is a listing of trees more or less common to the area
that are not suitable as street or parkway trees. Their lack of suitability is
based on undesirable growth habits, fruiting habits, form, susceptibility to
serious diseases, propensity to storm damage, and a host of other limitations
too numerous to mention. The limitations listed for each tree or species group
are not all-inclusive, and lists only the more serious problems encountered
locally. In essence, there are far too many superior street or parkway trees
listed in Table I to warrant the use of any of the trees listed in Table II
except under special circumstances.
   (B)   Though many of the trees listed in Table II are presently growing on
our parkways as the result of previously unrestricted plantings, they do
constitute a maintenance liability to the village and as such, upon removal,
should be replaced with species listed in Table I.
Scientific Name Common Name Problem or Limitation
Scientific Name       Common Name                  Problem or Limitation
Abies sp.             Fir                          Form - visibility hazard
Acer saccharinum      Silver Maple                 Weak wooded (but very
                                                   common)
Aesculus sp.          Horsechestnut                Foliar diseases, leaf blotch
Ailanthus altissima   Tree-of-heaven               Weedy invasive species
Betula sp.            Birch                        Environmental stress, borers
Catalpa sp.           Catalpa                      Littering fruit
Diospyros             Persimmon                    Littering fruit
Gleditsia sp.         Honeylocust                  Serious disease/insect
                                                   problem
Juglans sp.           Walnut                       Littering fruit
Juniperus sp.         Juniper                      Form - visibility hazard
Malus sp.             Common Apple                 Littering fruit, disease
                                                   prone
Morus alba            White Mulberry               Highly invasive, birds
                                                   spread seeds
Picea sp.             Spruce                       Form - visibility hazard
Pinus sp.             Pine                         Form - visibility hazard
Platanus occidentalis Sycamore (Amer.)             Disease - twig blight
Populus sp.           Poplar                       Fast growing, weak wooded
Pyrus sp.             Common Pear                  Littering fruit
Pyrus calleryana cv’Callery Pear (e.g., Bradford Very weak
                      and others)
Quercus acutissima    Sawtooth Oak
Quercus palustris     Pin Oak                      Iron chlorosis
Robinia sp.           Black Locust                 Shallow rooted, borers
Salix sp.             Willow                       Weak wooded, storm damage
Thuja sp.             Arborvitae                   Form - visibility hazard
Ulmus parvifolia      Chinese or Lacebark Elm      Weak wooded
Ulmus pumila          Siberian Elm                 Extremely weak wooded
 
(Ord. 86-10-3, passed 10-13-1986; Ord. 13-07-02, passed 7-23-2013)
TABLE III: TREES UNACCEPTABLE SPECIES.
   (A)   Fraxinus species (Ashes) (not to be removed but new plantings to be
prohibited until EAB status resolved).
   (B)   Tilia Americana, American Linden.
   (C)   T. cordata, Littleleaf Linden.
   (D)   T. x euchlora, Crimean Linden.
   (E)   T. platyphyllos, Bigleaf Linden - have significant defoliation
problems with Japanese Beetles (note T. petiolaris, Pendant Silver Linden and
T. tomentosa, Silver Linden have less problems with Japanese Beetles).
   (F)   Cercidiphyllum japonicum - Katsuratree is a very nice tree, but
generally not considered suitable for street tree planting due to its need for
moist soils and decline in dry sites or drought.
   (G)   Acer pensylvanicum - Striped Maple - A nice species with striped green
and white bark, but generally short-lived in the Midwest due to canker
problems.
(Ord. 13-07-02, passed 7-23-2013)
CHAPTER 95: PARKS AND RECREATION
Section
   
95.01   Parks identified
   
95.02   Park hours and rules
   
95.03   Parking
   
95.04   Motor vehicles
   
95.05   Interfering with a Village Officer, employee or agent
   
95.06   Trespassing prohibited
   
95.07   Animals prohibited
Cross-reference:
   Offenses generally, see
Chapter 130
§ 95.01 PARKS IDENTIFIED.
    Each of the following properties situated within the corporate limits of
the village is designated to be a “park” for the purposes of this chapter:
   (A)   13 Acres Park - 302 W. Dunbar St.;
   (B)   Barber Park - 703 S. McDougal Rd.;
   (C)   Brent Johnson Park -1202 E. Oak Valley Rd.;
   (D)   Bridle Leash Park - 906 W. Diane Ln.;
   (E)   Brooks-Warfel Memorial Park - 406 E. Dunbar St.;
   (F)   Dowell Park - 601 E. Andover St.;
   (G)   Freedom Plaza - 511 E. Main St.;
   (H)   E. Rt. 150, Lake of the Woods Road, Rt. 47 North, and S. Mahomet Road
Multi-use Pathways;
   (I)   Middletown Park -102 W. Main St.;
   (J)   Russell Park - 413 E. Main St.;
   (K)   Police Department Park - 570 S. Center St.;
   (L)   Sandy Ridge Park - 1404 E. Heather Dr.;
   (M)   Sangamon River Green Way - 1404 S. Division St.;
   (N)   Taylor Park - 703 W. Hickory St.; and
   (O)   Water Tower Park - 1404 E. Heather Dr.
(Ord. 05-08-02, passed 8-23-2005; Ord. 22-06-01, passed 6-28-2022)
§ 95.02 PARK HOURS AND RULES.
   (A)    All laws of the state and ordinances of the village shall be enforced
within any park by the Village Police Department.
   (B)   Parks are open for public use from sunrise to sunset, which shall be
"public hours". Parks may be kept open for village-authorized events after
public hours.
   (C)   Park hours shall be posted at designated entrances to the park.
(Ord. 05-08-02, passed 8-23-2005; Ord. 22-06-01, passed 6-28-2022)
§ 95.03 PARKING.
   (A)   Public parking shall be prohibited within any park except for parking
on designated improved parking areas during public hours while using park
facilities.
   (B)   All motor vehicles utilizing park facilities shall have valid license
plates properly displayed.
   (C)   All motor vehicles in violation of this chapter shall be subject to
ticket and/or tow.
(Ord. 05-08-02, passed 8-23-2005)
§ 95.04 MOTOR VEHICLES.
   (A)   All motor vehicles are prohibited in any park except for designated
entrance/exit drives and designated improved parking areas.
   (B)   All motor vehicles are subject to laws of the state governing the
operation of vehicles, including proper registration, valid driver’s license
and insurance.
   (C)   Any motor driven vehicle not able to be registered or licensed to
drive on a public highway is prohibited from being driven in any park. This
prohibition shall include, but is not limited to, minibikes, ATVs, snowmobiles,
dirt bikes or motor driven scooters.
(Ord. 05-08-02, passed 8-23-2005) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 95.05 INTERFERING WITH A VILLAGE OFFICER, EMPLOYEE OR AGENT.
   (A)   No person shall interfere with any officer, employee or agent of the
village in the performance of his or her duties at any park.
   (B)   Any officer, employee or agent of the village may order the ejection
of any person from any park for any violation of these rules as set forth in
this chapter.
   (C)   Any officer, employee or agent of the village shall identify
themselves as such, to any potential violator of this chapter.
(Ord. 05-08-02, passed 8-23-2005) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 95.06 TRESPASSING PROHIBITED.
   (A)   No person shall enter or remain in any park when prohibited.
   (B)   No person shall remain in any park after being ordered to leave by any
officer, employee or agent of the village.
(Ord. 05-08-02, passed 8-23-2005) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 95.07 ANIMALS PROHIBITED.
   (A)   Animals are prohibited from running at large in any park.
   (B)   Dogs shall be secured on a leash in any park.
   (C)   Any person in control of a dog must clean up any feces left by the dog
in any park.
(Ord. 05-08-02, passed 8-23-2005) Penalty, see §
10.99
Cross-reference:
   Animal regulations, see
Chapter 92
CHAPTER 96: SMALL WIRELESS FACILITIES
Section
   
96.01   Purpose and scope
   
96.02   Definitions
   
96.03   Permitted use
   
96.04   General requirements
   
96.05   Regulation of small wireless facilities
   
96.06   Application procedures
   
96.07   Pole attachment agreement
   
96.08   Duration of permits
   
96.09   Collocation requirements and conditions
   
96.10   Application fees
   
96.11   Exceptions to applicability
   
96.12   Pre-existing agreements
   
96.13   Annual recurring rate
   
96.14   Abandonment
   
96.15   Incidental construction requirements
   
96.16   Dispute resolution
   
96.17   Indemnification
   
96.18   Insurance
   
96.19   Revocation of small wireless facility collocation permit
   
96.20   Liability of violators
   
96.21   Violations
   
96.22   Interpretation
   
96.23   Cost of construction, operation and maintenance
   
96.24   Variances from requirements
   
96.25   Appeals
   
96.26   Transfer of ownership
   
96.27   Severability
§ 96.01 PURPOSE AND SCOPE.
   (A)   Purpose. The purpose of these regulations is to establish standards
and procedures for the siting and collocation of small wireless facilities on
rights-of-way within the village’s jurisdiction, or outside the rights-of-way
on property zoned by the village exclusively for commercial or industrial use,
in a manner that is consistent with the requirements of Public Act 100-0585
known as the Small Wireless Facilities Deployment Act.
   (B)   Conflicts with other chapters. This chapter supersedes all chapters or
parts of chapters adopted prior hereto that are in conflict herewith, to the
extent of such conflict.
   (C)   Conflicts with state and federal laws. In the event that applicable
federal or state laws or regulations conflict with the requirements of this
chapter, the wireless provider shall comply with the requirements of this
chapter to the maximum extent possible without violating federal or state laws
or regulations.
(Ord. 18-07-01, passed 7-24-2018)
§ 96.02 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purposes of this chapter, the following terms shall have the
following meanings:
   ACT. Public Act 100-0585, known as the Small Wireless Facilities Deployment
Act.
   ANTENNA. Communications equipment that transmits or receives electromagnetic
radio frequency signals used in the provision of wireless services.
   APPLICABLE CODES. Uniform building, fire, electrical, plumbing, or
mechanical codes adopted by a recognized national code organization or local
amendments to those codes, including the National Electric Safety Code.
   APPLICANT. Any person who submits an application and is a wireless provider.
   APPLICATION. A request submitted by an applicant to the village for a permit
to collocate small wireless facilities, and a request that includes the
installation of a new utility pole for such collocation, as well as any
applicable fee for the review of such application.
   COLLOCATE or COLLOCATION. To install, mount, maintain, modify, operate, or
replace wireless facilities on or adjacent to a wireless support structure or
utility pole.
   COMMUNICATIONS SERVICE. Cable service, as defined in 47 U.S.C. 522(6), as
amended; information service, as defined in 47 U.S.C. 153(24), as amended;
telecommunications service, as defined in 47 U.S.C. 153(53), as amended; mobile
service, as defined in 47 U.S.C. 153(53), as amended; or wireless service other
than mobile service.
   COMMUNICATIONS SERVICE PROVIDER. A cable operator, as defined in 47 U.S.C.
522(5), as amended; a provider of information service, as defined in 47 U.S.C.
153(24), as amended; a telecommunications carrier, as defined in 47 U.S.C. 153
(51), as amended; or a wireless provider.
   FCC. The Federal Communications Commission of the United States.
   FEE. A one-time charge.
   HISTORIC DISTRICT or HISTORIC LANDMARK. A building, property, or site, or
group of buildings, properties, or sites that are either (i) listed in the
National Register of Historic Places or formally determined eligible for
listing by the Keeper of the National Register, the individual who has been
delegated the authority by the federal agency to list properties and determine
their eligibility for the National Register, in accordance with Section
VI.D.1.a.i through Section VI.D.1.a.v of the Nationwide Programmatic Agreement
codified at 47 CFR Part 1, Appendix C; or (ii) designated as a locally
landmarked building, property, site, or historic district by an ordinance
adopted by the Village pursuant to a preservation program that meets the
requirements of the Certified Local Government Program of the Illinois State
Historic Preservation Office or where such certification of the preservation
program by the Illinois State Historic Preservation Office is pending.
   LAW. A federal or state statute, common law, code, rule, regulation, order,
or local ordinance or resolution.
   MICRO WIRELESS FACILITY. A small wireless facility that is not larger in
dimension than 24 inches in length, 15 inches in width, and 12 inches in height
and that has an exterior antenna, if any, no longer than 11 inches.
   MUNICIPAL UTILITY POLE. A utility pole owned or operated by the village in
public rights-of-way.
   PERMIT. a written authorization required by the village to perform an action
or initiate, continue, or complete a project.
   PERSON. An individual, corporation, limited liability company, partnership,
association, trust, or other entity or organization.
   PUBLIC SAFETY AGENCY. The functional division of the federal government, the
state, a unit of local government, or a special purpose district located in
whole or in part within this state, that provides or has authority to provide
firefighting, police, ambulance, medical, or other emergency services to
respond to and manage emergency incidents.
   RATE. A recurring charge.
   RIGHT-OF-WAY. The area on, below, or above a public roadway, highway,
street, public sidewalk, alley, or utility easement dedicated for compatible
use. RIGHT-OF-WAY does not include village-owned aerial lines.
   SMALL WIRELESS FACILITY. A wireless facility that meets both of the
following qualifications: (i) each antenna is located inside an enclosure of no
more than 6 cubic feet in volume or, in the case of an antenna that has exposed
elements, the antenna and all of its exposed elements could fit within an
imaginary enclosure of no more than six cubic feet; and (ii) all other wireless
equipment attached directly to a utility pole associated with the facility is
cumulatively no more than 25 cubic feet in volume. The following types of
associated ancillary equipment are not included in the calculation of equipment
volume: electric meter, concealment elements, telecommunications demarcation
box, ground-based enclosures, grounding equipment, power transfer switch, cut-
off switch, and vertical cable runs for the connection of power and other
services.
   UTILITY POLE. A pole or similar structure that is used in whole or in part
by a communications service provider or for electric distribution, lighting,
traffic control, or a similar function.
   VILLAGE. The Village of Mahomet, Champaign County, Illinois.
   VILLAGE ADMINISTRATOR.  The person appointed by the President of the Board
of Trustees to enforce the provisions of this chapter. The VILLAGE
ADMINISTRATOR may designate other village employees to act on his/her behalf.
   WIRELESS FACILITY. Equipment at a fixed location that enables wireless
communications between user equipment and a communications network, including:
(i) equipment associated with wireless communications; and (ii) radio
transceivers, antennas, coaxial or fiber-optic cable, regular and backup power
supplies, and comparable equipment, regardless of technological configuration.
WIRELESS FACILITY includes small wireless facilities. WIRELESS FACILITY does
not include: (i) the structure or improvements on, under, or within which the
equipment is collocated; or (ii) wireline backhaul facilities, coaxial or fiber
optic cable that is between wireless support structures or utility poles or
coaxial, or fiber optic cable that is otherwise not immediately adjacent to or
directly associated with an antenna.
   WIRELESS INFRASTRUCTURE PROVIDER. Any person authorized to provide
telecommunications service in the state that builds or installs wireless
communication transmission equipment, wireless facilities, wireless support
structures, or utility poles and that is not a wireless services provider but
is acting as an agent or a contractor for a wireless services provider for the
application submitted to the village.
   WIRELESS PROVIDER. A wireless infrastructure provider or a wireless services
provider.
   WIRELESS SERVICES. Any services provided to the general public, including a
particular class of customers, and made available on a nondiscriminatory basis
using licensed or unlicensed spectrum, whether at a fixed location or mobile,
provided using wireless facilities.
   WIRELESS SERVICES PROVIDER. a person who provides wireless services.
   WIRELESS SUPPORT STRUCTURE. A freestanding structure, such as a monopole;
tower, either guyed or self-supporting; billboard; or other existing or
proposed structure designed to support or capable of supporting wireless
facilities. WIRELESS SUPPORT STRUCTURE does not include a utility pole.
(Ord. 18-07-01, passed 7-24-2018)
§ 96.03 PERMITTED USE.
   Small wireless facilities shall be classified as permitted uses and subject
to administrative review, except as provided elsewhere herein regarding
variance requests and shall not be subject to zoning review or approval if they
are collocated (i) in rights-of-way in any zoning district, or (ii) outside
rights-of-way in property zoned exclusively for commercial or industrial use.
Within property zoned exclusively for commercial or industrial use collocated
small wireless facilities shall be considered permitted accessory uses.
(Ord. 18-07-01, passed 7-24-2018)
§ 96.04 GENERAL REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   Where reference is made herein to any federal or state statute, rules
or regulations, either specifically or generally, the reference shall be to
that statute, rule or regulation and to all amendments thereto now in force or
which may be hereafter enacted, adopted and/or promulgated.
   (B)   No portion or provision hereof shall be taken to establish lesser or
different requirements than those imposed upon persons by the state and federal
governments for purposes of protecting the public, and to the extent the state
and federal statutes and regulations are different from, in conflict with, and
are more stringent than the provisions of this chapter, the state and federal
statutes, rules and regulations shall govern.
   (C)   The village shall not be responsible in any way for the proper
operation and maintenance of small wireless facilities within the village.
   (D)   Private legal responsibility. Each applicant for a permit required by
this chapter for work on private or public property shall bear the
responsibility for accidental injury or death, property damage or any other
litigation that may arise in connection with this work and shall in any case
hold the village harmless from all damages.
   (E)   The village undertakes to use reasonable care and diligence to provide
municipal utility poles of sound character, but reserves the right, at any
time, to alter, amend, replace, repair or maintain its utility poles for the
purpose of making repairs or extensions or for other purposes. The village
shall not be liable for a deficiency or failure, regardless of cause, in the
support of a small wireless facility by a municipal utility pole, nor any
damage caused thereby by the failure of the municipal utility pole or any
attachment to the village’s utility pole or the village’s right-of-way. All
damage occasioned by any collapse or failure of a municipal facility shall be
borne exclusively by the provider.
   (F)   The village reserves the right to require that a permitted small
wireless facility located upon village right-of-way be relocated or adjusted to
accommodate the construction, expansion, repair, alteration or other
modifications to village infrastructure. When such relocation or adjustment is
required, it shall be completed within a reasonable time so as to cause no
delay to the village construction activities.
(Ord. 18-07-01, passed 7-24-2018)
§ 96.05 REGULATION OF SMALL WIRELESS FACILITIES. PERMIT REQUIRED.
   (A)   No person shall hereafter construct, build, establish, replace or
maintain a small wireless facility in a street or alley right-of-way maintained
by the village or within any private property zoned for commercial or
industrial use as set forth in Chapter 152 of this Code of Ordinances without
first obtaining a permit to do so, as hereinafter provided. Providers may
obtain the application and permit for collocation and construction of small
wireless facilities from the Village Code Compliance Official, or other person
as the village may designate to administer this chapter.
   (B)   Upon review of the permit application, the Building Inspector shall
determine whether the proposed construction conforms to the requirements of
this chapter. If it does, the Building Inspector shall issue the permit for
construction. If the proposed construction does not conform to the requirements
of this chapter, the Building Inspector shall deny issuance of the permit. If
approval is denied, the applicant may appeal the decision of the Building
Inspector to the Village Board of Trustees.
   (C)   The President of the Village Board of Trustees may vary or alter the
strict application of any of the requirements of this chapter where the strict
application would result in practical difficulty or unnecessary hardship that
would deprive the provider of the reasonable use of the land for establishment
of a small wireless facility.
(Ord. 18-07-01, passed 7-24-2018)
§ 96.06 APPLICATION PROCEDURES.
   An applicant shall obtain one or more permit applications from the Village
to collocate a small wireless facility. An application shall be received and
processed, and permits issued shall be subject to the following conditions and
requirements:
   (A)   Application requirements. An applicant shall provide the following
information to the village, together with the village’s small wireless
facilities permit application, as a condition of any permit application to
collocate small wireless facilities on a utility pole or wireless support
structure:
      (1)   Site specific structural integrity and, for a municipal utility
pole, make-ready analysis prepared by a structural engineer, as that term is
defined in Section 4 of the Structural Engineering Practice Act of 1989;
      (2)   The location where each proposed small wireless facility would be
installed and photographs of the location and its immediate surroundings
depicting the utility poles or structures on which each proposed small wireless
facility would be mounted or location where utility poles or structures would
be installed. The drawings should include a depiction of the completed
facility;
      (3)   Specifications and drawings prepared by a structural engineer, as
that term is defined in Section 4 of the Structural Engineering Practice Act of
1989, for each proposed small wireless facility covered by the application as
it is proposed to be installed;
      (4)   The equipment type and model numbers for the antennas and all other
wireless equipment associated with the small wireless facility;
      (5)   A proposed schedule for the installation and completion of each
small wireless facility covered by the application, if approved; and
      (6)   Certification that the collocation complies with the Collocation
Requirements and Conditions contained herein, to the best of the applicant’s
knowledge.
      (7)   In the event that the proposed small wireless facility is to be
attached to an existing structure or pole owned by an entity other than the
village, the applicant shall provide legally competent evidence of the consent
of the owner of such structure or pole to the proposed collocation.
   (B)   Application process. The village shall process applications as
follows:
      (1)   The first completed application shall have priority over
applications received by different applicants for collocation on the same
utility pole or wireless support structure.
      (2)   An application to collocate a small wireless facility on an
existing utility pole or wireless support structure, or replacement of an
existing utility pole or wireless support structure shall be processed on a
nondiscriminatory basis within 90 days.
      (3)   (a)   An application to install a small wireless facility on an
existing pole or wireless support structure shall be deemed approved if the
village fails to approve or deny the application within 90 days after the
submission of a completed application. However, if an applicant intends to
proceed with the installation of a small wireless facility on a deemed approved
basis, the applicant shall notify the Village in writing of its intention to
invoke the deemed approved remedy no sooner than 75 days after the submission
of a completed application.
         (b)   The permit application shall be deemed approved on the latter of
the 90th day after submission of the complete application or the 10th day after
the receipt of the deemed approved notice by the village. The receipt of the
deemed approved notice shall not preclude the village’s denial of the permit
request within the time limits as provided under this chapter.
      (4)   An application to collocate a small wireless facility that includes
the installation of a new utility pole or wireless support structure shall be
processed on a nondiscriminatory basis within 120 days.
      (5)   (a)   An application to install a new utility pole or wireless
support structure shall be deemed approved if the village fails to approve or
deny the application within 120 days after the submission of a completed
application. However, if an applicant intends to proceed with the installation
of a small wireless facility on a deemed approved basis, the applicant shall
notify the village in writing of its intention to invoke the deemed approved
remedy no sooner than 105 days after the submission of a completed application.
         (b)   The permit shall be deemed approved on the latter of the 120th
day after submission of the complete application or the 10th day after the
receipt of the deemed approved notice by the village. The receipt of the deemed
approved notice shall not preclude the village’s denial of the permit request
within the time limits as provided under this chapter.
      (6)   (a)   If the application and any supporting documentation is in
proper form, and if the small wireless facility indicated therein, in the
judgment of the Village Administrator or village staff, appears to be in
conformance with this chapter and all other applicable village requirements,
and the application permit fee has been paid, the Village Administrator or
village staff shall issue the permit for collocation of a small wireless
facility. If otherwise, the application shall be denied.
         (b)   The village shall document the basis for a denial, including the
specific code provisions or application conditions on which the denial is
based, and send the documentation to the applicant on the day the village
denies an application.
      (7)   (a)   The applicant may cure the deficiencies identified by the
village and resubmit a revised application once within 30 days after notice of
denial is sent to the applicant without paying an additional application fee.
The village shall approve or deny the revised application within 30 days after
the receipt of the revised application or the application shall be deemed
approved. Failure to resubmit a revised application within 30 days of denial
shall require the applicant to submit a new application with all applicable
fees, and recommencement of the village’s review period.
         (b)   The applicant must notify the village in writing of its
intention to proceed with the installation of a small wireless facility on a
deemed approved basis, which notification shall be submitted with the revised
application.
      (8)   Any review of a revised application shall be limited to the
deficiencies cited in the denial. However, this revised application review
process does not apply if the cure requires the review of a new location, new
or different structure to be collocated upon, new antennas, or other wireless
equipment associated with the small wireless facility. In such instances the
village shall approve or deny the revised application within 60 days after the
receipt of the revised application.
      (9)   If the village determines that applicable codes, ordinances or
regulations that concern public safety, or the collocation requirements and
conditions contained herein require that the utility pole or wireless support
structure be replaced before the requested collocation, approval of the permit
application shall be conditioned upon the replacement of the utility pole or
wireless support structure at the cost of the provider.
   (C)   Completeness of application. 
      (1)   Within 30 days after receiving an application, the village shall
determine whether the application is complete and notify the applicant. If an
application is incomplete, the village must specifically identify the missing
information. An application shall be deemed complete if the village fails to
provide notification to the applicant within 30 days after all documents,
information and fees specifically enumerated in the village’s permit
application form are submitted by the applicant to the village.
      (2)   Processing deadlines shall be suspended and the time periods for
review extended from the time the village sends the notice of incompleteness to
the applicant until the time the applicant provides the missing information to
the village.
   (D)   Time extensions. The time period for consideration of applications may
be further extended by:
      (1)   An express written agreement by both the applicant and the village;
or
      (2)   A local, state or federal disaster declaration or similar emergency
that causes the delay in consideration of the application.
   (E)   Consolidated applications. 
      (1)   An applicant seeking to collocate small wireless facilities within
the jurisdiction of the village shall be allowed, at the applicant’s
discretion, to file a consolidated application and receive a single permit for
the collocation of up to 25 small wireless facilities if the collocations each
involve substantially the same type of small wireless facility and
substantially the same type of structure.
      (2)   If an application includes multiple small wireless facilities, the
village may remove small wireless facility collocations from the application
and treat separately small wireless facility collocations for which incomplete
information has been provided or that do not qualify for consolidated treatment
or that are denied. The village may issue separate permits for each collocation
that is approved in a consolidated application.
   (F)   Means of submitting applications. Applicants shall submit
applications, supporting information and notices to the village by personal
delivery at the village’s designated place of business, by regular mail
postmarked on the date due or by any other commonly used means, including
electronic mail.
(Ord. 18-07-01, passed 7-24-2018)
§ 96.07 POLE ATTACHMENT AGREEMENT.
   Within 30 days after a permit to collocate a small wireless facility on a
municipal utility pole has been issued, the village and the applicant shall
enter into a Master Pole Attachment Agreement provided by the village. The
Master Agreement shall govern the terms for the initial collocation on a
municipal utility pole by the applicant. For subsequent approved permits to
collocate a small wireless facility on a municipal utility pole, the village
and the applicant shall enter into a License Supplement of the Master Pole
Attachment Agreement.
(Ord. 18-07-01, passed 7-24-2018)
§ 96.08 DURATION OF PERMITS.
   (A)   The duration of an approved permit to collocate a small wireless
facility shall be for a period of five years. Upon expiration each permit shall
be renewed for equivalent durations unless the village makes a finding that the
small wireless facility or the new or modified utility pole do not comply with
the applicable village codes or any provision, condition or requirement
contained in this chapter. Renewal of a permit shall involve submittal of an
application as set forth in §
96.05 and §
96.06 herein.
   (B)   If the Act is repealed as provided in Section 90 therein, renewals of
permits shall be subject to the applicable village code provisions or
regulations in effect at the time of renewal.
(Ord. 18-07-01, passed 7-24-2018)
§ 96.09 COLLOCATION REQUIREMENTS AND CONDITIONS.
   (A)   Public safety space reservation. The village may reserve space on
municipal utility poles for future public safety uses, for the village’s
electric utility uses, or both, but a reservation of space may not preclude the
collocation of a small wireless facility unless the village reasonably
determines that the municipal utility pole cannot accommodate both uses.
   (B)   Installation and Maintenance. The provider shall install, maintain,
repair and modify its small wireless facilities in safe condition and good
repair at all times and in full compliance with the requirements and conditions
of this chapter. The provider shall ensure that its employees, agents or
contractors that perform work in connection with its small wireless facilities
are adequately trained and skilled in accordance with all applicable industry
and governmental standards and regulations.
   (C)   No interference with public safety communication frequencies.
      (1)   A provider’s operation of the small wireless facilities shall not
interfere with the frequencies used by a public safety agency for public safety
communications.
      (2)   A provider shall install small wireless facilities of the type and
frequency that will not cause unacceptable interference with a public safety
agency’s communications equipment.
      (3)   Unacceptable interference will be determined by and measured in
accordance with industry standards and the FCC’s regulations addressing
unacceptable interference to public safety spectrum or any other spectrum
licensed by a public safety agency.
      (4)   If a small wireless facility causes such interference, and the
provider has been given written notice of the interference by the public safety
agency, the Provider, at its own expense, shall remedy the interference in a
manner consistent with the abatement and resolution procedures for interference
with public safety spectrum established by the FCC including 47 CFR 22.970
through 47 CFR 22.973 and 47 CFR 90.672 through 47 CFR 90.675.
      (5)   The village may terminate a permit for a small wireless facility
based on such interference if the Provider is not in compliance with the Code
of Federal Regulations cited in the previous paragraph. Failure to remedy the
interference as required herein shall constitute a public nuisance.
   (D)   (1)   A provider shall not collocate small wireless facilities on
village utility poles that are part of an electric distribution or transmission
system within the communication worker safety zone of the pole or the electric
supply zone of the pole.
      (2)   However, the antenna and support equipment of the small wireless
facility may be located in the communications space on the Village utility pole
and on the top of the pole, if not otherwise unavailable, if the Provider
complies with applicable codes for work involving the top of the pole.
      (3)   For purposes of this subparagraph, the terms “communications
space”, “communication worker safety zone”, and “electric supply zone” have the
meanings given to those terms in the National Electric Safety Code as published
by the Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers.
   (E)   A provider shall comply with all applicable codes and local code
provisions or regulations that concern public safety.
   (F)   A provider shall comply with the process for make ready work under 47
U.S.C. 224 and its implementing regulations, and the requirements of the Act.
   (G)   A provider shall comply with written design standards that are
generally applicable for decorative utility poles, or reasonable stealth,
concealment and aesthetic requirements that are set forth in a village
ordinance, written policy adopted by the village, a comprehensive plan or other
written design plan that applies to other occupiers of the rights-of-way,
including on a historic landmark or in a historic district.
   (H)   Alternate placements. 
      (1)   Except as provided in this collocation requirements and conditions
section, a provider shall not be required to collocate wireless facilities on
any specific utility pole, or category of utility poles, or be required to
collocate multiple antenna systems on a single utility pole. However, with
respect to an application for the collocation of a small wireless facility
associated with a new utility pole or new wireless support structure, the
Village may propose that the small wireless facility be collocated on an
existing utility pole or existing wireless support structure within 100 feet of
the proposed new installation. The applicant shall accept the proposed
different location if it has the right to use the alternate structure on
reasonable terms and conditions, and the alternate location and structure does
not impose technical limits or additional material costs as determined by the
applicant.
      (2)   If the applicant refuses a different location for a small wireless
facility as proposed by the village, the applicant shall provide written
certification describing the property rights, technical limits or material cost
reasons the alternate location does not satisfy the criteria in this paragraph.
   (I)   Height limitations.
      (1)   The maximum height of a small wireless facility shall be no more
than ten feet above the utility pole or wireless support structure on which the
small wireless facility is collocated.
      (2)   New or replacement utility poles or wireless support structures on
which small ‘wireless facilities are collocated may not exceed the higher of:
         (a)   Ten feet in height above the tallest existing utility pole,
other than a utility pole supporting only wireless facilities, that is in place
on the date the application is submitted to the village, that is located within
300 feet of the new or replacement utility pole or wireless support structure,
and that is in the same right-of-way within the jurisdictional boundary of the
village, provided the village may designate which intersecting right-of-way
within 300 feet of the proposed utility pole or wireless support structures
shall control the height limitation for such facility; or
         (b)   Forty-five (45) feet above ground level.
   (J)   Contractual design requirements. A provider shall comply with all
requirements that are imposed by a contract between the village and a private
property owner that concern design or construction standards applicable to
utility poles and ground-mounted equipment located in the right-of-way.
   (K)   Ground-mounted equipment spacing. The provider shall comply with
applicable spacing requirements in applicable codes and ordinances concerning
the location of ground-mounted equipment located in the right-of-way if the
requirements include a waiver, variance, exception or other process that
addresses provider requests for exception, waiver or variance and do not
prohibit the granting of such exceptions, waivers or variances.
   (L)   Undergrounding regulations. A provider shall comply with local code
provisions or regulations concerning requirements that require the underground
placement of utility cables and/or prohibit the installation of new or the
modification of existing utility poles in a right-of-way without prior approval
of the village. Such undergrounding regulations shall include a waiver,
exemption or other process that addresses requests to install new utility poles
or modify existing utility poles and which do not prohibit the replacement of
utility poles.
   (M)   Collocation completion deadline. Collocation for which a permit is
granted shall be completed within 180 days after issuance of the permit, unless
the village and the provider agree to extend this period or a delay is caused
by make-ready work for a municipal utility pole or by the lack of commercial
power or backhaul availability at the site, provided the provider has made a
timely request within 60 days after the issuance of the permit for commercial
power or backhaul services, and the additional time to complete installation
does not exceed 360 days after issuance of the permit. Otherwise, the permit
shall be void unless the village grants an extension of time in writing to the
applicant.
(Ord. 18-07-01, passed 7-24-2018)
§ 96.10 APPLICATION FEES.
   Application fees are imposed as follows:
   (A)   Each applicant shall pay an application fee of $650 for an application
to collocate a single small wireless facility on an existing utility pole or
wireless support structure. Each applicant shall pay an application fee of $350
for each small wireless facility addressed in a consolidated application to
collocate more than one small wireless facility on existing utility poles or
wireless support structures.
   (B)   Applicant shall pay an application fee of $1,000 for each small
wireless facility addressed in an application that includes the installation of
a new utility pole for such collocation.
   (C)   Notwithstanding any contrary provision of state law or local
ordinance, applications pursuant to this chapter shall be accompanied by the
required application fee. Application fees shall be non-refundable.
   (D)   The village shall not require an application, approval or permit, or
require any fees or other charges, from a communications service provider
authorized to occupy the rights-of-way, for:
      (1)   Routine maintenance;
      (2)   The replacement of existing wireless facilities with new wireless
facilities that are substantially similar, the same size, or smaller than the
existing facilities. The provider shall notify the village at least ten days
prior to the planned replacement and shall include equipment specifications for
the replacement of equipment consistent with §
96.06; or
      (3)   The installation, placement, maintenance, operation or replacement
of micro wireless facilities suspended on cables that are strung between
existing utility poles in compliance with applicable safety codes.
(Ord. 18-07-01, passed 7-24-2018)
§ 96.11 EXCEPTIONS TO APPLICABILITY.
   Nothing in this chapter authorizes a person to collocate small wireless
facilities on:
   (A)   property owned by a private party or property owned or controlled by
the village or another unit of local government that is not located within
rights-of-way, or a privately owned utility pole or wireless support structure
without the consent of the property owner;
   (B)   Property owned, leased, or controlled by a park district, forest
preserve district, or conservation district for public park, recreation or
conservation purposes without the consent of the affected district, excluding
the placement of facilities on rights-of-way located in an affected district
that are under the jurisdiction and control of a different unit of local
government as provided by the Illinois Highway Code; or
   (C)   (1)   Property owned by a rail carrier registered under § 18c-7201 of
the Illinois Vehicle Code, Metra Commuter Rail or any other public commuter
rail service, or an electric utility as defined in § 16-102 of the Public
Utilities Act, without the consent of the rail carrier, public commuter rail
service, or electric utility. The provisions of this chapter do not apply to an
electric or gas public utility or such utility’s wireless facilities if the
facilities are being used, developed and maintained consistent with the
provisions of subsection (I) of § 16-108.5 of the Public Utilities Act.
      (2)   For the purposes of this section, “public utility” has the meaning
given to that term in § 3-105 of the Public Utilities Act. Nothing in this
chapter shall be construed to relieve any person from any requirement (a) to
obtain a franchise or a state-issued authorization to offer cable service or
video service or (b) to obtain any required permission to install, place,
maintain, or operate communications facilities, other than small wireless
facilities subject to this chapter.
(Ord. 18-07-01, passed 7-24-2018)
§ 96.12 PRE-EXISTING AGREEMENTS.
   (A)   Existing agreements between the village and providers that relate to
the collocation of small wireless facilities in the right-of-way, including the
collocation of small wireless facilities on village utility poles, that are in
effect on June 1, 2018, remain in effect for all small wireless facilities
collocated on the village’s utility poles pursuant to applications submitted to
the village before June 1, 2018, subject to applicable termination provisions
contained therein. Agreements entered into after June 1, 2018, shall comply
with the requirements of this chapter.
   (B)   A provider that has an existing agreement with the Village on the
effective date of the Act may accept the rates, fees and terms that the village
makes available under this chapter for the collocation of small wireless
facilities or the installation of new utility poles for the collocation of
small wireless facilities that are the subject of an application submitted two
or more years after the effective date of the Act by notifying the village that
it opts to accept such rates, fees and terms. The existing agreement remains in
effect, subject to applicable termination provisions, for the small wireless
facilities the provider has collocated on the Village’s utility poles pursuant
to applications submitted to the village before the wireless provider provides
such notice and exercises its option under this paragraph.
(Ord. 18-07-01, passed 7-24-2018)
§ 96.13 ANNUAL RECURRING RATE.
   (A)   A provider shall pay to the village an annual recurring rate to
collocate a small wireless facility on a village utility pole located in a
right-of-way that equals a minimum of (i) $200 per year or (ii) the actual,
direct and reasonable costs related to the wireless provider’s use of space on
the village utility pole if those costs exceed $200 per year.
   (B)   If the village has not billed the wireless provider actual and direct
costs, the fee shall be $200 payable on the first day after the first annual
anniversary of the issuance of the permit, and on each annual anniversary date
thereafter.
(Ord. 18-07-01, passed 7-24-2018)
§ 96.14 ABANDONMENT.
   (A)   A small wireless facility that is not operated for a continuous period
of 12 months shall be considered abandoned. The owner of the facility shall
remove the small wireless facility within 90 days after receipt of written
notice from the village notifying the provider of the determination of
abandonment.
   (B)   The notice shall be sent by certified or registered mail, return
receipt requested, by the village to the owner at the last known address of the
provider. If the small wireless facility is not removed within 90 days of such
notice, the village may remove or cause the removal of such facility pursuant
to the terms of its pole attachment agreement for municipal utility poles or
through whatever actions are provided for abatement of nuisances or by other
law for removal and cost recovery.
(Ord. 18-07-01, passed 7-24-2018)
§ 96.15 INCIDENTAL CONSTRUCTION REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   Traffic control permits. Providers shall secure a separate permit from
the village to work within rights-of-way for activities that affect traffic
patterns, traffic safety, or require street pavement lane closures. Providers
shall comply with all requirements of the Illinois Department of Transportation
Manual of Uniform Traffic Control Devices, and the Illinois Department of
Transportation Standard Specifications for Road and Bridge Construction for
traffic control during construction activities within a street right-of-way.
   (B)   Surface restoration. When existing pavement, sidewalk, yard area,
ditches or other surface treatments on public rights-of-way are removed in the
course of collocating a small wireless facility, the surfaces shall be restored
to meet the original condition in accordance with the Standard Specifications
for Water and Sewer Construction in Illinois and in accordance with the
requirements of the Village Infrastructure Design Manual. Street cuts shall be
made only at the times and in a manner approved by the village following at
least 24 hours notice to the village.
   (C)   Excavation. All excavations for small wireless facility installation
shall be adequately guarded with barricades and lights as to protect the public
from hazard. Streets, sidewalks, parkways, and other public property disturbed
in the course of the work shall be restored in a manner satisfactory to the
village.
   (D)   Consent for inspections. All work for which a small wireless facility
collocation permit is required shall be subject to inspection by the Building
Inspector or his or her duly authorized representative. It shall be unlawful to
refuse to allow the Building Inspector or his or her representative to enter
the premises or structure at any reasonable time to make an inspection. It
shall be unlawful to interfere with or hinder the Building Inspector or his or
her representative when in the performance of their duties.
(Ord. 18-07-01, passed 7-24-2018) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 96.16 DISPUTE RESOLUTION.
   The Circuit Court of Champaign County shall have exclusive jurisdiction to
resolve all disputes arising under the Small Wireless Facilities Deployment
Act. Pending resolution of a dispute concerning rates for collocation of small
wireless facilities on municipal utility poles within the right-of-way, the
village shall allow the collocating person to collocate on its poles at annual
rates of no more than $200 per year per municipal utility pole, with rates to
be determined upon final resolution of the dispute.
(Ord. 18-07-01, passed 7-24-2018)
§ 96.17 INDEMNIFICATION.
   A provider shall indemnify and hold the village harmless against any and all
liability or loss from personal injury or property damage resulting from or
arising out of, in whole or in part, the use or occupancy of the village
improvements or right-of-way associated with such improvements by the provider
or its employees, agents, or contractors arising out of the rights and
privileges granted under this chapter and the Act. A Provider has no obligation
to indemnify or hold harmless against any liabilities and losses as may be due
to or caused by the sole negligence of the village or its employees or agents.
A provider shall further waive any claims that they may have against the
village with respect to consequential, incidental, or special damages, however
caused, based on the theory of liability.
(Ord. 18-07-01, passed 7-24-2018)
§ 96.18 INSURANCE.
   (A)   Insurance required. Each applicant for a permit required by this
chapter for work on public right-of-way shall carry adequate public liability
and property damage insurance to indemnify the village in case of any accident
or damage occurring in conjunction with or as a result of the work being done
under the permit.
   (B)   The provider shall carry, at the provider’s own cost and expense, the
following insurance:
      (1)   Property insurance for its property’s replacement cost against all
risks;
      (2)   Workers’ compensation insurance, as required by law;
      (3)   Commercial general liability insurance with respect to its
activities on the village improvements or rights-of-way to afford minimum
protection limits consistent with its requirements of other users of village
improvements or rights-of-way, including coverage for bodily injury and
property damage.
   (C)   Limits of liability shall be at least $100,000 for injury to any one
person and $500,000 for injury resulting from any one accident and $50,000 for
injury to any property. The provider shall include the village as an additional
insured on the commercial general liability policy and provide certification
and documentation of inclusion of the village in a commercial general liability
policy prior to the collocation of any wireless facility.
   (D)   A provider may self-insure all or a portion of any insurance coverage.
A provider that self-insures is not required, to the extent of the self-
insurance, to comply with the requirement for the naming of additional insureds
under this section. A provider that elects to self-insure shall provide to the
village evidence sufficient to demonstrate its financial ability to self-insure
the insurance coverage.
   (E)   The insurance required by this chapter may not be canceled for the
duration of the collocation permit. Cancellation or lapse of the insurance
required shall terminate any permit for which the policy provides coverage.
(Ord. 18-07-01, passed 7-24-2018)
§ 96.19 REVOCATION OF SMALL WIRELESS FACILITY COLLOCATION PERMIT.
   The Village Administrator and/or Building Inspector may revoke a small
wireless collocation permit in a case where there has been any false statement
or misrepresentation as to material facts in the application or plans upon
which the permit was based. The Village Administrator and/or Building Inspector
may revoke a small wireless facility collocation permit when work is performed
contrary to the provisions of the application or plans on which the permit is
based. When a permit is revoked, the Building Inspector shall inform the
permitee in writing of the specific steps the permittee must take in order to
have the permit reissued. It shall be unlawful to continue any work authorized
by a small wireless permit and until the permit is reissued or until a new
permit is issued.
(Ord. 18-07-01, passed 7-24-2018) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 96.20 LIABILITY OF VIOLATORS.
   Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall become
liable to the village for any expense, loss, or damage incurred by the village
by reason of the violation. The violation of any of the terms and provisions of
this chapter is hereby declared by the Village Board of Trustees to be a public
nuisance.
(Ord. 18-07-01, passed 7-24-2018)
§ 96.21 VIOLATIONS.
   (A)   Failure to obtain a permit for collocation of a small wireless
facility or failure to comply with the conditions of a permit shall be deemed
to be a violation of this chapter.
   (B)   Upon due investigations, the Village Administrator may determine that
a violation of the minimum standards of this chapter exists. The Village
Administrator shall notify the provider in writing of such violation.
      (1)   If the provider fails after ten days of notice to correct the
violation:
         (a)   The Village Administrator may make application to the circuit
court for an injunction requiring conformance with this chapter or make such
other order as the court deems necessary to secure compliance with the chapter;
         (b)   Any person who violates this chapter shall upon conviction
thereof be fined not less than $50 nor more than $500 for each offence; and
         (c)   A separate offence shall be deemed committed upon each day
during or on which a violation occurs or continues.
      (2)   Nothing herein shall prevent the village from taking such other
lawful action to prevent or remedy any violations. All costs connected
therewith shall accrue to the provider.
      (3)   The Village Administrator is authorized to issue an order requiring
the suspension of the operation, maintenance, or construction of any small
wireless facility in violation of this chapter. The stop work order shall be in
writing, indicate the reason for the issuance, and shall order the action, if
necessary, to resolve the circumstances requiring the stop work order. The stop
work order constitutes a suspension of the small wireless facility collocation
permit.
      (4)   Other remedies. The remedies herein above provided shall not be
exclusive and the village may seek whatever other remedies are authorized by
statute, at law or in equity, against any person violating the provisions of
this chapter.
      (5)   Action by village. When, in the opinion of the Village
Administrator, the violation of this chapter represents an imminent and
irreversible threat to the public health, safety and welfare, the Village may
correct the violation and assess the costs thereof to the provider.
      (6)   Falsified information. Any person who knowingly makes any false
statements, representation, or certification in any application, record,
report, plan or other document filed or required to be maintained pursuant to
this chapter, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction thereof,
shall be punished by a fine of not more than $1,000 or shall be incarcerated in
a penal institution other than the penitentiary for a period not to exceed six
months for each offense.
(Ord. 18-07-01, passed 7-24-2018)
§ 96.22 INTERPRETATION.
   In interpreting and applying the provisions of this chapter, they shall be
held to the minimum requirements for the promotion of the public safety,
health, convenience, comfort, morals, prosperity and general welfare. It is not
intended by this chapter to interfere with or abrogate or annul any easements,
covenants or other agreements between parties, except that if this chapter
imposes a greater restriction, this chapter shall control.
(Ord. 18-07-01, passed 7-24-2018)
§ 96.23 COST OF CONSTRUCTION, OPERATION AND MAINTENANCE.
   The provider shall bear the cost of furnishing all necessary construction,
labor, materials and related items necessary to comply with this chapter.
Maintenance of the small wireless facility and the costs thereof shall be the
responsibility of the provider. The provider shall at all times maintain that
portion of the small wireless facility within the village right-of-way in a
reasonable condition.
(Ord. 18-07-01, passed 7-24-2018)
§ 96.24 VARIANCES FROM REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   Special exemptions. To the extent consistent with the applicable
provisions of the Act, the President of the Village Board of Trustees may grant
variance of or exemption to the limitations prescribed in this chapter,
provided that the applicant has demonstrated that failure to receive a variance
or exemption would work an arbitrary and unreasonable hardship upon the
applicant. The burden of showing the arbitrary and unreasonable hardship shall
be on the applicant who shall, before a variance or exemption is granted, show
the arbitrary and unreasonable hardship to the Village by clear and convincing
proof.
   (B)   Limitations. In granting a variance or exemption, the President of the
Village Board of Trustees may impose any conditions, exceptions, time
limitations, duration and other limitations that the policies of this chapter
may require.
   (C)   Petition. Any user seeking a variance or exemption from any
requirement of this chapter shall do so by filing a petition for the variance
with the Village Administrator. Within 21 days of the filing of a full and
complete petition the President of the Village Board of Trustees shall make a
ruling to grant or to deny the requested variance or exemption.
   (D)   Documentation required. To enable the village to rule on the petition
for variance, the following information, where applicable, shall be included in
the petition:
      (1)   Clear and complete statement of the precise extent of the relief
sought, including specific identification of the particular provisions of this
chapter from which the variance is sought;
      (2)   A factual statement why compliance with this chapter cannot be
achieved; and
      (3)   A concise factual statement of the reason the petitioner believes
that compliance with the particular provisions of this chapter would impose an
arbitrary or unreasonable hardship.
      (4)   The extent and type of relief being requested.
(Ord. 18-07-01, passed 7-24-2018)
§ 96.25 APPEALS.
   The Board of Trustees is hereby authorized to hear and decide any appeals of
the judgments, interpretations, permits or rulings given as a result of this
chapter. Any decision of the Board of Trustees on an appeal is final, and
subject to normal judicial review as provided by statute.
(Ord. 18-07-01, passed 7-24-2018)
§ 96.26 TRANSFER OF OWNERSHIP.
   A provider shall provide written notice to the village if it sells or
transfers ownership of small wireless facilities within the jurisdiction of the
village. Such notice shall include the name and contact information of the new
provider. Notification shall be made not later than ten days after the sale or
transfer of ownership. The notice shall be delivered to the village via United
States mail, return receipt requested. Failure to notify the village of the
transfer of ownership within ten days shall be cause for the village to suspend
the collocation permits for all applicable small wireless facilities.
(Ord. 18-07-01, passed 7-24-2018)
§ 96.27 SEVERABILITY.
   If any provision of this chapter or application thereof to any person or
circumstances is ruled unconstitutional, illegal, invalid, unenforceable or
otherwise invalid for any reason, such invalidity, unenforceability, illegality
or unconstitutionality shall not affect other provisions or applications of
this chapter that can be given effect without the invalid application or
provision, and each invalid provision or invalid application of this chapter is
severable.
(Ord. 18-07-01, passed 7-24-2018)
CHAPTER 97: SPECIAL EVENTS
Section
   
97.01   Purpose
   
97.02   Definitions
   
97.03   Permit required
   
97.04   Application
   
97.05   Action on permit
   
97.06   Prohibited conduct
   
97.07   Consideration for issuance; denial
   
97.08   Sales tax collection
   
97.09   Insurance required
   
97.10   Fees for permit
   
97.11   Payment of costs
 
   
97.99   Penalty
§ 97.01 PURPOSE.
   The purpose of a special event permit is to establish a single point of
contact with the village by an applicant for a special event for coordination
of the activities of the special event and the various separate village
approvals for any related activities.
(Ord. 20-10-01, passed 10-20-2020)
§ 97.02 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purposes of this chapter, the following term shall have the
following meaning:
   SPECIAL EVENT. Any event in the village that: occurs partially or completely
within the jurisdiction of the village, is expected to or could disrupt normal
daily functions within the village including but not limited to traffic
congestion and excess noise; or could create a public health/safety concern
without proper precautions or prior planning, uses village park or other
village-owned property, temporarily provides food service, will use a public
address or sound system, will use portable toilets, will conduct a raffle, will
require additional refuse receptacles, will require safety or special fencing,
will require special street lighting or electrical service, will require
special water service, will use stages or other temporary structures, will
require the closing of a village street, will require the closing of an off-
street parking facility, will require the use of village barricades, will
require the service of Police Department, Fire Department, ESDA, and/or public
works, will require an emergency evacuation plan, will sell or serve alcoholic
beverages, will display fireworks, will need the services of village
maintenance workers or other employees, or will require an additional village
license or permit. Activities protected by the First Amendment of the United
States Constitution or by any of Sections 3, 4 and 5 of Article 1 of the
Constitution of 1970 of the State of Illinois are excluded from the definition
of SPECIAL EVENT, except where such activities impede traffic, requires road
closures, etc.
(Ord. 20-10-01, passed 10-20-2020)
§ 97.03 PERMIT REQUIRED.
   No person shall engage in, conduct or carry on the activity of a special
event without a permit issued under the provisions of this chapter. The permit
shall not authorize any activity that is also required to have a separate
license or permit as required by the Village of Mahomet Municipal Code. Failure
to acquire a permit is considered a violation and subject to penalties as
described in §
97.07.
(Ord. 20-10-01, passed 10-20-2020) Penalty, see §
97.99
§ 97.04 APPLICATION.
   (A)   A person seeking a special event permit shall file an application with
Village Clerk no less than 30 days prior to the special event. The application
shall include the name and contact of the person in charge, and an alternate,
on the day of the event. Applications filed less than 30 days before the event
may be accepted by the village if the village still has sufficient time to
review said application.
   (B)   Applicants shall agree in writing, prior to the issuance of a special
event permit, to defend, indemnify, and hold harmless the village, its
representatives, officer, trustees, agents, attorneys, and employees from and
against any and all claims, actions, suits, damages, costs, expenses and
liabilities, including reasonable fees and expenses of their attorneys, expert
witnesses and consultants, court costs and fines, asserted against them or
sought to be imposed upon them, individually or jointly or severally, and which
arise directly or indirectly out of or in connection in any way with the
special event applied for.
   (C)   Prior to final approval of the application and issuance of a permit,
the village may include as an addendum to any special event permit, reasonable
requirements not specifically outlined in the original permit application.
(Ord. 20-10-01, passed 10-20-2020)
§ 97.05 ACTION ON PERMIT.
   Applications may be denied on the basis of incompleteness or as not being in
compliance with this chapter or in compliance with any other ordinance, rule or
regulation for a related permit or license. The reason(s) for the denial shall
be made known to the applicant in writing at the time of denial. The applicant
shall be allowed to correct or compete the application and resubmit it to the
Clerk or appeal to the Village Administrator
   (A)   The Village Administrator is hereby authorized to promulgate rules
and/or regulations, not in conflict with this chapter, to supplement and
specify in more detail requirements relating to special events. Failure to
observe any rule or regulation adopted pursuant to this chapter shall
constitute an ordinance violation.
   (B)   No special event shall begin before 7:00 a.m. nor continue after 10:00
p.m. In cases where the desired hours of the special event are outside the
limits as described herein, upon application, the Village Administrator shall
have the authority to vary the permitted hours to accommodate the activities of
such special event, taking into consideration the impact of such special event
on the village's resources and property.
(Ord. 20-10-01, passed 10-20-2020)
§ 97.06 PROHIBITED CONDUCT.
   (A)   No person shall knowingly participate in a special event for which a
permit application has been falsified or has not been obtained.
   (B)   No person shall continue to organize, or participate in the further
planning or organizing, of a special event that is conducted without a permit
after a permit has been denied.
   (C)   No person in a position of influence or control over a special event
shall allow the conduct of a special event without a permit.
   (D)   No person shall violate any condition of a special event permit.
   (E)   No person shall violate any ordinance, rule or regulation of the
village during the planning, operation or conclusion of a special event.
(Ord. 20-10-01, passed 10-20-2020) Penalty, see §
97.99
§ 97.07 CONSIDERATION FOR ISSUANCE; DENIAL.
   (A)   In determining whether to approve a special event permit, the Village
Administrator shall consider the following factors relevant to the proposed
special event and necessary to secure the public welfare:
      (1)   Whether village resources or property will be affected, or are
reasonably expected to be affected;
      (2)   Whether the special event appears to be held for any unlawful
purpose;
      (3)   Whether it appears the special event may be conducted in a manner
so as to cause a breach of peace;
      (4)   Whether the special event will unnecessarily interfere with the
public use of the streets, sidewalks, open and/or public areas;
      (5)   Whether the special event may have some special right or priority
under the law; and
      (6)   Whether the special event would, in any way, be detrimental to the
public health, safety and welfare.
   (B)   If the Village Administrator denies an application for a proposed
special event, the applicant may appeal that decision to the Village President
and Board of Trustees by filing a written appeal of the Village Administrator's
decision with the Village Clerk within 30 days of the Village Administrator's
denial thereof. A majority of the Village President and Board of Trustees may
overturn the Village Administrator's decision to deny an application for a
special event
(Ord. 20-10-01, passed 10-20-2020)
§ 97.08 SALES TAX COLLECTION.
   Illinois law requires that sales taxes must be paid on all goods sold at the
event. If prepared food or beverages will be sold at the event, the selling
organization must file a village food and beverage tax return and pay the
applicable sales taxes.
   (A)   Event promoter will create a list of all the event vendors: name,
address, phone number, email address, and Illinois Department of Revenue (IDOR)
tax ID number (if available)
   (B)   Event promoter will contact the Illinois Department of Revenue,
Special Events Unit (847-294-4475) to register the event with the state.
      (1)   Provide a list of all vendors to the Illinois Department of
Revenue.
      (2)   IDOR will provide the event promoter with a coupon form with the
name, date, location of the special event and the appropriate sales tax rate
and filing instruction.
   (C)   Within ten days of the event, each vendor needs to report and remit
sales tax to the IL Dept. of Revenue, Springfield IL (address listed on the
coupon).
(Ord. 20-10-01, passed 10-20-2020)
§ 97.09 INSURANCE REQUIRED.
   Events that use village owned property, village parks, village streets, or
rights-of-way may require a certificate of insurance upon approval of a special
event permit. An original certificate of insurance naming the village as an
additional insured must be submitted. The certificate of insurance will be due
at prior to the event date and shall be issued by a company licensed in the
State of Illinois, approved by the village, and covering any and all liability.
In addition, the special event must be named on the certificate of insurance.
The minimum coverage limit for an event $1,000,000 each occurrence and
$2,000,000 in the aggregate. The village reserves the right to change insurance
requirements or request additional insurance for an event as deemed necessary
by the village. This requirement may be waived as determined by the Village
Administrator.
(Ord. 20-10-01, passed 10-20-2020) Penalty, see §
97.99
§ 97.10 FEES FOR PERMIT.
   The fee for such a special event permit shall be $0.00.
(Ord. 20-10-01, passed 10-20-2020)
§ 97.11 PAYMENT OF COSTS.
   Depending on the scope and attendance of the event, the Village of Mahomet
may require reimbursement of compensation for Police Department and public
works staffing to be present at the function pending staff availability. The
costs for police and public works services will be charged directly to the
event organization and/or agency. The number of personnel necessary to staff
the event will be based on the size and scope of the event. This determination
will be made prior to the event by the Village Administrator. The applicant
shall pay to the village prior to the event all fees and costs that can be
determined prior to issuance of the permit and any balance within 30 days after
the event.
(Ord. 20-10-01, passed 10-20-2020)
§ 97.99 PENALTY.
   Any special event permit issued under this chapter shall be revoked or
suspended if the permit holder violates any terms of the license or any other
provisions of this chapter. Any violation of this chapter including failure to
acquire a permit, shall be subject to a fine up to $250. Each day that a
violation hereof exists shall be considered a separate offense. Each special
event held in violation hereof shall be considered a separate offense.
(Ord. 20-10-01, passed 10-20-2020)
TITLE XI: BUSINESS REGULATIONS
   Chapter
      
110.   ALCOHOL REGULATIONS
      
111.   VEHICLES FOR HIRE
      
112.   PEDDLERS AND SOLICITORS
      
113.   VIDEO GAMING
      
114.   CANNABIS BUSINESS ESTABLISHMENTS PROHIBITED
      
115.   RAFFLES
      
116.   SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESSES
CHAPTER 110: ALCOHOL REGULATIONS
Section
Generally
   
110.001   Title and purpose
   
110.002   Adoption of Liquor Control Act by reference
   
110.003   Definitions
Licenses
   
110.015   License required
   
110.016   Liability of licensee for acts of agents and employees
   
110.017   Fees and number of licenses
   
110.018   Displaying license
   
110.019   Eligibility to apply for license
   
110.020   Restricted areas
   
110.021   Application for license
   
110.022   Examination of applicant for license
   
110.023   Classification
   
110.024   Issuance of license; insurance
   
110.025   Record of licenses
   
110.026   Term
   
110.027   Fees
   
110.028   Sale or transfer of license
   
110.029   Change of location
   
110.030   Renewal of license
   
110.031   Changes in interest; partnerships, corporations and limited liability
companies
Temporary Permits
   
110.045   Generally
   
110.046   Applications for temporary permit
   
110.047   Causes for denial
   
110.048   Conditions of issuance
   
110.049   Automatic revocation upon revocation of consent by owner
   
110.050   Compliance with other laws
Regulation of Operation
   
110.060   Location and hours of service
   
110.061   Minors in Class A or Class B licensed premises
   
110.062   Minors as managers and employees
   
110.063   Prohibited sales or delivery
   
110.064   Lighting
   
110.065   Reporting of violations
   
110.066   Training required
Other Prohibitions and Provisions
   
110.075   Prohibitions related to age
   
110.076   Warning to minors
   
110.077   Prohibitions related to responsibility
   
110.078   Open containers and consumption
   
110.079   Inspection of premises
   
110.080   Revocation or suspension of license
   
110.081   Fines and training procedures
   
110.082   Appeals
   
110.083   Costs of hearing
   
110.084   Prohibitions related to salons
 
   
110.999   Penalty
Cross-reference:
   Fine schedule, see §
35.01
GENERALLY
§ 110.001 TITLE AND PURPOSE.
   (A)   This chapter shall be and constitute the “Alcoholic Liquor Control
Ordinance” of the village, which is adopted pursuant to state statutes
authorizing the empowered municipalities to control and regulate the retail
sale of alcoholic liquor within the municipality, and this chapter shall be in
effect for that purpose on and after its effective date as provided herein.
   (B)   This chapter may be known and cited as the “Village Liquor Code”.
(Ord. 07-05-01, passed 5-22-2007)
§ 110.002 ADOPTION OF LIQUOR CONTROL ACT BY REFERENCE.
   All provisions of the State Liquor Control Act of 1934 (ILCS Ch. 235, Act 5,
§§ 1-1 et seq.) applicable to the licensing, sale, delivery, transfer,
possession or consumption of alcoholic liquor within the corporate limits of
the village are hereby referred to, adopted and made a part hereof as if fully
set forth in this chapter, with additions, deletions and changes, if any, as
may otherwise be specifically provided for in this chapter.
(Ord. 07-05-01, passed 5-22-2007)
§ 110.003 DEFINITIONS.
   (A)   Whenever any words and phrases used in this chapter are not defined
herein but are defined in the Liquor Control Act, any definition therein shall
be deemed to apply to the words and phrases used in this chapter, except when
the context otherwise requires.
   (B)   The following capitalized words and phrases when used in this chapter
shall, for the purpose of this chapter, have the meanings respectfully ascribed
to them in this section below, except when the context otherwise requires.
      ADULT ENTERTAINMENT FACILITY. As defined in the Illinois Municipal Code
(ILCS Ch. 65, Act 5, §§ 1-1 et seq.). Food must be prepared on the premise and
sold directly to consumers for immediate consumption.
      AGRICULTURAL WINE. A wine made from suitable agricultural products other
than the juice of grapes, berries, or other fruits.
      ALCOHOLIC LIQUOR. Includes alcohol, spirits, hard seltzer, hard cider,
wine, and beer and every liquid or solid, patented or not, containing alcohol,
spirits, wine or beer and capable of being consumed as a beverage by a human
being.
      BILLIARD HALL. A place kept, used, maintained, advertised, or held out to
the public as a place in which the public may participate in a game of skill
commonly known as pool.
      EVENT CENTER. Premises which are frequently used or rented out for public
or private activities that are not repeated on a weekly basis, and which are
not usually open to the public or serve alcohol on a daily basis at times other
than when an event is scheduled.
      FOOD. A nutritious substance that people eat or drink (non-alcoholic), in
order to maintain life and growth and must be prepared and sold on premise
directly to consumers for immediate consumption.
      HOTEL. Every building or other structure kept, used, maintained,
advertised and held out to the public to be a place where sleeping
accommodations are offered for adequate pay to travelers and guests, whether
transient, permanent or residential, in which 25 or more rooms are used for the
sleeping accommodations of the guests.
      LIQUOR CONTROL ACT. The Liquor Control Act of 1934 of the state (ILCS Ch.
235, Act 5, §§ 1-1 et seq.), as supplemented and amended from time to time.
      LOCAL COMMISSIONER. The Village President or Deputy Commissioner so
appointed by the Village President, who is the local Liquor Control
Commissioner under and pursuant to § 4-2 of the Liquor Control Act.
      MEAD. A fermented alcoholic beverage made from water, honey, malt, and
yeast.
      MICROBREW PUB RESTAURANT. An establishment where alcoholic liquor is
manufactured on the premises by the licensee and allowed to sell at retail and
wholesale from the licensed premise. The establishment is used, maintained,
advertised, or held out to the public as a place where meals are regularly
served and shall operate as a restaurant and meet the required definitions
thereof.
      RESTAURANT. A facility with a commercial grade permitted kitchen that
prepares and sells food on premises directly to consumers for immediate
consumption. Any public place kept, used, maintained, advertised, and held out
to the public as a place where meals are served, and where meals are actually
and regularly served, without sleeping accommodations, the space being provided
with adequate and sanitary kitchen and dining room equipment and capacity and
having employed therein a sufficient number and kind of employees to prepare,
cook, and serve suitable food for its guests.
      SALON AND SPA. A business establishment devoted to hair care (haircut,
hair color, perms, and the like); skin care (facials, cosmetic treatment of
skin, makeup application); nail care (manicure, pedicure); or body care
(massage, wraps, waxing). Services must be provided on premises used
exclusively for beauty/hair salon, nail salon, or spa services. Any
establishment exclusively providing massage therapy, or services involving the
manipulation of soft tissue of the body is excluded from this definition for
the purpose of this chapter.
      SPECIAL EVENT. Any public or private event including, but not limited to,
any banquet, picnic, reception, fundraiser, promotion, convention, show,
bazaar, fair, carnival, recreational activity, entertainment, or any similar
assembly of individuals for any like purpose.
(Ord. 07-05-01, passed 5-22-2007; Ord. 16-04-01, passed 4-26-2016; Ord. 20-07-
02, passed 7-28-2020; Ord. 22-10-01, passed 10-25-2022; Ord. 24-01-01, passed
1-23-2024)
LICENSES
§ 110.015 LICENSE REQUIRED.
   It shall be unlawful and a violation of this section for any person to sell
or offer for sale at retail any alcoholic liquor in the village either without
having a valid license therefor pursuant to this subchapter or in violation of
the terms of the license or this chapter.
(Ord. 07-05-01, passed 5-22-2007) Penalty, see §
110.999
§ 110.016 LIABILITY OF LICENSEE FOR ACTS OF AGENTS AND EMPLOYEES.
   Every act or omission of whatsoever nature constituting a violation of any
of the applicable provisions of this chapter or of the Liquor Control Act by
any officer, director, member, manager, agent or employee of any licensee or
permittee shall be deemed and held to be the act of the licensee, permittee or
employer, and any licensee, permittee or employer shall be punishable in the
same manner as if any like act or omission had been done by any licensee,
permittee or employer personally.
(Ord. 07-05-01, passed 5-22-2007) Penalty, see §
110.999
§ 110.017 FEES AND NUMBER OF LICENSES.
   The number of licenses authorized and the annual fee for the license
classifications set forth in §
110.023 below are as follows:
Classification Annual Fee Number of Licenses Authorized
Classification                       Annual Fee Number of Licenses Authorized
Class A (General Retail License)     $2,000     2
Class B (Billiard Hall License)      $1,200     1
Class C (Club License)               $1,500     1
Class CA (Caterer s License)         $500/$200  Unlimited
Class EC (Event Center License)      $1,000     2
Class GC (Golf Course License)       $2,000     1
Class H (Hotel License)              $2,000     Unlimited
Class M (Microbrew Pub Restaurant)   $2,500     2
Class N (Salon and Spa License)      $750       Unlimited
Class OC (Outdoor Caf License)       $200       Unlimited
Class P (Package Liquor License)     $2,000     11
Class PR (Package Sales Rider)       $500       Unlimited
Class PS (Package Specialty License) $500       1
Class R-1 (Restaurant License)       $1,500     1
Class R-2 (Restaurant License)       $2,500     Unlimited
Class S (Specialty Retail License)   $1,500     2
Class T-1 (Special Event Permit)     $50/day    Unlimited
Class T-2 (Special Event Permit)     $100/day   Unlimited
Class Y (Conditional BYOB)           $250       3
 
(Ord. 07-05-01, passed 5-22-2007; Ord. 11-12-01, passed 12-13-2011; Ord. 13-07-
01, passed 7-9-2013; Ord. 14-06-03, passed 6-24-2014; Ord. 15-11-08, passed 11-
24-2015; Ord. 17-04-03, passed 4-25-2017; Ord. 18-04-02, passed 4-24-2018; 19-
12-14, passed 12-17-2019; Ord. 20-07-02, passed 7- 28-2020; Ord. 21-05-07,
passed 5-25-2021; Ord. 22-03-02, passed 3-22-2022; Ord. 22-10-01, passed 10-25-
2022; Ord. 23-03-04, passed 3-28-2023; Ord. 24-01-01, passed 1-23-2024; Ord.
25-08-01, passed 8-26-2025)
§ 110.018 DISPLAYING LICENSE.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful and a violation of this section for any licensee
of any license issued pursuant to this chapter to fail to cause the licensee’s
license or licenses, except Class CA, T-1 or T-2 licenses, to be framed and
hung in plain view in a conspicuous place within the licensed premises.
   (B)   Class CA. T-1 or T-2 licenses shall be kept on the licensed premises
and available for inspection.
(Ord. 07-05-01, passed 5-22-2007) Penalty, see §
110.999
§ 110.019 ELIGIBILITY TO APPLY FOR LICENSE.
   (A)   No license of any kind shall be issued to:
      (1)   A person who is not a resident of the village;
      (2)   A person who is not of good character and reputation in the
community in which he or she resides;
      (3)   A person who is not a citizen of the United States;
      (4)   A person who has been convicted of a felony under any federal or
state law, unless the Liquor Control Commissioner determines that the person
has been sufficiently rehabilitated to warrant the public trust after
considering matters set forth in the person’s application and the
Commissioner’s investigation;
      (5)   A person who has been convicted of being the keeper or is keeping a
house of ill fame;
      (6)   A person who has been convicted of pandering or other crime or
misdemeanor opposed to decency and morality;
      (7)   A person whose license issued under this chapter has been revoked
for cause;
      (8)   A person who at the time of application for renewal of any license
issued hereunder would not be eligible for the license upon a first
application; or
      (9)   A co-partnership, unless all of the members of the co-partnership
shall be qualified to obtain a license or permit;
      (10)   A corporation, or limited liability company, if any officer,
manager or director thereof, or any stockholder or stockholders owning in the
aggregate more than 5% of the stock of the corporation, would not be eligible
to receive a license or permit hereunder for any reason other than citizenship
and residence within the village;
      (11)   A corporation or limited liability company, unless it is
incorporated in Illinois, or a foreign corporation unless it is qualified to
transact business in Illinois;
      (12)   A person otherwise prohibited by the Liquor Control Act or any
other federal or state law.
   (B)   Any person not disqualified under division (A) above may apply for a
license in a classification for which no limit on the number of licenses is
established pursuant to this subchapter.
(Ord. 07-05-01, passed 5-22-2007; Ord. 18-04-02, passed 4-24-2018) Penalty, see
§
110.999
§ 110.020 RESTRICTED AREAS.
   No licenses, except Class CA, T-1 or T-2, shall be issued for any property
located in any of the residential zoned areas that are now or hereafter zoned
R-1A, R-1B, R-1C (single-family residential) or R-2 (two-family residential),
or R- 3A, R-3B, R-3C, R-3G (multiple-family residential district) under the
zoning ordinances of the village.
(Ord. 07-05-01, passed 5-22-2007; Ord. 19-12- 14, passed 12-17-2019; Ord. 21-
05-07, passed 5- 25-2021) Penalty, see §
110.999
§ 110.021 APPLICATION FOR LICENSE.
   (A)   An application for a license shall be made in writing to the Local
Commissioner and shall be signed by the applicant and verified under oath.
   (B)   The application shall be in a form and shall contain information as
may be required by the Local Commissioner and shall be accompanied by the
applicable nonrefundable application fee and the annual fee for the license.
(Ord. 07-05-01, passed 5-22-2007)
§ 110.022 EXAMINATION OF APPLICANT FOR LICENSE.
   The Local Commissioner shall have the right to examine, or cause to be
examined, under oath, any applicant for a license or for a renewal thereof, or
any licensee upon whom notice of revocation or suspension has been served in
the manner provided in this chapter or the Liquor Control Act, and to examine
or cause to be examined the books and records of any applicant or licensee; to
hear testimony and take proof for the Local Commissioner’s information in the
performance of his or her duties, and for the purpose to issue subpoenas which
shall be effective in any part of the state.
(Ord. 07-05-01, passed 5-22-2007)
§ 110.023 CLASSIFICATION.
   Any license issued pursuant to this chapter shall be classified as follows
and subject to these terms, conditions, restrictions and fees.
   (A)   Class A - General Retail License.
      (1)   A Class A license shall authorize the sale at retail of any
alcoholic liquor by the drink for consumption on the licensed premises, where
sold or in original package form for consumption off the licensed premises,
where sold and not for resale in any form.
      (2)   No Class A license shall be issued to any premise located within
the village on Main Street between Division Street and Lombard Street; on
Lincoln Street between Franklin Street and Dunbar Street; on Elm Street between
Franklin Street and Dunbar Street; or on Jefferson Street between Franklin
Street and Union Street.
      (3)   Total gross revenues from video gaming for a Class A licensee shall
not exceed 50% of the total gross revenues from the combined sale of food and
alcoholic liquor and video gaming in any calendar year.
      (4)   Any licensee holding a Class A license shall file with the Local
Commissioner on or before May 1 and November 1 of each year an affidavit signed
under oath by licensee or an authorized agent of licensee setting forth the
total gross revenue for the previous six months in each of the following
categories: food, alcoholic liquor, and video gaming.
      (5)   Upon the request of the Local Commissioner, any licensee holding a
Class A license shall be required to provide a report prepared by a certified
public accountant which certifies the gross revenues, derived during such
period of time as may be designated by the Local Commissioner, from each of the
following categories: the sale of food, sale of alcoholic liquor, and video
gaming.
      (6)   The fee for any Class A license shall be $2,000 per year.
   (B)   Class B - Billiard Hall License.
      (1)   A Class B license shall authorize the retail sale of beer, hard
seltzer, hard cider, and wine only, by the drink for consumption on the
licensed premises to patrons in the licensed premises where the premises are
used exclusively for billiards business.
      (2)   No person under the age of 21 shall be permitted in a billiard hall
after 10:00 p.m. unless accompanied by a parent or legal guardian.
      (3)   Total gross revenues from video gaming for a Class B licensee shall
not exceed 25% of the total gross revenues from the combined sale of pool
games, tangible goods, alcoholic liquor and video gaming in any calendar year.
      (4)   Any licensee holding a Class B license shall file with the Local
Commissioner on or before May 1 and November 1 of each year an affidavit signed
under oath by licensee or an authorized agent of licensee setting forth the
total gross revenue for the previous six months in each of the following
categories: food, alcoholic liquor, and video gaming.
      (5)   Upon the request of the Local Commissioner, any licensee holding a
Class B license shall be required to provide a report prepared by a certified
public accountant which certifies the gross revenues, derived during such
period of time as may be designated by the Local Commissioner, from each of the
following categories: the sale of food, sale of alcoholic liquor, and video
gaming.
      (6)   The fact that 50% or more of the combined gross revenues is derived
from the sale of alcoholic liquor alone shall be prima facie evidence that the
licensed premises is not a restaurant within the meaning of this chapter.
      (7)   The fact that 25% or more of the combined gross revenues is derived
from video gaming alone shall be prima facie evidence that the licensed
premises is not a restaurant within the meaning of this chapter.
      (8)   The fee for any Class B license shall be $1,200 per year.
   (C)   Class C - Club License.
      (1)   A Class C license shall be issued only to clubs. A Class C license
shall authorize the sale at retail of any alcoholic liquor by the drink for
consumption on the licensed premises of a club, where sold to members and
guests accompanied by members, and not for resale in any form.
      (2)   License holders may also permit a patron to store unsealed or
partially consumed bottles of wine or alcoholic spirit for the exclusive future
use of that patron.
      (3)   Total gross revenues from video gaming for a Class C licensee shall
not exceed 50% of the total gross revenues from the combined sale of food and
alcoholic liquor and video gaming in any calendar year.
      (4)   Any licensee holding a Class C license shall file with the Local
Commissioner on or before May 1 and November 1 of each year an affidavit signed
under oath by licensee or an authorized agent of licensee setting forth the
total gross revenue for the previous six months in each of the following
categories: food, alcoholic liquor, and video gaming.
      (5)   Upon the request of the Local Commissioner, any licensee holding a
Class C license shall be required to provide a report prepared by a certified
public accountant which certifies the gross revenues, derived during such
period of time as may be designated by the Local Commissioner, from each of the
following categories: the sale of food, sale of alcoholic liquor, and video
gaming.
      (6)   The fee for any Class C license shall be $1,500 per year.
   (D)   Class CA - Caterer's License.
      (1)   A Class CA license shall be issued only to a bona fide caterer or
current holder of another type of liquor license provided for in this chapter.
A Class CA license shall authorize the sale at retail of any alcoholic liquor
by the drink for service at private parties, weddings or other similar private
events which are not open to the general public, at a location other than the
premises leased, owned, or otherwise operated by the licensee.
      (2)   No event catered by a Class CA licensee shall exceed three days in
length, nor shall alcoholic liquor be served at such an event for more than
eight hours in one day.
      (3)   The fee for any Class CA license shall be $500 per year, or $200
for the holder of a Class A, C, EC, GC, H, P or R license.
   (E)   Class EC - Event Center License.
      (1)   A Class EC license shall only be issued to event centers that do
not market themselves primarily as a food service establishment and the sale of
alcoholic liquor is incidental to the main purpose of the business. A Class EC
license shall authorize the sale at retail of any alcoholic liquor by the drink
for consumption on the premises, where sold and not for resale in any form, and
such retail sale must be made by the licensee or agent of the licensee.
      (2)   License holders may also permit a patron to remove one unsealed and
partially consumed bottle of wine for off premises consumption. A partially
consumed bottle of wine that is to be removed from the premises shall be
securely sealed by the licensee or an agent of the licensee prior to removal
from the premises and placed in a transparent, one-time use, tamper-proof bag.
The licensee or agent of the licensee shall provide a dated receipt for the
bottle of wine to the patron.
      (3)   Total gross revenues from video gaming for a Class EC licensee
shall not exceed 50% of the total gross revenues from the combined sale of
tangible goods, tickets, rental fees, food, alcoholic liquor, and video gaming
in any calendar year.
      (4)   Any licensee holding a Class EC license shall file with the Local
Commissioner on or before May 1 and November 1 of each year an affidavit signed
under oath by licensee or an authorized agent of licensee setting forth the
total gross revenue for the previous six months in each of the following
categories: tangible goods, tickets, rental fees, food, alcoholic liquor, and
video gaming.
      (5)   Upon the request of the Local Commissioner, any licensee holding a
Class EC license shall be required to provide a report prepared by a certified
public accountant which certifies the gross revenues derived, during such
period of time as may be designated by the Local Commissioner, from each of the
following categories: the sale of tangible goods, tickets, rental fees, food,
alcoholic liquor, and video gaming.
      (6)   The fee for any Class EC license shall be $1,000 per year.
   (F)   Class GC - Golf Course License.
      (1)   A Class GC license shall be issued only to golf courses comprised
of 50 or more acres. A Class GC license shall authorize the sale at retail of
any alcoholic liquor by the drink for consumption on the licensed premises of a
golf course where sold, including within the clubhouse and from not more than
three mobile carts operated on the golf course.
      (2)   The fee for any Class GC license shall be $2,000 per year.
   (G)   Class H - Hotel License.
      (1)   A Class H license shall be issued only to hotels. A Class H license
shall authorize the sale at retail of any alcoholic liquor by the drink for
consumption on the licensed premises of a hotel, where sold and not for resale
in any form.
      (2)   A Class H license shall authorize the sale at retail of any
alcoholic liquor by the drink in a sealed container from a locked liquor
cabinet wherein a key to such cabinet is made available only to guests over the
age of 21 years for consumption on the licensed premises of a hotel, where sold
and not for resale in any form.
      (3)   Total gross revenues from video gaming for a Class H licensee shall
not exceed 50% of the total gross revenues from the combined sale of food and
alcoholic liquor and video gaming in any calendar year.
      (4)   Any licensee holding a Class H license shall file with the Local
Commissioner on or before May 1 and November 1 of each year an affidavit signed
under oath by licensee or an authorized agent of licensee setting forth the
total gross revenue for the previous six months in each of the following
categories: food, alcoholic liquor, and video gaming.
      (5)   Upon the request of the Local Commissioner, any licensee holding a
Class H license shall be required to provide a report prepared by a certified
public accountant which certifies the gross revenues derived, during such
period of time as may be designated by the Local Commissioner, from each of the
following categories: the sale of food, sale of alcoholic liquor, and video
gaming.
      (6)   The fee for any Class H license shall be $2,000 per year.
   (H)   Class M - Microbrew Pub Restaurant License.
      (1)   A Class M license shall authorize the sale at retail of any
alcoholic liquor manufactured on the licensed premises by the licensee by the
drink for consumption on the licensed premises, where sold and/or in original
package form for consumption off the licensed premises, where sold and not for
resale in any form. A Class M licensee shall hold a valid and proper license
issued by the state to manufacture and sell at retail alcoholic liquor
(including but not limited to spirits, wine, and beer).
      (2)   A Class M license shall be issued only to a microbrew pub
restaurant having a minimum seating capacity of 25 seats at tables or booths. A
Class M license shall also authorize the sale at retail of any alcoholic liquor
by the drink for consumption on the licensed premises of a microbrew pub
restaurant, where sold and not for resale in any form.
      (3)   The licensee shall maintain and operate a commercial kitchen on the
premises where meals are actually and regularly prepared and offered
principally for purchase and consumption on the premises.
      (4)   Any sale of alcoholic liquor directly to consumers shall only be
made during periods of time that food is prepared and served on the licensed
premises of a microbrew pub.
      (5)   Total gross revenues from the sale of alcoholic liquor sold by the
drink for consumption on the licensed premises by a microbrew pub restaurant
having a Class M license shall not exceed 50% of the total gross revenues from
the combined sale of food and alcoholic liquor in any calendar year, excluding
alcoholic liquor manufactured on the licensed premises and sold through
wholesale.
      (6)   Public consumption of beer and alcoholic liquor shall not occur in
any portion of the licensed premises used for beer manufacturing, storage and/
or shipping, except during supervised tours and private parties.
      (7)   Total gross revenues from video gaming for a Class M licensee shall
not exceed 50% of the total gross revenues from the combined sale of food and
alcoholic liquor sold by the drink for consumption on the licensed premises and
video gaming in any calendar year.
      (8)   Any licensee holding a Class M license shall file with the Local
Commissioner on or before May 1 and November 1 of each year an affidavit signed
under oath by licensee or an authorized agent of licensee setting forth the
total gross revenue for the previous six months in each of the following
categories: food, alcoholic liquor (broken down by whether sold for consumption
on the licensed premises or sold for consumption off the licensed premises),
and video gaming.
      (9)   Upon the request of the Local Commissioner, any licensee holding a
Class M license shall be required to provide a report prepared by a certified
public accountant which certifies the gross revenues, derived during such
period of time as may be designated by the Local Commissioner, from each of the
following categories: the sale of food, sale of alcoholic liquor (broken down
by whether sold for consumption on the licensed premises or sold for
consumption off the licensed premises), and video gaming.
      (10)   The fact that 50% or more of the combined gross revenues is
derived from the sale of alcoholic liquor alone shall be prima facie evidence
that the licensed premises is not a restaurant within the meaning of this
chapter.
      (11)   The fact that 50% or more of the combined gross revenues is
derived from video gaming alone shall be prima facie evidence that the licensed
premises is not a restaurant within the meaning of this chapter.
      (12)   The fee for any Class M licensee shall be $2,500 per year.
   (I)   Class N - Salon and Spa License.
      (1)   A Class N license shall authorize the complimentary dispensing or
sale at retail of beer, hard seltzer, hard cider, and wine only, by the drink
for consumption on the licensed premises to patrons in the licensed premises
where the premises are used exclusively for salon or spa services and in which
the sale of alcohol is secondary and incidental.
      (2)   Customers and patrons shall not be served alcoholic beverages
unless receiving contemporaneous salon or spa services from the license holder
and shall not be served more than three alcoholic beverages during such period
of time. Each serving is limited to no more than a six-ounce glass of wine or a
twelve-ounce glass of beer, seltzer, or cider.
      (3)   No live entertainment of any nature shall be permitted on the
specified premises.
      (4)   No window or any other external signage shall be permitted on the
specified premises or surrounding property that indicates directly or
indirectly that alcoholic liquor or gaming is available for retail sale at the
specified premises, including the use of words associated with alcohol or
gaming.
      (5)   Total gross revenues from the sale of alcohol shall not exceed 10%
of the total gross revenues from the combined sale of all services, tangible
goods, and alcoholic liquor in any calendar year.
      (6)   Total gross revenues from video gaming for a Class N licensee shall
not exceed 10% of the total gross revenues from the combined sale of all
services, tangible goods, alcoholic liquor, and video gaming in any calendar
year.
      (7)   Any licensee holding a Class N license shall file with the Local
Commissioner on or before May 1 and November 1 of each year an affidavit signed
under oath by licensee or an authorized agent of licensee setting forth the
total gross revenue for the previous six months in each of the following
categories: food and tangible goods, total alcoholic liquor (with wine sales
listed as a sub-category), and video gaming.
      (8)   Upon the request of the Local Commissioner, any licensee holding a
Class N license shall be required to provide a report prepared by a certified
public accountant which certifies the gross revenues, derived during such
period of time as may be designated by the Local Commissioner, from each of the
following categories: food and tangible goods, total alcoholic liquor (with
wine sales listed as a sub-category), and video gaming.
      (9)   The fact that 10% or more of the combined gross revenues is derived
from the sale of alcoholic liquor alone shall be prima facie evidence that the
licensed premises is not a beauty/hair salon, nail salon, or spa within the
meaning of this chapter.
      (10)   The fact that 10% or more of the combined gross revenues is
derived from video gaming alone shall be prima facie evidence that the licensed
premises is not a beauty/hair salon, nail salon, or spa within the meaning of
this chapter.
      (11)   The fee for any Class N license shall be $750 per year.
   (J)   Class OC - Outdoor Cafe License.
      (1)   A Class OC license shall authorize a person holding a Class A, B,
H, M, R-1, R-2, or S license to sell at retail any alcoholic liquor by the
drink for consumption on the licensed premises where sold and not for resale in
any form, within a designated outdoor area adjacent to the premises during the
hours of 11:00 a.m. to 1:00 a.m., Monday through Saturday, and 12:00 noon to 1:
00 a.m. on Sunday.
      (2)   During the times when alcoholic liquor may be served under the
Class OC license, the licensee shall not allow or permit any customer,
employee, or other person to remove alcoholic liquor from the area designated
in the outdoor cafe permit or the service premises of the licensee.
      (3)   The outdoor cafe area shall be subject to all provisions of this
chapter as though the outdoor cafe area was part of the licensee's service
premises during the times permitted by this section for alcoholic liquor sales.
      (4)   The fee for any Class OC license shall be $200 per year.
   (K)   Class P - Package Liquor License.
      (1)   A Class P license shall authorize the sale at retail of any
alcoholic liquor in original package form for consumption off the licensed
premises, where sold and not for resale in any form.
      (2)   Samples of alcoholic liquor may from time to time be served on the
licensed premises of a Class P licensee with the prior permission of the Local
Commissioner.
      (3)   The fee for any Class P license shall be $2,000 per year.
   (L)   Class PR - Package Sales Rider.
      (1)   A Class PR rider shall authorize the sale at retail of any
alcoholic liquor manufactured on the licensee's premises, or on a premise that
is substantially owned and operated by the same licensee, in original, sealed
package form for consumption off the licensed premises, where sold and not for
resale in any form.
      (2)   A Class PR rider may be issued to the holder of any valid Class R-
1 or R-2 restaurant license issued by the village.
      (3)   The revenues generated from package sales under a Class PR rider
shall not be included in the calculation of “total gross revenues” for the
purpose of determining eligibility for or compliance with a license type.
      (4)   The fee for any Class PR rider shall be $500 per year.
   (M)   Class PS - Package Specialty License.
      (1)   A Class PS alcoholic liquor license shall authorize the sale at
retail of only specialty agricultural wine and mead in original package form
for consumption off the licensed premises, where sold and not for resale in any
form.
      (2)   For the purposes of this license, an agricultural wine and mead can
additionally be fermented with fruit juice for added flavoring.
      (3)   The sale of agricultural wine and mead cannot be the principal
business purpose for the retail licensee.
      (4)   Samples of alcoholic liquor may from time to lime be served on the
licensed premises of a Class PS licensee with the prior permission of the Local
Commissioner.
      (5)   The fee for any Class PS license shall be $500 per year.
   (N)   Class R-1 - Restaurant License.
      (1)   A Class R-1 license shall be issued only to restaurants having a
seating capacity of 49 or fewer seats at tables or booths exclusive of any
seats at or within any lounge, bar or drink rail area. A Class R-1 license
shall authorize the sale at retail of any alcoholic liquor by the drink for
consumption on the licensed premises of a restaurant where sold and not for
resale in any form.
      (2)   Any sale of alcoholic liquor shall only be made during periods of
time that food is prepared and served on the licensed premises of a restaurant.
      (3)   Total gross revenues from the sale of alcoholic liquor by a
restaurant having a Class R-1 license shall not exceed 50% of the total gross
revenues from the combined sale of food and alcoholic liquor in any calendar
year.
      (4)   Total gross revenues from video gaming for a Class R-1 licensee
shall not exceed 50% of the total gross revenues from the combined sale of food
and alcoholic liquor and video gaming in any calendar year.
      (5)   Any licensee holding a Class R-1 license shall file with the Local
Commissioner on or before May 1 and November 1 of each year an affidavit signed
under oath by licensee or an authorized agent of licensee setting forth the
total gross revenue for the previous six months in each of the following
categories: food, alcoholic liquor, and video gaming.
      (6)   Upon the request of the Local Commissioner, any licensee holding a
Class R-1 license shall be required to provide a report prepared by a certified
public accountant which certifies the gross revenues, derived during such
period of lime as may be designated by the Local Commissioner, from each of the
following categories: the sale of food, sale of alcoholic liquor, and video
gaming.
      (7)   The fact that 50% or more of the combined gross revenues is derived
from the sale of alcoholic liquor alone shall be prima facie evidence that the
licensed premises is not a restaurant within the meaning of this chapter.
      (8)   The fact that 50% or more of the combined gross revenues is derived
from video gaming alone shall be prima facie evidence that the licensed
premises is not a restaurant within the meaning of this chapter.
      (9)   The fee for any Class R-1 license shall be $1,500 per year.
   (O)   Class R-2 - Restaurant License.
      (1)   A Class R-2 license shall be issued only to restaurants having a
minimum seating capacity of 50 seats at tables or booths exclusive of any seats
at or within any lounge, bar, or drink rail area. A Class R-2 license shall
authorize the sale at retail of any alcoholic liquor by the drink for
consumption on the licensed premises of a restaurant, where sold and not for
resale in any form.
      (2)   Any sale of alcoholic liquor shall only be made during periods of
time that food is prepared and served on the licensed premises of a restaurant.
      (3)   Total gross revenues from the sale of alcoholic liquor by a
restaurant having a Class R-2 license shall not exceed 50% of the total gross
revenues from the combined sale of food and alcoholic liquor in any calendar
year.
      (4)   Total gross revenues from video gaming for a Class R-2 licensee
shall not exceed 50% of the total gross revenues from the combined sale of food
and alcoholic liquor and video gaming in any calendar year.
      (5)   Any licensee holding a Class R-2 license shall file with the Local
Commissioner on or before May 1 and November 1 of each year an affidavit signed
under oath by licensee or an authorized agent of licensee setting forth the
total gross revenue for the previous six months in each of the following
categories: food, alcoholic liquor, and video gaming.
      (6)   Upon the request of the Local Commissioner, any licensee holding a
Class R-2 license shall be required to provide a report prepared by a certified
public accountant which certifies the gross revenues, derived during such
period of lime as may be designated by the Local Commissioner, from each of the
following categories: the sale of food, sale of alcoholic liquor, and video
gaming.
      (7)   The fact that 50% or more of the combined gross revenues is derived
from the sale of alcoholic liquor alone shall be prima facie evidence that the
licensed premises is not a restaurant within the meaning of this chapter.
      (8)   The fact that 50% or more of the combined gross revenues is derived
from video gaming alone shall be prima facie evidence that the licensed
premises is not a restaurant within the meaning of this chapter.
      (9)   The fee for any Class R-2 license shall be $2,500 per year.
   (P)   Class S - Specialty Retail License.
      (1)   A Class S license shall authorize the sale at retail of any
alcoholic liquor by the drink for consumption on the licensed premises, where
sold or in original package form for consumption off the licensed premises,
where sold and not for resale in any form. The sale of wine is the primary
purpose of alcohol sales for a specialty retail licensee but shall not be
exclusive.
      (2)   License holders may also permit a patron to remove one unsealed and
partially consumed bottle of wine for off premises consumption. A partially
consumed bottle of wine that is to be removed from the premises shall be
securely sealed by the licensee or an agent of the licensee prior to removal
from the premises and placed in a transparent, one-time use, tamper-proof bag.
The licensee or agent of the licensee shall provide a dated receipt for the
bottle of wine to the patron.
      (3)   Total gross revenues from the sale of wine, food, and tangible
goods for a Class S licensee shall be at least 40% of the total gross revenues
from the combined sale of all food and tangible goods and alcoholic liquor in
any calendar year.
      (4)   Total gross revenues from video gaming for a Class S licensee shall
not exceed 50% of the total gross revenues from the combined sale of food and
alcoholic liquor and video gaming in any calendar year.
      (5)   Any licensee holding a Class S license shall file with the Local
Commissioner on or before May 1 and November 1 of each year an affidavit signed
under oath by licensee or an authorized agent of licensee setting forth the
total gross revenue for the previous six months in each of the following
categories: food and tangible goods, total alcoholic liquor (with wine sales
listed as a sub-category), and video gaming.
      (6)   Upon the request of the Local Commissioner, any licensee holding a
Class S license shall be required to provide a report prepared by a certified
public accountant which certifies the gross revenues, derived during such
period of time as may be designated by the Local Commissioner, from each of the
following categories: food and tangible goods, total alcoholic liquor (with
wine sales listed as a sub-category), and video gaming.
      (7)   The fee for any Class S license shall be $1,500 per year.
   (Q)   Class Y - Conditional BYOB License.
      (1)   A Class Y license shall authorize customers of the licensee to
consume alcoholic liquor which has been brought onto the licensed premises by
the customer for the customer and customer's companions' personal consumption
while purchasing goods or services from the licensee, subject to the following
conditions and restrictions:
         (a)   The licensee may provide customers with glassware, ice, and
other service accessories related to the consumption of alcoholic liquors;
         (b)   The licensee, its employees, and agents, may open, but shall not
serve, pour, store, or dispose of any alcoholic liquor for such customers; and
         (c)   It shall be unlawful for licensee, its employees, and agents, to
allow any person to leave the licensed premises with open alcoholic liquor,
unless customers remove open containers of alcoholic liquor from the licensed
premises in compliance with Illinois law.
      (2)   The fee for a Class Y license shall be $250 per year.
(Ord. 07-05-01, passed 5-22-2007; Ord. 11-12-01, passed 12-13-2011; Ord. 13-07-
01, passed 7-9-2013; Ord. 14-06-03, passed 6-24-2014; Ord. 15-11-08, passed 11-
24-2015; Ord. 17-04-03, passed 4-25-2017; Ord. 19-12-14, passed 12-17-2019;
Ord. 20-07-02, passed 7-28-2020; Ord. 21-03-01, passed 3-23-2021; Ord. 22-10-
01, passed 10-25-2022; Ord. 24-01-01, passed 1-23-2024)
§ 110.024 ISSUANCE OF LICENSE; INSURANCE.
   (A)   The Local Commissioner shall have the authority to issue a license
under this chapter if:
      (1)   The applicant is eligible to apply for a license under this
chapter;
      (2)   The issuance of the license is otherwise not prohibited pursuant to
the applicable provisions of this chapter or any other ordinance, code, rule or
regulation of the village or the applicable provisions of the Liquor Control
Act; and
      (3)   The applicant, applying for a license under §
110.021 above filed with the Local Commissioner a certificate of insurance
issued by an insurance company authorized to do business in the state
certifying that the applicant has liquor liability insurance coverage for the
licensed premises in an amount that is at least equal to the maximum liability
amounts set out in § 6-21 of the Liquor Control Act and general liability
insurance coverage for the licensed premises in an amount not less than
$500,000.
   (B)   Each licensee under this chapter shall maintain the insurance coverage
described in division (A) above at all times during the term of the license.
(Ord. 07-05-01, passed 5-22-2007)
§ 110.025 RECORD OF LICENSES.
   The Local Commissioner shall keep a complete record of all retail liquor
licenses issued by the village, and shall furnish the Village Clerk and County
Sheriff with a copy thereof, and the Local Commissioner shall give notice to
the Village Clerk and County Sheriff of the revocation or surrender of any
licenses within 48 hours thereof.
(Ord. 07-05-01, passed 5-22-2007)
§ 110.026 TERM.
   Any license issued pursuant to this chapter, unless otherwise stated, shall
be for a term not to exceed one year and shall expire on April 30 of the next
calendar year following the date of issuance.
(Ord. 07-05-01, passed 5-22-2007)
§ 110.027 FEES.
   (A)   Except as set forth in division (C) below, the nonrefundable $500
application fee and applicable annual fee for any license issued pursuant to
this chapter shall be paid in advance and shall be submitted with the
application for any license. When a new license is issued at some time other
than May 1, the annual fee for any license shall be proportionately reduced by
the number of full calendar months that have elapsed prior to the issuance of
any license since the most previous May 1. No annual license fee or part
thereof shall be refunded after the issuance of any like license.
   (B)   All the nonrefundable application fees and license fees received by
the Local Commissioner shall be forthwith turned over to the Village Treasurer
if the application for the license is accepted. In the event the license
applied for is denied, the fee shall be forthwith returned to the applicant,
less the nonrefundable $500 application fee. The fees, when received, shall be
deposited into the general corporation fund of the village, or the fund as may
be designated by the Board of Trustees.
   (C)   The nonrefundable application fee for a Class EC, PS, and Y license
shall be $250.
   (D)   The application fee for all annual license renewals for current
license holders or change of form of ownership applications shall be $30.
   (E)   There is no initial application fee or application renewal fee for
Class T-1 and T-2 licenses or add-ons of Class OC, CA, and PR for existing
license holders.
   (F)   The foregoing fees, as referenced in §§
110.017 and
110.027, may be deferred, waived and/or rebated, in whole or in part, by
resolution and majority vote of the Village Board of Trustees, provided,
however, that any such waiver or rebate shall apply equally to all licensees of
a particular class or classes in good standing with the village as of a date
certain.
(Ord. 07-05-01, passed 5-22-2007; Ord. 11-12- 01, passed 12-13-2011; Ord. 14-
06-03, passed 6- 24-2014; Ord. 21-03-01, passed 3-23-2021; Ord. 22-10-01,
passed 10-25-2022; Ord. 24-01-01, passed 1-23-2024)
§ 110.028 SALE OR TRANSFER OF LICENSE.
   (A)   A license shall be a purely personal privilege, good for not to exceed
one year after issuance unless sooner revoked as in this chapter or the Liquor
Control Act provided, and shall not constitute property, nor shall it be
subject to attachment, garnishment or execution, nor shall it be alienable or
transferable, voluntarily or involuntarily, or subject to being encumbered or
hypothecated.
   (B)   The license shall cease upon the death, dissolution or termination of
the licensee and shall not descend by the laws of testate or intestate
devolution, provided that executors or administrators of the estate of any
deceased licensee and the trustee of any insolvent or bankrupt licensee, when
the estate consists in part of alcoholic liquor, may continue the business of
the sale of alcoholic liquor under the order of the appropriate court and may
exercise the privileges of the deceased or insolvent or bankrupt licensee after
the death of the decedent, or insolvency or bankruptcy, until the expiration of
the license, but not longer than six months after the death, bankruptcy or
insolvency of the licensee; provided, however, that the administrator or
executor of an estate must meet the qualifications set out in §
110.019.
(Ord. 07-05-01, passed 5-22-2007)
§ 110.029 CHANGE OF LOCATION.
   (A)   A license shall permit the sale of alcoholic liquor only on the
premises described in the application and license. The location may be changed
only if the Local Commissioner grants written permission to make the change.
   (B)   No change of location shall be permitted unless the proposed new
location is in compliance with the applicable provisions and regulations of
this chapter and the Liquor Control Act in connection with the issuance of any
license at the new location.
(Ord. 07-05-01, passed 5-22-2007)
§ 110.030 RENEWAL OF LICENSE.
   Any licensee may renew the licensee’s license at the expiration thereof,
provided that the licensee is then qualified to receive a license and the
premises for which the renewal license is sought are suitable for that purpose;
and provided further, that the renewal privilege herein provided for shall not
be construed as a vested right which shall in any case prevent the Board of
Trustees from decreasing the number or kinds of licenses to be issued within
its jurisdiction.
(Ord. 07-05-01, passed 5-22-2007)
§ 110.031 CHANGES IN INTEREST; PARTNERSHIPS, CORPORATIONS AND LIMITED LIABILITY
COMPANIES.
   (A)   A change in the ownership of any licensee or in the management of any
licensed premises shall be subject to the following requirements:
      (1)   Any change in the partners, officers, directors, managers or other
persons holding directly or beneficially more than 5% of an ownership interest
of any licensee or in the business management of any licensed premises under
this chapter shall be reported in writing to the Local Commissioner within ten
days of the change; provided, however, that any change in stock ownership need
not be reported where the stock is publicly traded and the stock transferred to
any person is less than 20% of the outstanding stock; and
      (2)   When a change occurs that results in any ownership interest
described in division (A)(1) above being transferred to any person who is not
eligible to hold a license under this chapter or the Liquor Control Act, the
license shall terminate effectively on the date of the change.
   (B)   Each licensee shall submit information as may be required by the Local
Commissioner for each change described in division (A) above.
(Ord. 07-05-01, passed 5-22-2007)
TEMPORARY PERMITS
§ 110.045 GENERALLY.
   A temporary permit issued pursuant to this subchapter shall authorize the
sale at retail during a special event or festival of any alcoholic liquor by
the drink for consumption on the premises or area specifically designated in
the temporary permit including public way. The temporary permits shall be
classified as follows and subject to the terms, conditions, restrictions and
fees.
   (A)   Class T-1 permit.
      (1)   A Class T-1 permit shall be issued to any duly constituted
educational, fraternal, political, civic, religious or other non-profit
organization other than a club, unless otherwise approved by the local Liquor
Control Commissioner, for certain premises or area.
      (2)   A Class T-1 permit shall be issued for any specified period of time
not to exceed eight consecutive days.
      (3)   The fee for any Class T-1 permit shall be $50 per day.
   (B)   Class T-2 permit.
      (1)   A Class T-2 permit shall be issued to the holder of any valid Class
A - General Retail License, Class B - Billiard Hall License, Class C - Club
License, Class GC - Golf Course License, Class H - Hotel License, Class M -
Manufacturer Serving License, Class R - Restaurant License, or Class S -
Specialty Retail License issued by the village under this chapter for any
premises or area immediately adjacent to and extending no more than 100 feet
from the licensed premises described in the then current license so issued.
      (2)   A Class T-2 permit may be issued for any specified period of time
of not exceeding eight consecutive hours.
      (3)   No more than four such licenses shall be issued to any one licensee
within a license year.
      (4)   The fee for any Class T-2 permit shall be $100 per day.
(Ord. 07-05-01, passed 5-22-2007; Ord. 13-07-01, passed 7-9-2013; Ord. 17-04-
03, passed 4-25-2017; Ord. 18-04-02, passed 4-24-2018; Ord. 22-03-02, passed 3-
22-2022; Ord. 24-01-01, passed 1-23-2024)
§ 110.046 APPLICATIONS FOR TEMPORARY PERMIT.
   The application for any temporary permit shall be submitted to the Local
Commissioner at least 21 days prior to the first day of any special event. All
applications for any temporary permit shall state in writing:
   (A)   A description of the special event, including the date(s) and hours of
the special event and the date(s) and hours during which alcoholic liquor is
proposed to be sold, transferred and/or consumed;
   (B)   The limits of the premises or area where any alcoholic liquor is
proposed to be sold, transferred and/or consumed;
   (C)   The measures to be taken by the applicant to ensure that persons under
the age of 21 years will not be served, offered or allowed to possess any
alcoholic liquor and that any public nuisance will not be created; and
   (D)   If the proposed permit includes any premises or area not beneficially
owned or duly leased or licensed by the applicant for the full period for which
the temporary permit is to be issued, the application shall include a signed
statement by the owner of the proposed premises or area that the owner has
freely and fully consented to the issuance of a temporary permit and that the
owner shall not revoke the consent during the full period for which the
temporary permit may be issued without first advising the Local Commissioner in
writing of the revocation.
(Ord. 07-05-01, passed 5-22-2007)
§ 110.047 CAUSES FOR DENIAL.
   The Local Commissioner may refuse to issue any temporary permit as provided
for in this subchapter if it is found that:
   (A)   Any provision of state law, local ordinance or other duly adopted rule
or regulation relating to the sale or transfer of alcoholic liquor, other than
those provisions which would be in direct conflict with the provisions relating
to the application and issuance of any temporary permit as provided for in this
subchapter, would be violated;
   (B)   To grant the application would pose any threat to public safety or
would likely create a public nuisance; or
   (C)   Any measures to ensure the protection of persons under the age of 21
years are not adequate to reasonably ensure the protection.
(Ord. 07-05-01, passed 5-22-2007)
§ 110.048 CONDITIONS OF ISSUANCE.
   (A)   A temporary permit, if issued by the Local Commissioner under this
subchapter, may be conditioned upon the applicant enforcing certain conditions
of the temporary permit including, but not limited to, those imposed for the
protection of persons under the age of 21 years or those imposed to avoid
creating a public nuisance.
   (B)   In addition to all other lawful grounds to revoke or suspend any
liquor license, which shall likewise be applicable to any temporary permit
issued under this subchapter, the failure of any holder of a temporary permit
to enforce all the imposed conditions shall constitute grounds to revoke or
suspend any temporary permit or to refuse to issue any other temporary permit.
(Ord. 07-05-01, passed 5-22-2007)
§ 110.049 AUTOMATIC REVOCATION UPON REVOCATION OF CONSENT BY OWNER.
   Any temporary permit issued under this subchapter shall automatically be
suspended during any time or period in which an owner of the premises or area
has revoked consent to the issuance of the temporary permit as required herein.
The suspension shall be effective immediately upon receipt of written notice to
the village or the Local Commissioner of the revocation or withdrawal of the
consent by any like owner.
(Ord. 07-05-01, passed 5-22-2007)
§ 110.050 COMPLIANCE WITH OTHER LAWS.
   Any temporary permit, if issued by the Local Commissioner under this
subchapter, shall not in any manner be regarded to relieve the permittee of
complying with any other requirement of law, ordinance, rule or regulation as
may be applicable to any sale or transfer of alcoholic liquor by any licensee,
except that any temporary permit may be issued without regard to residency and
that any temporary permit may be issued for any day of the week including any
Sunday.
(Ord. 07-05-01, passed 5-22-2007)
REGULATION OF OPERATION
§ 110.060 LOCATION AND HOURS OF SERVICE.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to bring upon, possess or consume
alcoholic liquor in any restaurant, eating place, parking lot of a commercial
establishment, or in or about a commercial establishment inviting the public,
or club used by members and guests, upon its premises or permitting public
patronage without the commercial establishment or premises having a valid
village liquor license under this chapter.
   (B)   Except for any Class P licensee, it shall be unlawful and a violation
of this section for any licensee or permittee under this chapter to sell, offer
for sale, deliver or transfer at retail any alcoholic liquor during the
following hours:
      (1)   Between the hours of 1:00 a.m. and 6:00 a.m. on any Monday through
Saturday, inclusive; and
      (2)   Between the hours of 1:00 a.m. and 12:00 noon on any Sunday.
      (3)   Exception: On January 1 of each year, between the hours of 2:00
a.m. and 6:00 a.m. on any Monday through Saturday, inclusive and between the
hours of 2:00 a.m. and 12:00 noon on any Sunday.
   (C)   It shall be unlawful and a violation of this section for any Class P
licensee under this chapter to sell, offer for sale, deliver or transfer at
retail any alcoholic liquor during the following hours: between the hours of 1:
00 a.m. and 6:00 a.m. on any Monday through Sunday, inclusive; except for on
January 1 of each year, between the hours of 2:00 a.m. and 6:00 a.m. on any
Monday through Sunday, inclusive.
   (D)   Subject to division (C) above, it shall be unlawful and a violation of
this section for any licensee or permittee under this chapter to keep open for
business, to admit the public to or to permit the public to remain within any
licensed or permitted premises or area under this chapter between the hours of
1:30 a.m. and 6:00 a.m. on any day other than January 1 of each year and
between the hours of 2:30 a.m. and 6:00 a.m. on any January 1 of each year.
   (E)   In the case of any grocery store, drug store, food mart, gas station,
hotel, bowling alley or restaurant which has been issued a liquor license under
this chapter, any establishment may be kept open for business between the hours
prohibited in division (D) above but no alcoholic liquor may be sold, offered
for sale or consumed during any such hours.
(Ord. 07-05-01, passed 5-22-2007)
Cross-reference:
   For fine, see §
35.01
§ 110.061 MINORS IN CLASS A OR CLASS B LICENSED PREMISES.
   It shall be unlawful and a violation of this section for any licensee
holding a Class A or B license under this chapter to permit or allow after 10:
00 p.m. any person under the age of 19, who is not an employee, to enter or
remain in that portion of the licensed premises where the sale, delivery or
service of alcoholic liquor for consumption occurs, provided, however, that the
provisions of this section shall not apply to that portion of any bowling alley
or restaurant where the sale, delivery or service of alcoholic liquor is not
the principal business of the licensee in any such portion of the licensed
premises.
(Ord. 07-05-01, passed 5-22-2007; Ord. 13-07-01, passed 7-9-2013; Ord. 20-07-
02, passed 7-28-2020; Ord. 22-10-01, passed 10-25-2022) Penalty, see §
110.999
§ 110.062 MINORS AS MANAGERS AND EMPLOYEES.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful and a violation of this section for any licensee
or permittee under this chapter to permit or allow any person under the age of
18 to be in charge of any licensed or permitted premises when any such premises
is open to the public for business.
   (B)   It shall be unlawful and a violation of this section for any licensee
or permittee under this chapter to permit or allow any person under the age of
18 to sell any alcoholic liquor, to attend the bar or to draw, pour or mix any
alcoholic liquor on the licensed or permitted premises. This section shall not
prohibit a minor employee of a Class A, M, P or PS licensee from assisting a
customer with sold packaged alcoholic liquor to the customer”s vehicle on or
adjacent to the premises where sold.
(Ord. 07-05-01, passed 5-22-2007; Ord. 13-07-01, passed 7-9-2013; Ord. 22-10-
01, passed 10-25-2022) Penalty, see §
110.999
§ 110.063 PROHIBITED SALES OR DELIVERY.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful and a violation of this section for any licensee
or permittee under this chapter to sell or deliver any alcoholic liquor to any
person under the age of 21 years, to any intoxicated person or to any person
known to the licensee or permittee to be under a legal disability or in need of
mental treatment.
   (B)   For the purposes of preventing a violation of division (A) above, any
licensee or permittee shall request adequate written evidence of identity of
all persons ordering, purchasing or attempting to purchase any alcoholic liquor
and shall refuse to sell, deliver or serve alcoholic liquor to any person who
is unable to produce the evidence.
   (C)   As used in this section, adequate written evidence of identity and of
age of a person is a document with an affixed photograph issued by a federal,
state, county or municipal government, or subdivision or agency thereof,
including but not limited to a motor vehicle operator’s license or an
identification card issued to a member of the armed forces.
   (D)   (1)   Proof that any licensee or permittee under this chapter was
shown and reasonably relied upon any written evidence of identity and of age in
any transaction prohibited by this section shall be an affirmative defense in
the prosecution of any violation under this section.
      (2)   It shall not, however, be an affirmative defense if any licensee or
permittee accepted any written evidence knowing it to be false or fraudulent.
(Ord. 07-05-01, passed 5-22-2007) Penalty, see §
110.999
§ 110.064 LIGHTING.
   It shall be unlawful and a violation of this section for any licensee or
permittee under this chapter to fail to keep the area of any licensed or
permitted premises where alcoholic liquor is then being sold, offered for sale,
delivered or served for consumption on the licensed or permitted premises to be
continuously illuminated so that all the portions of the licensed or permitted
premises shall be clearly visible at all times.
(Ord. 07-05-01, passed 5-22-2007) Penalty, see §
110.999
§ 110.065 REPORTING OF VIOLATIONS.
   It shall be unlawful and a violation of this section for any licensee or
permittee under this chapter to fail to immediately notify the Police
Department of the village of any violation of the Criminal Code of 1961 (ILCS
Ch. 720, Act 5, §§ 1-1 et seq.) or any other criminal laws of the state or of
any violation of any of the ordinances of the village relating to quasi-
criminal offenses which occur on or in the licensed or permitted premises.
(Ord. 07-05-01, passed 5-22-2007) Penalty, see §
110.999
§ 110.066 TRAINING REQUIRED.
   (A)   All alcohol servers are required to obtain and complete a Beverage
Alcohol Sellers and Servers Education and Training Program (BASSET)
certification within 120 days after the alcohol server begins his or her
employment. Until obtaining BASSET certification, all newly hired alcohol
servers shall work under the supervision of a person possessing a valid BASSET
certification as required by this section.
   (B)   For the purpose of this section, ALCOHOL SERVERS means persons who
sell or serve open containers of alcoholic beverages at retail and anyone whose
job description entails the checking of identification for the purchase of open
containers of alcoholic beverages at retail or for entry into the licensed
premises.
   (C)   BASSET certification and all subsequent recertification shall be
obtained from a program licensed by the State of Illinois Liquor Control
Commission and meeting the requirements of ILCS Ch. 235, Act 5, § 6-27.1 and 77
III. Adm. Code 3500, as amended from time to time.
   (D)   A copy of a valid BASSET certification for each alcohol server shall
be available at the licensed premises for inspection, upon demand, by any
designee of state liquor control authorities, Mahomet Police Department, the
local liquor commissioner or designee thereof.
   (E)   The requirements of this section shall not apply to Class P (Packaged
Liquor), Class T-1 (Special Event Permit) or Class Y (Conditional BYOB)
licensees.
(Ord. 16-04-01, passed 4-26-2016)
OTHER PROHIBITIONS AND PROVISIONS
§ 110.075 PROHIBITIONS RELATED TO AGE.
   It shall be unlawful and a violation of this section for any person under
the age of 21 to do any of the following:
   (A)   To possess or consume any alcoholic liquor except in the performance
of a religious service or ceremony or in the privacy of a home under the direct
supervision of the parent or parents of the person;
   (B)   To order, purchase, attempt to purchase or otherwise procure or
attempt to procure any alcoholic liquor, unless they are an employee or owner
of a licensed establishment in the function of their job; or
   (C)   To misrepresent his or her age for the purpose of purchasing or
obtaining alcoholic liquor.
(Ord. 07-05-01, passed 5-22-2007; Ord. 22-10-01, passed 10-25-2022)
Cross-reference:
   For fine, see §
35.01
§ 110.076 WARNING TO MINORS.
   Every place of business in the village where alcoholic liquor is sold shall
display in a prominent place a printed card warning persons under the age of 21
years against the purchase, possession or consumption of alcoholic liquor and
advising them that violations of this chapter will subject the minors to a fine
up to $750 under this chapter.
(Ord. 07-05-01, passed 5-22-2007) Penalty, see §
110.999
§ 110.077 PROHIBITIONS RELATED TO RESPONSIBILITY.
   It shall be unlawful and a violation of this section for:
   (A)   Any person to sell, give or deliver alcoholic liquor to any person
under the age of 21 years;
   (B)   Any person to sell, give or deliver alcoholic liquor to any
intoxicated person;
   (C)   Any person to rent a hotel or motel room for the purpose of or with
the knowledge that the room shall be used for the consumption of alcoholic
liquor by any person under the age of 21 years;
   (D)   Any parent or guardian to permit or allow the child of any parent or
ward of any guardian to violate any provision of this subchapter under
circumstances where the parent or guardian knew, or in the exercise of
reasonable care should have known, of any violation;
   (E)   Any person to sell, give or furnish to any person under the age of 21
years any written, printed or photostatic evidence of age and identity that is
false, fraudulent or not actually his or her own for any purpose described in §
110.075(C); provided, however, that nothing in this section shall be deemed or
construed to prohibit the giving or delivery of alcoholic liquor to any person
under the age of 21 years for consumption in the performance of a religious
service or as otherwise allowed by law; or
   (F)   Any person to sell, give or deliver alcoholic liquor on any premises
on which adult entertainment is provided.
(Ord. 07-05-01, passed 5-22-2007)
Cross-reference:
   For fine, see §
35.01
§ 110.078 OPEN CONTAINERS AND CONSUMPTION.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful and a violation of this section for any person to
possess any open container of or to consume any alcoholic liquor on any public
property or on the parking lot of any business establishment or within ten feet
of any public street open to vehicular traffic, or in any vehicle traveling
upon or parked on any public property or on the parking lot of any business
establishment except where the possession or consumption has been authorized
pursuant to the terms of a liquor license or permit duly issued under this
chapter or to any other official authorization of the governing body of the
public property, or the open container of alcoholic liquor is being transported
in compliance with Illinois law.
   (B)   For the purposes of this section, PUBLIC PROPERTY means any real
property owned, controlled or managed by the village, the County Forest
Preserve District or the Mahomet-Seymour School District, including, but not
limited to, any street, alley, bike path, sidewalk, public parking lot,
parkway, school grounds or park.
(Ord. 07-05-01, passed 5-22-2007; Ord. 14-06- 03, passed 6-24-2014)
Cross-reference:
   For fine, see §
35.01
§ 110.079 INSPECTION OF PREMISES.
   The premises for which any license has been applied for and any licensed
premises shall be open to inspection by the village authorities at any time for
the purpose of enforcing the provisions of this chapter.
(Ord. 07-05-01, passed 5-22-2007)
§ 110.080 REVOCATION OR SUSPENSION OF LICENSE.
   The Local Commissioner may revoke or suspend any license issued under this
chapter if the Local Commissioner determines that:
   (A)   The licensee has violated any of the provisions of this chapter or the
Liquor Control Act or any applicable rule or regulations established by the
Local Commissioner or the State Liquor Control Commission which are not
inconsistent with law; or
   (B)   The licensee has violated any other federal, state or village laws,
ordinances, codes, rules or regulations in connection with the operation of the
licensee’s business or the maintenance of the licensed premises.
(Ord. 07-05-01, passed 5-22-2007)
§ 110.081 FINES AND TRAINING PROCEDURES.
   In lieu of or in addition to any suspension, the Local Liquor Control
Commissioner shall have the additional power and authority to:
   (A)   Impose a fine upon a licensee of not less than $150 nor more than
$2,000 for each violation, with each day on which a violation continues
constituting a separate violation; and/or
   (B)   Require a licensee and any of the licensee’s managers, employees or
agents who sell or serve alcoholic liquor to complete a state certified or
otherwise approved education and training program for any sellers and servers.
(Ord. 07-05-01, passed 5-22-2007)
§ 110.082 APPEALS.
   (A)   In any case in which a licensee appeals to the State Liquor Control
Commission from any action or order of the Local Commissioner under this
section, the appeal shall be limited to a review of the official record of the
Local Commissioner, the President and Board of Trustees of the village.
   (B)   The licensee undertaking any appeal shall pay all costs of preparing
and transcribing the official record in connection with any appeal.
(Ord. 07-05-01, passed 5-22-2007)
§ 110.083 COSTS OF HEARING.
   In any case where any action or order of the Local Commissioner adverse to
any licensee is not appealed from within the time specified in the Liquor
Control Act or is otherwise upheld in whole or in part by the State Liquor
Control Commission upon appeal, the licensee shall be responsible for all
costs, including attorneys’ fees, incurred by the village in connection with
the hearing thereon, including, but not limited to, any court reporter costs
and hourly fees as well as any witness and mileage fees.
(Ord. 07-05-01, passed 5-22-2007)
§ 110.084 PROHIBITIONS RELATED TO SALONS.
   It shall be unlawful to possess for consumption, sell, offer or keep for
sale, or possess for sale, alcoholic liquor or beer in salons or salons located
within a licensed facility, except under the terms, conditions, limitations,
and restrictions enumerated within this chapter and state law.
(Ord. 20-07-02, passed 7-28-2020)
§ 110.999 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person, other than any fine against a licensee under §
110.081 above, who violates any provision of this chapter shall be subject to a
fine in a sum of not less than $150 or more than $750 for each violation.
   (B)   Each day that any like violation continues shall be deemed a separate
offense.
   (C)   For §§
110.060,
110.075,
110.077 and
110.078 fines, see §
35.01.
(Ord. 07-05-01, passed 5-22-2007)
CHAPTER 111: VEHICLES FOR HIRE
Section
General Provisions
   
111.001   Definitions
   
111.002   Applicability
   
111.003   Reciprocal issuance
   
111.004   Expiration
Operator Licensing
   
111.015   Licenses required
   
111.016   Application; photograph required
   
111.017   Qualification of driver; certification of driving ability
   
111.018   Issuance of village vehicle for hire driver's license
   
111.019   Display of license
   
111.020   Duplicate certificates
   
111.021   Suspension or revocation.
Business Licensing
   
111.035   Business certificate required
   
111.036   Business application
   
111.037   Qualifications of applicant
   
111.038   Issuance
   
111.039   Duplicate certificates
   
111.040   Suspension or revocation
Rates
   
111.055   Method of rate calculation
   
111.056   Rate posting
   
111.057   Waiting time
   
111.058   Clearance of taximeter
   
111.059   Proof of insurance, bond and registration
Rules and Regulations
   
111.075   Responsibility for unlicensed drivers
   
111.076   False representation
   
111.077   Issuing receipt upon demand
   
111.078   Conduct and appearance of drivers
   
111.079   Use of vehicle for crime; alcoholic beverages
   
111.080   Obedience to traffic rules
   
111.081   Soliciting passengers; direct route to be used
   
111.082   Duty to accept passengers
   
111.083   Parking in taxicab stand
   
111.084   Occupancy by person not a passenger
   
111.085   Number of passengers; seating arrangement
   
111.086   Failure to pay fare prohibited.
Equipment
   
111.100   Ineligible vehicles
   
111.101   Vehicle classification
   
111.102   Display of certificate
   
111.103   Condition of vehicle for hire; inspections
   
111.104   Vehicle markings; similar markings prohibited
   
111.105   Testing of meters.
   
111.106   Condition of meters.
 
   
111.999   Penalty
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 111.001 DEFINITIONS.
   (A)   Whenever any words and phrases used in the chapter are not defined
herein but are defined in the Illinois Vehicle Code, ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, §§ 1-
100 et seq., or otherwise in the Illinois Compiled Statutes, as amended, any
such definition therein shall be deemed to apply to such words and phrases used
in this chapter, except when the context otherwise requires.
   (B) The following words and phrases when used in this chapter shall, for the
purpose of this chapter, have the meanings respectfully ascribed to them in
this section below, except when the context otherwise requires.
      DRIVER. The person in actual physical control of a vehicle for hire.
      LICENSEE. Owner of vehicle for hire or the driver of said vehicle.
      LIMOUSINE. A vehicle classified as such pursuant to the State of Illinois
and used to carry passengers for hire based primarily on an hourly rate rather
than a mileage rate and is arranged between the passenger and operator prior to
the arrival of the vehicle at the passenger's location.
      OPERATING. Owning a vehicle for hire.
      OPERATOR. Owner of a vehicle for hire.
      PUBLIC TRANSPORTATION VEHICLE. A privately-owned vehicle which is
required to have registration plates with a "PT" suffix and designed to
lawfully carry ten or more passengers, including but not limited to, passenger
vans.
      TAXI (Also referred to as TAXICAB and CAB). Any vehicle used in the
village to carry passengers for hire based on mileage, per person or flat rate.
      TAXIMETER. Any mechanical or electronic device which records and
indicates a charge or fare measured by distance traveled, waiting time and
extra passengers.
      VEHICLE FOR HIRE. Any motor vehicle engaged in the business of carrying
persons for hire on the streets of the Village of Mahomet, including taxis,
limousines and public transportation vehicles.
(Ord. 11-06-01, passed 6-28-2011)
§ 111.002 APPLICABILITY.
   (A)   The provisions of this chapter shall be applicable to all vehicles for
hire, whether to transport persons within or outside the corporate limits of
the Village of Mahomet and to the drivers and operators of such vehicles.
   (B)   These provisions shall not apply to:
      (1)   Vehicles operated as school buses as defined by the Illinois
Vehicle Code;
      (2)   Vehicles provided by employers for the exclusive use of its
employees;
      (3)   Vehicles devoted exclusively for funeral use;
      (4)   Vehicles used in operation of a metropolitan transit authority;
      (5)   Vehicles used as shuttles or courtesy vehicles by a business for
the convenience of their customers and at no charge to their customers; or
      (6)   Vehicles specifically designed, constructed or modified and
equipped, and are intended to be used for, and are maintained or operated
exclusively for the emergency or non-emergency transportation of persons for
compensation for the purpose of obtaining medical services.
(Ord. 11-06-01, passed 6-28-2011)
§ 111.003 RECIPROCAL ISSUANCE.
   Licenses issued by or on behalf of the City of Champaign and the City of
Urbana shall constitute the issuance of a license within the Village of Mahomet
for drivers of vehicles for hire and for the business of operating vehicles for
hire. Licensees shall pay all applicable fees required by each city, regardless
of which city may issue the license.
(Ord. 11-06-01, passed 6-28-2011)
§ 111.004 EXPIRATION.
   Each license, other than a provisional license, issued under this chapter
shall expire on April 30 of the fiscal year for which it is issued.
(Ord. 11-06-01, passed 6-28-2011)
OPERATOR LICENSING
§ 111.015 LICENSES REQUIRED.
   No person shall drive a vehicle for hire or be hired or permitted to do so,
unless he/she is a duly licensed driver by the State of Illinois and has a
valid village issued vehicle for hire driver's license.
(Ord. 11-06-01, passed 6-28-2011)
§ 111.016 APPLICATION; PHOTOGRAPH REQUIRED.
   A verified application for a vehicle for hire driver's license shall be made
in writing to the Village Administrator upon forms provided by the village
along with a payment of $100 for application or renewal thereof. The
application shall state the full name of the applicant, his/her age, his/her
residence address, the name and address of his/her employer, and whether or not
he/she qualifies for a village issued vehicle for hire license under this
chapter. The applicant must undergo a state criminal background check and must
complete any forms required by the state to undergo such a background check.
(Ord. 11-06-01, passed 6-28-2011)
§ 111.017 QUALIFICATION OF DRIVER; CERTIFICATION OF DRIVING ABILITY.
   (A)   No village issued vehicle for hire driver's license shall be issued to
any person:
      (1)   Who is not competent to drive a motor vehicle;
      (2)   Who is not familiar with the traffic laws and ordinances;
      (3)   Who has a conviction within the last five years for manslaughter or
reckless homicide resulting from the operation of a motor vehicle;
      (4)   Who has a conviction within the last five years for driving under
the influence;
      (5)   Who has two convictions within the last five years for reckless
driving;
      (6)   Who has been convicted of a felony within five years of the date of
application or has been released from prison or jail for a felony conviction
within five years of the date of application;
      (7)   Whose license to drive a vehicle for hire in any jurisdiction has
been suspended or revoked during the preceding six months;
      (8)    Who is under the age of 18 years of age; or
      (9)   Who is not properly licensed by the State of Illinois to operate
the particular registered vehicle which is to be utilized for hire.
   (B)   The Chief of Police, or his/her designee, shall examine each applicant
for a vehicle for hire driver's license to determine the eligibility of the
applicant. No such license shall be issued except on certificate of the Chief
of Police, or his/her designee, which the applicant has demonstrated no traffic
violations during the preceding six months.
   (C)   Repeat violations of this chapter shall be grounds for rejection of a
license application, non-renewal of a license or revocation of a current
license.
(Ord. 11-06-01, passed 6-28-2011)
§ 111.018 ISSUANCE OF VILLAGE VEHICLE FOR HIRE DRIVER'S LICENSE.
   Upon completion of a local background check and successfully passing the
State of Illinois background check, the Village Administrator, or his/her
designee, is authorized to issue a village vehicle for hire driver's license to
the applicant for driving a vehicle for hire. The license shall contain the
name of the driver, the number of his/her license, and his/her photograph.
(Ord. 11-06-01, passed 6-28-2011)
§ 111.019 DISPLAY OF LICENSE.
   The driver of a vehicle for hire shall conspicuously display his/her village
vehicle for hire driver's license at all times while on duty posted in the
passenger area of the vehicle so as to be readily visible to a passenger.
(Ord. 11-06-01, passed 6-28-2011)
§ 111.020 DUPLICATE CERTIFICATES.
   Whenever a driver has lost or destroyed his/her village issued vehicle for
hire license, he/she shall submit an affidavit in writing to the Village
Administrator, stating that the license has been lost or destroyed. The Village
Administrator shall issue a duplicate copy or substitute thereof upon payment
of $5 for each item so duplicated or substituted.
(Ord. 11-06-01, passed 6-28-2011)
§ 111.021 SUSPENSION OR REVOCATION.
   (A)   The village may initiate suspension and/or revocation proceedings for
a license issued under this chapter if the licensee commits one or more moving
violation pursuant to the Illinois Vehicle Code.
   (B)   The village may immediately revoke any license issued under this
chapter when the licensee's driving privileges have been suspended or revoked
pursuant to the Illinois Vehicle Code. The issuing authority shall send a
notice of revocation advising of the revocation to the residence address of the
licensee filed with the Village Administrator. The revocation shall be in
effect from the date of the notice. The licensee shall be entitled to a post-
deprivation hearing as soon as practical, but no later than seven days after
issuance of the notice.
   (C)   Any person whose driver's license has been revoked shall immediately
return every license to the Village Administrator.
(Ord. 11-06-01, passed 6-28-2011)
BUSINESS LICENSING
§ 111.035 BUSINESS CERTIFICATE REQUIRED.
   No person shall engage in the business of operating a vehicle for hire in
the village without first having secured a village issued certificate therefore
as provided in this chapter.
(Ord. 11-06-01, passed 6-28-2011)
§ 111.036 BUSINESS APPLICATION.
   A verified application for a vehicle for hire village issued certificate
shall be made in writing by the owner, operator or manager of the vehicle for
hire to the Village Administrator or his/her designee upon forms furnished by
the village. The application shall include:
   (A)   The full name of the applicant (if a firm or corporation, provide
names, telephone numbers and addresses of the president, secretary and
treasurer);
   (B)   The applicant's residence (local and permanent) address;
   (C)   The full name and intended place of business, the telephone number of
the business, and the owner/operator/manager;
   (D)   The number of vehicles to be operated, the make and type of each motor
vehicle to be used, the vehicle identification number for each vehicle, the
proposed vehicle classification as defined in this chapter, the state license
number thereof, the seating capacity thereof according to its trade rating, the
company assigned number, the registered owner of the vehicle, the body style,
and the color;
   (E)   Whether or not the applicant has ever been convicted of a felony. If
the applicant is a firm or corporation, the names and addresses of the
president, secretary and treasurer shall be given;
   (F)   Issuance and validity statement and insurance certificates;
   (G)   A Certificate of Good Standing from the Illinois Secretary of State
dated no later than three months prior to the application date; and
   (H)   Signature of applicant.
(Ord. 11-06-01, passed 6-28-2011)
§ 111.037 QUALIFICATIONS OF APPLICANT.
   (A)   No village issued certificate to engage in the business of operating a
vehicle for hire shall be issued to or held by any person:
      (1)   Who has been convicted of a felony within five years of the date of
application or has been released from prison or jail upon a felony conviction
within five years of the date of application; or
      (2)   Whose license to operate a vehicle for hire in any jurisdiction has
been suspended or revoked during the preceding six months.
   (B)   No village issued certificate to operate a vehicle for hire business
shall be issued to or held by any firm or corporation if any officer thereof
would be ineligible for a village issued certificate under the foregoing
conditions.
(Ord. 11-06-01, passed 6-28-2011)
§ 111.038 ISSUANCE.
   (A)   The Village Administrator, or his/her designee, is authorized to issue
a village issued certificate to any qualified applicant for the operation of a
vehicle for hire. The village issued certificate shall contain a distinguishing
number, name of the person owning such vehicle for hire, his/her business
address, the number of vehicles to be operated, the make and type of each
vehicle to be used, the vehicle identification number thereof, and the state
license number thereof.
   (B)   The village issued certificate shall be non-assignable and
nontransferable.
(Ord. 11-06-01, passed 6-28-2011)
§ 111.039 DUPLICATE CERTIFICATES.
   Whenever an operator has lost or destroyed his/her village issued
certificate, he/she shall submit an affidavit in writing to the Village
Administrator, stating that the village issued certificate has been lost or
destroyed. The Village Administrator shall issue a duplicate copy or substitute
thereof upon payment of the sum $5 for each item so duplicated or substituted.
(Ord. 11-06-01, passed 6-28-2011)
§ 111.040 SUSPENSION OR REVOCATION.
   (A)   The village may initiate suspension and/or revocation proceedings for
a village issued certificate issued under this chapter for any of the
following:
      (1)   Violation of any ordinance provisions regulating a licensee of a
vehicle for hire;
      (2)   Knowingly suffering a driver of a licensee to drive a vehicle for
hire with a driver's license that is suspended or revoked under the State
Vehicle Code, ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, §§ 1-100, et seq.;
      (3)   Having as a driver a person who is not licensed as a vehicle for
hire driver pursuant to this chapter.
   (B)   Any person whose certificate has been revoked shall immediately return
every such village issued certificate to the Village Administrator.
(Ord. 11-06-01, passed 6-28-2011)
RATES
§ 111.055 METHOD OF RATE CALCULATION.
   Every operator of a vehicle for hire shall establish a method for
calculating rates and fares. The methods approved are:
   (A)   Taximeters;
   (B)   Per head or flat rate; or
   (C)   Individual written contract terms.
(Ord. 11-06-01, passed 6-28-2011)
§ 111.056 RATE POSTING.
   (A)   All licensees, excluding limousines, shall provide the Village
Administrator with a written schedule of all rates charged, including but not
limited to, per person or flat rate, taximeter rates, flag and mileage rates
and rates for transportation and carrying of luggage, hand luggage and parcels.
The Village Administrator shall be notified in writing ten days prior to the
effective date of any rate changes.
   (B)   All licensees, excluding limousines, shall post conspicuously in each
vehicle for hire and keep posted conspicuously at all times or a written notice
setting out the schedule of all rates charged by that person and as are on file
with the Village Administrator. The fares set out in this notice shall not vary
from the schedule filed with the Village Administrator.
   (C)   No licensee or driver shall charge a fare in excess of the effective
schedule of fares on file with the Village Administrator.
   (D)   If the vehicle for hire is equipped with a taximeter, no fare shall be
charged other than that recorded on the dial of the meter for the trip where
such meter is utilized. However, if the driver of such vehicle is charging
passengers a per person rate, said driver must clearly state that fact; provide
the exact rate to all passengers for their destination; and receive their
consent before the trip may proceed.
   (E)   No licensee shall operate and no driver shall drive a vehicle for hire
unless the fare to be charged is determined in accordance with the posted
schedule of rates or provided.
   (F)   No person shall remove or deface the notice required to be posted in a
vehicle for hire or post the notice in a place so as to not be easily readable
by a passenger located in the rear of the vehicle.
   (G)   No licensee shall drive a vehicle for hire with a defaced or missing
schedule of rates. This shall be a strict liability offense.
   (H)   Limousine only. In the event a vehicle is classified as a limousine,
the parties to the contract may establish the rate for services. Said rates
must be in writing and a copy of the contract shall be presented to the person
who has contracted for such service prior to or at the time of commencement of
service. The driver of a limousine shall have a copy of the contract documents
in the vehicle and available for inspection at all times. However, any vehicle,
otherwise classified as a limousine and defined as a LIVERY VEHICLE by the
State of Illinois, but is utilized from time to time as a taxi, as defined by
this chapter, shall file the meter rates, and per person rates with the Village
Administrator and post said rates, as required in division (B) of this section.
At such times as limousine may be used as a taxi, that vehicle and its driver
shall be regulated as such by the applicable provisions of this chapter.
(Ord. 11-06-01, passed 6-28-2011) Penalty, see §
111.999
§ 111.057 WAITING TIME.
   Waiting time shall include the time when the vehicle for hire is not in
motion, beginning three minutes after arrival at the place to which it has been
called, the time consumed by unavoidable delays at street intersections, and
the time consumed while standing at the direction of the passenger. No charge
shall be made for time lost for inefficiency of the vehicle for hire or its
driver or the time consumed by premature response to a call.
(Ord. 11-06-01, passed 6-28-2011)
§ 111.058 CLEARANCE OF TAXIMETER.
   (A)   The taximeter shall be cleared at the destination of each passenger or
group of passengers, unless a passenger declares to the driver at or before the
time the first destination is reached that no clearance of the meter shall be
made until all or certain designated passengers in such vehicle for hire reach
their respective destination. The passenger making such declaration shall be
liable for the whole fare upon reaching his/her destination.
   (B)   The clearance of the taximeter at the destination of a passenger or
group of passengers shall constitute the end of one trip. Any passengers
remaining in the vehicle for transportation to a different destination after
the clearance of the meter shall constitute the commencement of a new trip, and
shall not be liable for any fare whatsoever until such new trip is commenced.
(Ord. 11-06-01, passed 6-28-2011)
§ 111.059 PROOF OF INSURANCE, BOND AND REGISTRATION.
   (A)   No person shall operate or drive a vehicle for hire unless such
vehicle is covered by a bond or an insurance policy or other proof of insurance
in a form prescribed by the Secretary of State and in at least the minimum
amounts required by ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 8-104 or ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 8-
108, as amended from time to time. Evidence that the applicant has filed with
the Secretary of State such bond or insurance policy shall be filed with the
Village Administrator prior to the issuance of any village issued certificate.
   (B)   The operator of a vehicle for hire shall provide proof of registration
of the vehicle as prescribed by the Illinois Vehicle Code on or before January
2 of each and every year in which the vehicle is used as a vehicle for hire.
(Ord. 11-06-01, passed 6-28-2011)
RULES AND REGULATIONS
§ 111.075 RESPONSIBILITY FOR UNLICENSED DRIVERS.
   No operator shall have as a driver of one of the operator's vehicles for
hire a driver who is not licensed pursuant to this chapter. This shall be a
strict liability offense.
(Ord. 11-06-01, passed 6-28-2011) Penalty, see §
111.999
§ 111.076 FALSE REPRESENTATION.
   No operator, driver or other employee of a licensee shall imitate the
vehicle for hire name, colors, emblems, cap bands, caps or uniforms previously
adopted and in use by any other licensee or represent himself as an employee of
any other licensee.
(Ord. 11-06-01, passed 6-28-2011) Penalty, see §
111.999
§ 111.077 ISSUING RECEIPT UPON DEMAND.
   Upon paying the fare each passenger may demand a receipt. Upon such demand
the driver of any vehicle for hire shall give the passenger a receipt in
legible type or writing showing the date and amount so paid, the pick-up and
drop-off location of the passenger, the trade name of the vehicle for hire, and
the name and the license number of the driver.
(Ord. 11-06-01, passed 6-28-2011) Penalty, see §
111.999
§ 111.078 CONDUCT AND APPEARANCE OF DRIVERS.
   (A)   No driver of a vehicle for hire while on duty shall use any profane or
obscene language or gestures, shout or call to prospective passengers, or
engage in violent, abusive, indecent, profane, boisterous, or unreasonably loud
conduct.
   (B)   Every driver of a vehicle for hire shall maintain a reasonable degree
of personal hygiene and be dressed in clean clothing that is not soiled or
otherwise offensive.
(Ord. 11-06-01, passed 6-28-2011) Penalty, see §
111.999
§ 111.079 USE OF VEHICLE FOR CRIME; ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES.
   (A)   No person shall knowingly permit any vehicle for hire to be used in
the perpetration of a crime.
   (B)   No driver of any vehicle for hire shall have in his/her possession or
in or about the driver's compartment of the vehicle any alcoholic liquor while
on any street or on public property.
   (C)   No driver of any vehicle for hire shall use a vehicle for hire for the
purpose of transporting or delivering any alcoholic liquor except alcoholic
liquor in its original unopened packaging in the possession of and the property
of a paying passenger.
   (D)   No driver of any vehicle for hire while on duty shall possess or
consume any alcoholic liquor.
   (E)   This section shall not apply to the passengers in a limousine when it
is being used for purposes for which a limousine is ordinarily used or the
passengers on a chartered bus when it is being used for purposes for which
chartered buses are ordinarily used. However, the driver of any such vehicle is
prohibited from consuming or having any alcoholic liquor in or about the
driver's area. Any evidence of alcoholic consumption by the driver shall be
prima facie evidence of such driver's failure to obey this section. For the
purposes of this section, a LIMOUSINE is a motor vehicle with the passenger
compartment enclosed by a partition or dividing window used in the for hire
transportation of passengers.
(Ord. 11-06-01, passed 6-28-2011) Penalty, see §
111.999
§ 111.080 OBEDIENCE TO TRAFFIC RULES.
   Every driver of a vehicle for hire shall obey all traffic rules established
by statute or ordinance.
(Ord. 11-06-01, passed 6-28-2011) Penalty, see §
111.999
§ 111.081 SOLICITING PASSENGERS; DIRECT ROUTE TO BE USED.
   (A)   No vehicle for hire driver shall induce or attempt to make anyone
employ him or his vehicle for hire by any false statement or representation of
the place or time of arrival or departure of any public conveyance or common
carrier.
   (B)   No person shall be admitted to a vehicle for hire occupied by a
passenger without the consent of the original passenger.
   (C)   The vehicle for hire driver shall take his/her passenger to his/her
destination by the most direct available route from the place where the
passenger enters the cab.
(Ord. 11-06-01, passed 6-28-2011) Penalty, see §
111.999
§ 111.082 DUTY TO ACCEPT PASSENGERS.
   Any driver of any vehicle for hire shall accept as a passenger any person
who seeks to so use the vehicle for hire, provided such person is not under the
influence of alcohol or drugs and conducts himself in an orderly manner.
(Ord. 11-06-01, passed 6-28-2011) Penalty, see §
111.999
§ 111.083 PARKING IN TAXICAB STAND.
   A vehicle for hire may be parked in any taxicab stand only while such
vehicle is under the control of its driver on duty awaiting a fare. The driver
of such vehicle for hire shall remain in the vehicle unless providing immediate
assistance to a passenger.
(Ord. 11-06-01, passed 6-28-2011) Penalty, see §
111.999
§ 111.084 OCCUPANCY BY PERSON NOT A PASSENGER.
   (A)   No licensee of a vehicle for hire shall permit any person except a
passenger for hire to occupy or be seated in such vehicle when the vehicle is
engaged in the business of transporting passengers.
   (B)   Operators may temporarily occupy a vehicle for hire for training
purposes when a new trainee has obtained a vehicle for hire driver's license.
The operator shall notify the Village Administrator of the training activities
and shall provide a date certain for when said training activities will be
concluded.
(Ord. 11-06-01, passed 6-28-2011) Penalty, see §
111.999
§ 111.085 NUMBER OF PASSENGERS; SEATING ARRANGEMENT.
   The number of passengers transported at any one time by a vehicle for hire
shall not:
   (A)   Exceed the number of manufacturers installed seats and seatbelts
available for each and every passenger in said vehicle; or
   (B)   Exceed the number allowed by state or federal laws for that vehicle
type.
(Ord. 11-06-01, passed 6-28-2011) Penalty, see §
111.999
§ 111.086 FAILURE TO PAY FARE PROHIBITED.
   No passenger shall fail or refuse to pay the lawful fare at the termination
of a trip.
(Ord. 11-06-01, passed 6-28-2011) Penalty, see §
111.999
EQUIPMENT
§ 111.100 INELIGIBLE VEHICLES.
   No village issued certificate to engage in the business of operating a
vehicle for hire shall be issued for pick-up trucks of any kind or two-door
coupe vehicles.
(Ord. 11-06-01, passed 6-28-2011)
§ 111.101 VEHICLE CLASSIFICATION.
   All vehicles for hire shall be registered and classified with the State of
Illinois as either a limousine, taxicab, or a public transportation vehicle, as
defined in this chapter.
(Ord. 11-06-01, passed 6-28-2011)
§ 111.102 DISPLAY OF CERTIFICATE.
   Upon the issuance of a village issued certificate, the Village
Administrator, or his/her designee, shall deliver to the licensee a vehicle for
hire village sticker with the year for which the village issued certificate is
issued, for each and every vehicle for hire for which a village issued
certificate is procured. The applicant shall affix such village sticker in an
approved place upon the rear of the vehicle for hire. No vehicle for hire,
although licensed in accordance with the provision of this chapter, shall be
used upon the streets, avenues or alleys of the village unless such village
sticker is attached thereto.
(Ord. 11-06-01, passed 6-28-2011) Penalty, see §
111.999
§ 111.103 CONDITION OF VEHICLE FOR HIRE; INSPECTIONS.
   (A)   No village issued certificate to engage in the business of operating a
vehicle for hire shall be issued unless:
      (1)   The vehicle for hire bears a state license plate duly issued and
appropriate for vehicles for hire;
      (2)   The vehicle for hire is equipped with proper brakes, lights, tires,
horn, muffler, rear vision mirror, windshield wiper, speedometer, and when
applicable, an approved taximeter in good condition to record the amount of
fare to be charged for each trip;
      (3)   The vehicle for hire has been thoroughly and carefully inspected
and found by the village to be in clean, sanitary, safe, and good mechanical
condition for the transportation of passengers; and
   (4)   A written certificate of the inspection required by this section is
filed with the Village Administrator.
   (B)   The Village Administrator may require the inspection of every vehicle
for hire in operation to determine whether such vehicle meets the requirements
of this chapter. The inspections required may be conducted by the village or by
such duly qualified persons as the Village Administrator may direct. The
schedule of inspections shall be as follows:
      (1)   One inspection per year for vehicles manufactured less than three
years from the date of inspection or vehicles with under 75,000 miles on the
odometer.
      (2)   One inspection every six months for vehicles manufactured three to
five years from the date of inspection or vehicles with 75,001 miles to 125,000
miles on the odometer.
      (3)   One inspection every four months for vehicles manufactured over
five years from the date of inspection or with over 125,000 miles on the
odometer.
      (4)   Additional inspections may be required as often as the apparent
condition of the vehicle warrants.
   (C)   The licensee shall pay all required fees for all inspections before a
certificate of inspection will be issued.
(Ord. 11-06-01, passed 6-28-2011) Penalty, see §
111.999
§ 111.104 VEHICLE MARKINGS; SIMILAR MARKINGS PROHIBITED.
   (A)   All vehicles for hire, excluding limousines, shall, while engaged in
or available for the transportation of persons, have painted on each side of
the vehicle, the following:
      (1)   The word CAB, TAXI, or VEHICLE FOR HIRE in lettering at least four
inches in height, except that, any vehicle which does not have said lettering,
pursuant to the limousine exception in division (A) above, must be registered
as a livery vehicle and display State of Illinois license plates with a "LY"
suffix;
      (2)   The trade name as provided to the Village Administrator in visible
lettering at least three inches in height; and
      (3)   The vehicle number as provided to the Village Administrator.
   (B)   All vehicles for hire, excluding limousines, shall, while engaged in
or available for the transportation of persons, have painted on the rear of the
vehicle, the trade name as provided to the Village Administrator, and the
vehicle number in approved and visible letters.
(Ord. 11-06-01, passed 6-28-2011) Penalty, see §
111.999
§ 111.105 TESTING OF METERS.
   (A)   In the event a vehicle for hire is equipped with a taximeter, every
applicant for a village issued certificate to operate a vehicle for hire and
every licensee, shall deliver for testing the vehicle for hire with the meter
attached thereto to such person as the Village Administrator may direct. Any
such applicant or licensee may be present or represented at the time such test
is made.
   (B)   Every meter shall be tested to determine the accuracy of its recording
mechanism with respect to distance traveled, either by running the vehicle for
hire to which it is attached over a course of standard two miles in length or
by a mechanical test. Both of the foregoing tests may be made in the discretion
of the Village Administrator.
   (C)   In order to determine whether any meter correctly registers waiting
time, the person, such as the Village Administrator shall designate, shall test
such meter by comparing the time recorded as shown by the fare computed on the
dial thereof with the standard time.
   (D)   When any test shows that a meter correctly records the charge of fare,
measured by distance traveled, waiting time and additional passengers, it shall
be sealed and a written certificate of the test shall be issued by such person
as the Village Administrator designates to the licensee.
(Ord. 11-06-01, passed 6-28-2011) Penalty, see §
111.999
§ 111.106 CONDITION OF METERS.
   (A)   No vehicle for hire equipped with a taximeter shall be operated unless
it is equipped with an approved meter in good condition to record the amount of
fare to be charged on each trip. The amount shall be shown on the dial of the
meter in figures visible to the passenger, and shall also be equipped with a
steady, continuous light illuminating the figures during the period between
sunset and sunrise.
   (B)   No operator shall use or permit the use of a meter which shall record
the rate of fare in excess of 5% error to the prejudice of any passenger.
(Ord. 11-06-01, passed 6-28-2011) Penalty, see §
111.999
§ 111.999 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person who violates any provision of this chapter shall be subject
to a fine in a sum of not less than $150 or more than $750 for each violation.
   (B)   Each day that any like violation continues shall be deemed a separate
offense.
(Ord. 11-06-01, passed 6-28-2011)
CHAPTER 112: PEDDLERS AND SOLICITORS
Section
   
112.01   Definitions
   
112.02   Village policy on soliciting
   
112.03   Notice regulating soliciting
   
112.04   Duty of solicitors
   
112.05   Time limit on soliciting
   
112.06   Exceptions
   
112.07   Enforcement
§ 112.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purposes of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   CHARITABLE SOLICITATION. All solicitation by or on behalf of a charitable
organization within the meaning of Section 501(a) and (c)3 of the Internal
Revenue Code, 1954 (as amended).
   RESIDENCE. Shall mean and include every separate living unit occupied for
residential purposes by one or more persons, contained within any type of
building or structure.
   SOLICITING. Shall mean and include any one or more of the following
activities conducted in person:
      (1)   Seeking to obtain orders for the purchase of goods, wares,
merchandise, foodstuffs, services of any kind, character or description
whatever, for any kind of consideration whatever;
      (2)   Seeking to obtain prospective customers for application or purchase
of insurance of any type, kind or character;
      (3)   Seeking to obtain subscriptions to books, magazines, periodicals,
newspapers and every other type or kind of publication;
      (4)   Seeking to obtain gifts or contributions of money, clothing or any
other valuable thing for the support or benefit of any charitable or non-profit
association, organization, corporation, or project; or
      (5)   Conducting what is commonly known as “door-to-door sales” or
“street peddling.”
(Ord. 85-12-1, passed 12-9-1985)
§ 112.02 VILLAGE POLICY ON SOLICITING.
   It is hereby declared to be the policy of the Board of Trustees of this
village that the occupant or occupants of the residences in this village shall
make the determination of whether solicitors shall be, or shall not be, invited
to their respective residences. If no determination is made as provided in §
112.03 hereof, then in that event, solicitors may go upon such premises for any
lawful purpose, as long as said solicitor has been properly registered and has
been issued a permit for solicitation.
(Ord. 85-12-1, passed 12-9-1985)
§ 112.03 NOTICE REGULATING SOLICITING.
   (A)   Every person desiring to secure the protection intended to be provided
by the regulations pertaining to soliciting contained in this chapter shall
comply with the following directions, to wit:
   (B)   Notice of the determination by the occupant of giving invitation to
solicitors, or the refusal of invitation to solicitors, to any residence shall
be given in the manner following:
      (1)   A weatherproof card, approximately three inches by four inches in
size, shall be exhibited upon or near the main entrance door to the residence
indicating the determination by the occupant, containing the applicable words,
as follows:
   “NO SOLICITORS INVITED”
   or
   “CHARITABLE SOLICITORS ONLY”
      (2)   The letters shall be at least one-third inch in height.
   (C)   Such cards so exhibited shall constitute sufficient notice to any
solicitor of the determination by the occupant of the residence of the
information contained thereon.
(Ord. 85-12-1, passed 12-9-1985)
§ 112.04 DUTY OF SOLICITORS.
   (A)   It shall be the duty and responsibility of any prospective solicitor
to make application through the Village Clerk a minimum of ten days prior to
intended time of solicitation. Upon approval of the application and filing of
the appropriate fees, a permit will be issued for a period not to exceed five
working days as provided in §
112.05. (See exceptions in §
112.06.)
   (B)   It shall be the duty of each applicant to pay a non-refundable
application fee of $50 upon initial application.
   (C)   It shall be the duty of every solicitor upon going onto any premises
in the village upon which a residence as defined in this chapter is located to
first examine the notice provided for in §
112.03 of this code, if any is attached, and be governed by the statement
contained on the notice. If the notice states “CHARITABLE SOLICITORS ONLY,”
then the solicitor shall immediately and peacefully depart from the premises
unless such person represents a charitable organization as defined in §
112.01 of this code; and if the notice states “NO SOLICITORS INVITED,” then the
solicitor shall immediately and peacefully depart from the premises.
   (D)   Any solicitor who has gained entry to any residence, whether invited
or not, shall immediately and peacefully depart from the premises when
requested to do so by the occupant.
   (E)   It is hereby declared to be unlawful and shall constitute a nuisance
for any person to go upon any premises and ring the door bell upon or near any
door, or create any sound in any other manner calculated to attract the
attention of the occupant of such residence, for the purpose of securing an
audience with the occupant thereof and engage in soliciting as defined in this
chapter, in defiance of the notice exhibited at the residence in accordance
with the provisions of §
112.03 of this code.
   (F)   Any use of sales techniques generally construed as high pressure are
prohibited and may be grounds for invoking the penalty under §
35.01 of this code.
(Ord. 85-12-1, passed 12-9-1985)
Cross-reference:
   Minimum fine, see §
35.01
§ 112.05 TIME LIMIT ON SOLICITING.
   It is hereby declared to be unlawful and shall constitute a nuisance for any
person to go upon any premises in the village and ring the door bell upon or
near any door of a residence located thereon, or rap or knock upon any door, or
create any sound in any other manner calculated to attract the attention of the
occupant of such residence, for the purpose of securing an audience with the
occupant thereof and engage in soliciting as defined in this chapter, prior to
9:00 a.m. or after 5:00 p.m. on any day other than Sunday or a national or
state holiday; no soliciting shall be lawful on Sunday or a national or state
holiday, except for charitable soliciting.
(Ord. 85-12-1, passed 12-9-1985)
Cross-reference:
   Minimum fine, see §
35.01
§ 112.06 EXCEPTIONS.
   Any not-for-profit or charitable organization with a legal address within
the corporate limits of the Village of Mahomet and/or Mahomet Township that has
shown evidence of their not-for-profit nature must register with the Village
Clerk but are exempt from all registration fees.
(Ord. 85-12-1, passed 12-9-1985)
§ 112.07 ENFORCEMENT.
   The Village Police Department will act as the enforcement agency and may
issue a notice to appear or arrest said solicitor for violation of this
chapter.
(Ord. 85-12-1, passed 12-9-1985)
CHAPTER 113: VIDEO GAMING
Section
   
113.01   Definitions
   
113.02   License required
   
113.03   License application and fees
   
113.04   Issuance
   
113.05   License display
   
113.06   Inspection of premises
   
113.07   Revocation, suspension and fines
   
113.08   Transfer prohibited
   
113.09   Restrictions on operation
   
113.10   Licenses per establishment
§ 113.01 DEFINITIONS.
   All definitions and provisions of the Video Gaming Act (ILCS Ch. 230, Act
40, §§ 1 et seq.) applicable to any individual, partnership, corporation, or
limited liability company that is licensed under the Video Gaming Act and that
owns, services, and maintains video gaming terminals for placement in licensed
establishments, licensed truck stop establishments, licensed large truck stop
establishments, licensed fraternal establishments, or licensed veterans
establishments within the corporate limits of the village are hereby referred
to, adopted and made a part hereof as if fully set forth in this chapter, with
additions, deletions and changes, if any, as may otherwise be specifically
provided for in this chapter.
(Ord. 15-11-07, passed 11-24-2015; Ord. 19-09-01, passed 9-24-2019)
§ 113.02 LICENSE REQUIRED.
The owner of a video gaming terminal shall obtain a license for such device
issued by the village. No license shall be issued unless the applicant holds a
valid class A, B, C, EC, GC, H, M, N, R-1, R-2 or S liquor license, as defined
by
Chapter 110 of the Mahomet Village Code; or is a licensed truck stop
establishment, a licensed large truck stop establishment, licensed fraternal
establishment, or licensed veterans' establishment.
(Ord. 15-11-07, passed 11-24-2015; Ord. 19-09-01, passed 9-24-2019; Ord. 22-03-
03, passed 3-22-2022; Ord. 22-10-02, passed 10-25-2022; Ord. 24-01-02, passed
1-23-2024)
§ 113.03 LICENSE APPLICATION AND FEES.
   (A)   Applications for the license required by this chapter shall be filed
with the Village Liquor Commissioner. The application for a license shall be
signed by the applicant, or an authorized agent of the applicant, and verified
under oath. An application for a license required by this chapter shall be made
in writing to the Village Liquor Commissioner and shall set forth the
following:
      (1)   The name of the individual, partnership, corporation, association
or other entity applying for the license;
      (2)   The residence, phone number and driver's license number of the
applicant or of each partner; or, if a corporation, association or other
entity, the residence, phone number and driver's license number of each
principal officer;
      (3)   The specific description of the place where the video gaming
terminal is to be displayed or operated and the business conducted at that
place;
      (4)   A description of the video gaming terminal(s) to be covered by the
license;
      (5)   A true and accurate photocopy of the state of Illinois license
granted to the applicant by the Illinois Gaming Board under the Video Gaming
Act for the applicable premises; and
      (6)   Whether the applicant, his or her partners or the principal
officers of the corporation, association or other entity have been convicted of
a criminal offense or ordinance violation (other than traffic or parking
offenses) in any jurisdiction and, if so, a list of such convictions with date
and prosecuting jurisdiction.
   (B)   Every video gaming license holder shall be required to file a renewal
application annually, which shall contain the same or similar information as
set forth in the application. Renewal applications and fees shall be due on a
business day on or before April 30.
   (C)   The fee for operation of a video gaming terminal shall be $250 per
terminal annually, paid in full by the licensed establishment. As required by
statute, the cost of this fee shall be shared equally between the terminal
operator and the applicable licensed establishment, however, the licensed
establishment must seek reimbursement for half of the fee from the terminal
operator.
      (1)   The fee shall be paid in advance and no fee or portion thereof
shall be refunded or prorated by the village and shall be in the form and shall
contain information as may be required by the Village Liquor Commissioner.
(Ord. 15-11-07, passed 11-24-2015; Ord. 22-03-03, passed 3-22-2022)
§ 113.04 ISSUANCE.
   The Village Liquor Commissioner shall issue the license requested under this
chapter unless he or she shall find:
   (A)   That the applicant is under the age of 21.
   (B)   That the applicant or any principal officer therein has held a license
under this chapter or had an interest therein that was revoked for cause.
   (C)   That the applicant or any principal officer therein has furnished
false or misleading information on the application.
   (D)   That the applicant or any principal officer has ever been convicted of
a felony.
(Ord. 15-11-07, passed 11-24-2015)
§ 113.05 LICENSE DISPLAY.
   The license required by this division shall be prominently displayed next to
the video gaming terminal.
(Ord. 15-11-07, passed 11-24-2015)
§ 113.06 INSPECTION OF PREMISES.
   Every place where a video gaming terminal is kept shall be subject to
inspection by the Chief of Police or his or her authorized agents at any time
the chief of police or his or her agents may deem it necessary to inspect the
premises. It shall be unlawful for any person to hinder, resist, oppose or
attempt to hinder, resist or oppose the Chief of Police or his or her
respective agents in the course of any such inspection.
(Ord. 15-11-07, passed 11-24-2015)
§ 113.07 REVOCATION, SUSPENSION AND FINES.
   (A)   Any license issued pursuant to this chapter may be revoked or
suspended for a period not to exceed 30 days and/or the licensee be subjected
to a fine of not more than $1,000 per offense by the Village President or his
or her designee if the President or his or her designee determines:
      (1)   That the licensee has violated any of the provisions of this
chapter, the laws of the state, or ordinances of the village at the licensed
location.
      (2)   That the licensee has knowingly furnished false or misleading
information or withheld relevant information on any application for a license
required by this chapter or any investigation into any such application.
   (B)   The licensee shall be responsible for the acts of his or her agents,
servants and employees in the operation of any licensed establishment.
   (C)   If the licensee desires a hearing on the possible revocation,
suspension or fine for alleged violations, a request must be made within five
days of receipt of notice of revocation, suspension or fine.
   (D)   Prior to holding a hearing concerning the question of whether a
license issued pursuant to this chapter shall be revoked or suspended, the
village president or his or her designee shall give at least ten days” written
notice to the licensee setting forth the alleged violations specifically. The
licensee shall be given a reasonable chance to present evidence at such hearing
and cross examine witnesses.
(Ord. 15-11-07, passed 11-24-2015)
§ 113.08 TRANSFER PROHIBITED.
   A license issued pursuant to this chapter may not be transferred, sold or
assigned to any other person, corporation, association or entity; nor shall
such license be transferred to any location other than that listed on the
application. Upon the alienation, sale, transfer, assignment or donation of the
business that underlines the license to any third party or person other than
the licensee, the video gaming license shall automatically become void.
(Ord. 15-11-07, passed 11-24-2015)
§ 113.09 RESTRICTIONS ON OPERATION.
   Every licensee shall strictly comply with all of the conditions, rules and
regulations imposed by the state, and by the village, and specifically shall
comply with the following:
   (A)   Each and every video gaming terminal shall be licensed by the state
before placement or operation, and the license for each and every terminal
shall be maintained within the licensed premises where the video gaming
terminal is operated.
   (B)   No video gaming terminal may be played except during the legal hours
of operation allowed for the consumption of alcoholic beverages at the licensed
establishment.
   (C)   No licensee shall cause or permit any person under the age of 21 years
to use or play a video gaming terminal.
   (D)   Video gaming terminals located within any licensed establishment must
be within an area of the establishment that is restricted to persons 21 years
of age and over, separated from other areas by a barrier of at least 36 inches
in height, the entrance to which restricted area is within the view at all
times of at least one employee of said establishment, which employee must
likewise be 21 years of age or over. The physical barrier may consist of a
partition, gate, rope, railing or other means of separation.
(Ord. 15-11-07, passed 11-24-2015)
§ 113.10 LICENSES PER ESTABLISHMENT.
   A licensed establishment, licensed truck stop establishment, licensed
veteran establishment, or licensed fraternal establishment may operate up to
six video gaming terminals on its premises at any time. A licensed large truck
stop establishment may operate up to ten video gaming terminals on its premises
at any time.
(Ord. 15-11-07, passed 11-24-2015; Ord. 19-09-01, passed 9-24-2019)
CHAPTER 114: CANNABIS BUSINESS ESTABLISHMENTS PROHIBITED
Section
   
114.01   Definitions
   
114.02   Cannabis business establishments prohibited
   
114.03   Public nuisance declared
 
   
114.99   Penalty
§ 114.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ADULT USE CANNABIS BUSINESS ESTABLISHMENT. A cultivation center, craft
grower, processing organization, infuser organization, dispensing organization
or transporting organization.
   ADULT USE CANNABIS CRAFT GROWER. A facility operated by an organization or
business that is licensed by the Illinois Department of Agriculture to
cultivate, dry, cure and package cannabis and perform other necessary
activities to make cannabis available for sale at a dispensing organization or
use at a processing organization, per the Cannabis Regulation and Tax Act, as
it may be amended from time to time, and regulations promulgated thereunder.
   ADULT USE CANNABIS CULTIVATION CENTER. A facility operated by an
organization or business that is licensed by the Illinois Department of
Agriculture to cultivate, process, transport and perform necessary activities
to provide cannabis and cannabis-infused products to licensed cannabis business
establishments, per the Cannabis Regulation and Tax Act, as it may be amended
from time to time, and regulations promulgated thereunder.
   ADULT USE CANNABIS DISPENSING ORGANIZATION. A facility operated by an
organization or business that is licensed by the Illinois Department of
Financial and Professional Regulation to acquire cannabis from licensed
cannabis business establishments for the purpose of selling or dispensing
cannabis, cannabis-infused products, cannabis seeds, paraphernalia or related
supplies to purchasers or to qualified registered medical cannabis patients and
caregivers, per the Cannabis Regulation and Tax Act, as it may be amended from
time to time, and regulations promulgated thereunder.
   ADULT USE CANNABIS INFUSER ORGANIZATION or INFUSER. A facility operated by
an organization or business that is licensed by the Illinois Department of
Agriculture to directly incorporate cannabis or cannabis concentrate into a
product formulation to produce a cannabis-infused product, per the Cannabis
Regulation and Tax Act, as it may be amended from time to time, and regulations
promulgated thereunder.
   ADULT USE CANNABIS PROCESSING ORGANIZATION or PROCESSOR. A facility operated
by an organization or business that is licensed by the Illinois Department of
Agriculture to either extract constituent chemicals or compounds to produce
cannabis concentrate or incorporate cannabis or cannabis concentrate into a
product formulation to produce a cannabis product, per the Cannabis Regulation
and Tax Act, as it may be amended from time to time, and regulations
promulgated thereunder.
   ADULT USE CANNABIS TRANSPORTING ORGANIZATION or TRANSPORTER. An organization
or business that is licensed by the Illinois Department of Agriculture to
transport cannabis on  behalf of a cannabis business establishment or a
community college licensed under the Community College Cannabis Vocational
Training Pilot Program, per the Cannabis Regulation and Tax Act, as it may be
amended from time to time, and regulations promulgated thereunder.
   PERSON. Any person, firm, corporation, association, club, society or other
organization, including any owner, manager, proprietor, employee, volunteer or
agent.
(Ord. 19-12-01, passed 12-17-2019)
§ 114.02 CANNABIS BUSINESS ESTABLISHMENTS PROHIBITED.
   The following adult use cannabis business establishments are prohibited in
the village. No person shall locate, operate, own, suffer, allow to be operated
or aide, abet or assist in the operation within the village of any of the
following:
   (A)   Adult use cannabis craft grower;
   (B)   Adult use cannabis cultivation center;
   (C)   Adult use cannabis dispensing organization;
   (D)   Adult use cannabis infuser organization or infuser;
   (E)   Adult use cannabis processing organization or processor;
   (F)   Adult use cannabis transporting organization or transporter.
(Ord. 19-12-01, passed 12-17-2019)
§ 114.03 PUBLIC NUISANCE DECLARED.
   Operation of any prohibited cannabis business establishment within the
village in violation of the provisions of this chapter is hereby declared a
public nuisance and shall be abated pursuant to all available remedies.
(Ord. 19-12-01, passed 12-17-2019)
§ 114.99 PENALTY.
   Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall be punished
by a fine of not less than $750 for each offense. A separate offense shall be
deemed committed on each day during or on which a violation of this chapter
continues.
(Ord. 19-12-01, passed 12-17-2019)
CHAPTER 115: RAFFLES
Section
   
115.01   Definitions
   
115.02   License required
   
115.03   Application
   
115.04   Validity of license
   
115.05   Eligible organizations
   
115.06   Ineligibility for license
   
115.07   Limitations
   
115.08   Fees
   
115.09   Approval
   
115.10   Conduct of raffles
   
115.11   Records
   
115.12   Manager’s bond
   
115.13   Suspension/revocation
 
   
115.99   Penalty
§ 115.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   BUSINESS. A voluntary organization composed of individuals and businesses
who have joined together to advance the commercial, financial, industrial and
civil interests of a community.
   CHARITABLE. An organization or institution organized and operated to benefit
an indefinite number of the public. The service rendered to those eligible for
benefits must also confer some benefit on the public.
   EDUCATIONAL. An organization or institution organized and operated to
provide systematic instruction in useful branches of learning by methods common
to schools and institutions of learning which  compare favorably in their scope
and intensity with the course of study presented in tax-supported schools.
   FRATERNAL. An organization of persons having a common interest, the primary
interest of which is to both promote the welfare of its members and to provide
assistance to the general public in such a way as to lessen the burdens of
government by caring for those that otherwise would be cared for by the
government.
   LABOR. An organization composed of workers organized with the objective of
betterment of the conditions of those engaged in such pursuit and the
development of a higher degree of efficiency in their respective occupations.
   NET PROCEEDS. The gross receipts from the conduct of raffles, less
reasonable sums expended for prizes, license fees, and other reasonable
operating expenses incurred as a result of operating a raffle.
   NON-PROFIT. An organization or institution organized and conducted on a not-
for-profit basis with no personal profit inuring to anyone as a result of the
operation.
   RAFFLE. A form of lottery where the player pays or agrees to pay something
of value for a chance, represented and differentiated by a number or by a
combination of numbers or by some other medium, one or more which chances is to
be designated the winning chance. The winning chance is to be determined
through a drawing or by some other method based on an element of chance by an
act or set of facts on the part of persons conducting or connected with the
lottery, except that the winning chance shall not be determined by the outcome
of a publicly exhibited sporting contest.
   RELIGIOUS. Any church, congregation, society, or organization founded for
the purposes of religious worship.
   VETERANS. An organization or association comprised of members of which
substantially all are individuals who are veterans of military service, the
primary purpose of which is to promote the welfare of its members and to
provide assistance to the general public in such a way as to confer a public
benefit.
(Ord. 20-09-05, passed 9-22-2020)
§ 115.02 LICENSE REQUIRED.
   No person, firm, corporation or other entity shall conduct raffles or
chances without having first obtained a license therefor pursuant to this
chapter and the Raffles Act.
(Ord. 20-09-05, passed 9-22-2020)
§ 115.03 APPLICATION.
   (A)   Applications shall be made in writing through the Village Clerk’s
office at least 30 days prior to the first day intended for sale of the raffle
chances. The application shall be on a form furnished by the Village Clerk. The
Village Clerk shall refer all applications to the Police Department and Village
Administrator for review or investigation of the representations in
applications. The Clerk shall issue or deny the license within 30 days of
application or the license shall be deemed granted.
   (B)   Applications for licenses under this chapter must contain the
following information:
      (1)   Name of applicant;
      (2)   Address;
      (3)   Purpose of raffle;
      (4)   Area within the village where the raffle is to be conducted;
      (5)   Time period during which chances will be sold or issued;
      (6)   Sworn statement attesting to not-for-profit character of the
prospective licensee organization, signed by the presiding officer and
secretary of the organization;
      (7)   Date, time and location at which winning chances will be
determined;
      (8)   The aggregate retail value of all prizes or merchandise to be
awarded by a single raffle;
      (9)   The maximum retail value of each prize or each specific type of
prize to be awarded by a licensee in a single raffle;
      (10)   The maximum to be charged for each raffle chance and the number of
chances to be issued for each raffle;
      (11)   The name(s) and address(es) of the operator of the raffle if not
an officer or member of the applicant organization.
(Ord. 20-09-05, passed 9-22-2020)
§ 115.04 VALIDITY OF LICENSE.
   Each such license shall be valid for one raffle or for a specified number of
raffles during a specified period not to exceed one year, and may be suspended
or revoked by the corporate authorities in the event of violation of the terms
of this chapter or of any applicable state law.
(Ord. 20-09-05, passed 9-22-2020)
§ 115.05 ELIGIBLE ORGANIZATIONS.
   Licenses shall be issued only to bona fide religious, charitable, labor,
business, fraternal, educational, veterans, or other bona fide not-for-profit
organizations that operate without profit to their members, as defined in §
115.01, are based or located in the village, and which have been in existence
continuously for a period of five years immediately before making application
for a license and which have had during the entire five year period a bona fide
membership engaged in carrying out their objectives, or to a non-profit
fundraising organization that the licensing authority determines is organized
for the sole purpose of providing financial assistance to an identified
individual or group of individuals suffering extreme financial hardships as the
result of an illness, disability, accident or disaster, or to any law
enforcement agencies and statewide associations that represent law enforcement
officials.
(Ord. 20-09-05, passed 9-22-2020)
§ 115.06 INELIGIBILITY FOR LICENSE.
   The following are ineligible for any license under this chapter and shall be
interpreted to be consistent with the state Raffles Act (ILCS Ch. 230, Act 15):
   (A)   Any person whose felony conviction will impair the person's ability to
engage in the licensed position.
   (B)   Any person who is or has been a professional gambler or professional
gambling promoter.
   (C)   Any person who is not of good moral character.
   (D)   Any organization in which a person defined in divisions (A), (B) or
(C) of this section has a proprietary, equitable or credit interest, or in
which such a person is active or employed.
   (E)   Any organization in which a person defined in divisions (A), (B) or
(C) of this section is an officer, director or employee, whether compensated or
not.
   (F)   Any organization in which a person defined in divisions (A), (B) or
(C) of this section is to participate in the management or operation of a
raffle as defined in the Raffles Act.
(Ord. 20-09-05, passed 9-22-2020; Ord. 20-12- 03, passed 12-15-2020)
§ 115.07 LIMITATIONS.
   The aggregate retail value of all prizes or merchandise awarded by a license
in a single raffle under this chapter and in accordance with applicable state
law is limited to $500,000.
   (A)   The maximum retail value of each prize awarded by a licensee in a
single raffle is limited to $500,000.
   (B)   The maximum price which may be charged for each raffle chance issued
or sold is limited to $500.
   (C)   The maximum number of days during which chances may be issued or sold
is limited for a specified period not to exceed one year.
   (D)   Licenses issued shall be valid for one raffle or for a specified
number of raffles to be conducted during a specified period not to exceed one
year and may be suspended or revoked for any violation of the Raffles Act or
this chapter.
(Ord. 20-09-05, passed 9-22-2020; Ord. 21-02- 01, passed 2-23-2021)
§ 115.08 FEES.
   The fee for such a license to conduct a raffle shall be zero dollars.
(Ord. 20-09-05, passed 9-22-2020)
§ 115.09 APPROVAL.
   The village shall, within 30 days, evaluate and either approve or disapprove
of said application. The village’s approval of an application for a license
shall constitute the license for the conduct of the raffle applied for by the
applicant.
(Ord. 20-09-05, passed 9-22-2020)
§ 115.10 CONDUCT OF RAFFLES.
   The conducting of raffles is subject to the following restrictions:
   (A)   Proceeds. The entire net proceeds of any raffle must be exclusively
devoted to the lawful purpose of the organization permitted to conduct that
game.
   (B)   Participation in management. No person except a bona fide member of
the sponsoring organization may participate in the management or operation of
the raffle.
   (C)   Remuneration. No person may receive any remuneration or profit for
participating in the management or operation of the raffle.
   (D)   Premises. A licensee may rent a premise on which to determine the
winning chance or chances in a raffle only from an organization which is also
licensed under this chapter.
   (E)   Locations. Raffle chances may be sold or issued only within the area
specified on the license and winning chances may be determined only at those
locations specified on the license.
   (F)   Age of participants. No person under the age of 18 years may
participate in the conducting of raffles or chances. A person under the age of
18 years may be within the area where winning chances are being determined only
when accompanied by his or her parent or guardian.
   (G)   Location for determining winning chance(s). The location of the
premises on which to determine the winning chance or chances in a raffle shall
be restricted to a business district, commercial district or where a special
use permit has been granted for a school, church, government or similar
institution.
(Ord. 20-09-05, passed 9-22-2020)
§ 115.11 RECORDS.
   (A)   Each organization licensed to conduct raffles and chances shall keep
such records and shall also keep records of its gross receipts, expenses and
net proceeds for each single gathering or occasion at which chances are
determined.
   (B)   Gross receipts from the operation of raffles programs shall be
segregated from other revenues of the organization, including bingo gross
receipts, if bingo games are also conducted by the same non-profit organization
pursuant to license therefor issued by the Illinois Department of Revenue, and
shall be placed in a separate account. Each organization shall have separate
records of its raffles. The person who accounts for gross receipts, expenses
and net proceeds from the operation of raffles shall not be the same person who
accounts for other revenues of the organization.
   (C)   Each organization licensed to conduct raffles shall report promptly
after the conclusion of each raffle to its membership, and to the village, its
gross receipts, expenses and net proceeds from raffles, and the distribution of
net proceeds itemized as required in this section.
   (D)   Records required by this section shall be preserved three years, and
organizations shall make available their records relating to operation of
raffles for public inspection at reasonable times and places.
(Ord. 20-09-05, passed 9-22-2020)
§ 115.12 MANAGER’S BOND.
   (A)   All operations of and conduct of raffles shall be under the
supervision of a single raffles manager designated by the organization. The
manager or operator of the raffle must be a bona fide member of the
organization holding the license for such a raffle and may not receive any
remuneration or profit for participating in the management or operation of the
raffle. The manager shall give a fidelity bond in the sum of the total value of
the prizes to be awarded in the raffle conditioned upon his/her honesty in the
performance of his/her duties. Terms of the bond shall provide that notice
shall be given in writing to the village not less than 30 days prior to its
cancellation. The village may waive the requirement of a fidelity bond by
including a waiver provision in the license issued to an organization under
this chapter, contingent upon: (i) proof of the affirmative vote of the
requisite number of members of the licensed organization or, if the licensed
organization does not have members, of members of the governing board of the
organization, to constitute an affirmative action of the licensed organization
and (ii) waiver of fidelity bond requirement by the village pursuant to the
process detailed herein.
   (B)   The Village Administrator may waive this fidelity bond requirement
when, due to the nature, past experience or competence of the organization
involved, the Village Administrator determines that such bond would be
unnecessarily burdensome. The Village Administrator shall give notice of such
waiver to the Village President and Village Board not less than 48 hours before
the license becomes effective. Within such 48 hour period, the Village
President or any member of the Village Board may, through notice (be it
written, oral or other) to the Village Administrator, cause this waiver to be
stayed. In such case the matter will be formally presented to the Village Board
at their next regular Board meeting for decision by a majority vote. If the
Village Administrator declines a request to waive the fidelity bond
requirement, the applicant may ask the Village Board for such waiver by
majority vote of the Board.
(Ord. 20-09-05, passed 9-22-2020; Ord. 21-02- 01, passed 2-23-2021)
§ 115.13 SUSPENSION/REVOCATION.
   Any license granted under this chapter may be suspended or revoked by the
village at any time it appears that the proposed or actual operation of the
raffle will be or is such as to constitute a public nuisance or to endanger the
public peace, health, safety or welfare. Any license granted under this chapter
may be suspended or revoked in whole or in part at any time that the raffle is
conducted contrary to the license or to any state or village law, or when such
raffle or portion thereof is conducted so as to constitute a public nuisance or
to disturb the peace, health, safety or welfare. Suspension or revocation shall
become effective immediately. It shall be a violation for any person to
operate, engage or participate in, except as a patron, any raffle which license
has been suspended or revoked.
(Ord. 20-09-05, passed 9-22-2020)
§ 115.99 PENALTY.
   Any raffle permit issued under this chapter shall be revoked or suspended if
the permit holder violates any terms of the license or any other provisions of
this chapter. Any violation of this chapter shall be subject to a fine up to
$750. Each day that a violation hereof exists shall be considered a separate
offense. Each raffle held in violation hereof shall be considered a separate
offense.
(Ord. 20-09-05, passed 9-22-2020)
CHAPTER 116: SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESSES
Section
   
116.01   Purpose; findings and rationale
   
116.02   Definitions
   
116.03   License required
   
116.04   Issuance of license
   
116.05   Fees
   
116.06   Inspection
   
116.07   Expiration and renewal of license    
   
116.08   Suspension
   
116.09   Revocation
   
116.10   Hearing; license denial, suspension, revocation; appeal
   
116.11   Transfer of license
   
116.12   Hours of operation
   
116.13   Regulations pertaining to exhibition of sexually explicit films on
premises
   
116.14   Loitering, exterior lighting and monitoring, and interior lighting
requirements
   
116.15   Applicability of chapter to existing businesses
   
116.16   Prohibited conduct
   
116.17   Scienter required to prove violation or business licensee liability
   
116.18   Failure of village to meet deadline not to risk applicant/licensee
rights
 
   
116.99   Penalty
§ 116.01 PURPOSE; FINDINGS AND RATIONALE.
   (A)   Purpose. It is the purpose of this chapter to regulate sexually
oriented businesses in order to promote the health, safety, and general welfare
of the citizens of the village, and to establish reasonable and uniform
regulations to prevent the deleterious secondary effects of sexually oriented
businesses within the village. The provisions of this chapter have neither the
purpose nor effect of imposing a limitation or restriction on the content or
reasonable access to any communicative materials, including sexually oriented
materials. Similarly, it is neither the intent nor effect of this chapter to
restrict or deny access by adults to sexually oriented materials protected by
the First Amendment, or to deny access by the distributors and exhibitors of
sexually oriented entertainment to their intended market. Neither is it the
intent nor effect of this chapter to condone or legitimize the distribution of
obscene material.
   (B)   Findings and rationale.
      (1)   Based on evidence of the adverse secondary effects of adult uses,
and on findings, interpretations, and narrowing constructions incorporated in
the cases of City of Littleton v. Z.J. Gifts D-4, LLC, 541 U.S. 774 (2004);
City of Los Angeles v. Alameda Books, Inc., 535 U.S. 425 (2002); City of Erie
v. Pap's A.M., 529 U.S. 277 (2000); City of Renton v. Playtime Theatres, Inc.,
475 U.S. 41 (1986); Young v. American Mini Theatres, 427 U.S. 50 (1976); Barnes
v. Glen Theatre, Inc., 501 U.S. 560 (1991); California v. LaRue, 409 U.S. 109
(1972); N.Y. State Liquor Authority v. Bellanca, 452 U.S. 714 (1981 );
      (2)   Illinois One News, Inc. v. City of Marshall, 477 F.3d 461 (7th Cir.
2007); G.M. Enterprises, Inc. v. Town of St. Joseph, 350 F.3d 631 (7th Cir.
2003); Andy's Restaurant & Lounge, Inc. v. City of Gary, 466 F.3d 550 (7th Cir.
2006); Schultz v, City of Cumberland, 26 F. Supp. 2d 1128 (W.D. Wisc.1998),
affd in part, rev'd in part, 228 F.3d 831 (7th Cir. 2000); Blue Canary Corp. v.
City of Milwaukee, 270 F.3d 1156 (7th Cir. 2001 ); Matney v. County of Kenosha,
86 F.3d 692 (7th Cir. 1996); Berg v. Health & Hospital Corp., 865 F.2d 797 (7th
Cir. 1989); DiMa Corp. v. Town of Hallie, 185 F.3d 823 (7th Cir. 1999); Annex
Books, Inc. v. City of Indianapolis, 581 F.3d 460 (7th Cir. 2009); New Albany
DVD, LLC v. City of New Albany, 581 F.3d 556 (7th Cir. 2009); Graff v. City of
Chicago, 9 F .3d 1309 (7th Cir. 1993); North Avenue Novelties, Inc. v. City of
Chicago, 88 F.3d 441 (7th Cir. 1996); Chulchian v. City of Indianapolis, 633
F.2d 27 (7th Cir. 1980); City of Chicago v. Pooh Bah Enters., Inc., 865 N.E.2d
133 (111. 2006); PoohBah Enters., Inc. v. County of Cook, 905 N.E.2d 781 (Ill.
2009); Imaginary Images, Inc. v. Evans, 612 F.3d 736 (4th Cir. 2010); Bigg Wolf
Discount Video v. Montgomery County, 256 F. Supp. 2d 385 (D. Md. 2003); County
of Cook v. Renaissance Arcade and Bookstore, 122 Ill. 2d 123 (1988) (including
cases cited therein); Ben's Bar, Inc. v. Village of Somerset, 316 F.3d 702 (7th
Cir. 2003); LLEH, Inc. v. Wichita County, 289 F.3d 358 (5th Cir. 2002); Plaza
Group Properties, LLC v. Spencer County Plan Commission, 877 N.E.2d 877 (Ind.
Ct. App. 2007); Flanigan's Enters., Inc. v. Fulton County, 596 F.3d 1265 (11th
Cir. 2010); East Brooks Books, Inc. v. Shelby County, 588 F.3d 360 (6th Cir.
2009); Entm't Prods., Inc. v. Shelby County, 588 F.3d 372 (6th Cir. 2009);
Sensations, Inc. v. City of Grand Rapids, 526 F.3d 291 (6th Cir. 2008); World
Wide Video of Washington, Inc. v. City of Spokane, 368 F.3d 1186 (9th Cir.
2004); Daytona Grand, Inc. v. City of Daytona Beach, 490 F.3d 860 (11th Cir.
2007); Williams v. Morgan, 478 F.3d 1316 (11th Cir. 2007); H&A Land Corp. v.
City of Kennedale, 480 F.3d 336 (5th Cir. 2007); Richland Bookmart, Inc. v.
Knox County, 555 F.3d 512 (6th Cir. 2009); Richland Bookmart, Inc. v. Nichols,
137 F.3d 435 (6th Cir. 1998); Spokane Arcade, Inc. v. City of Spokane, 15 F.3d
663 (9th Cir. 1996); City of New York v. Hammes, 724 N.E.2d 368 (N.Y. 1999);
For the People Theatres of NY., Inc. v. City of New York, 793 N.Y.S.2d 356
(N.Y. App. Div. 2005); Taylor v. State, No. 01-01-00505-CR, 2002 WL 1722154
(Tex. App. July 25, 2002); Gammoh v. City of La Habra, 395 F.3d 1114 (9th Cir.
2005); Z.J. Gifts D-4, LLC v. City of Littleton, Civil Action No. 99-N-1696,
Memorandum Decision and Order (D. Colo. March 31, 2001 ); People ex rel. Deters
v. The Lion's Den, Inc., Case No. 04-CH-26, Modified Permanent Injunction Order
(111. Fourth Judicial Circuit, Effingham County, July 13, 2005); Reliable
Consultants, Inc. v. City of Kennedale, No. 4:05-CV-166-A, Findings of Fact and
Conclusions of Law (N.D. Tex. May 26, 2005); Peek-a-Boo Lounge v. Manatee
County, F.3d, 2011 WL 182819 (11th Cir. Jan. 21, 2011 ); People v. Hill, 333
Ill. App. 3d 783, 776 N.E.2d 828 (Ill. App. 2 Dist. 2002), pet. denied, 202
111.2d 633, 787 N.E.2d 162 (111. 2002) (table) (affirming conviction for lap
dancing under prostitution statute); and
      (3)   And based upon reports concerning secondary effects occurring in
and around sexually oriented businesses, including, but not limited to, Austin,
Texas-1986; Indianapolis, Indiana-1984; Garden Grove, California-1991; Houston,
Texas-1983, 1997; Phoenix, Arizona-1979, 1995-98; Chattanooga, Tennessee-1999-
2003; Los Angeles, California-1977; Whittier, California-1978; Spokane,
Washington-2001; St. Cloud, Minnesota - 1994; Littleton, Colorado - 2004;
Oklahoma City, Oklahoma-1986; Dallas, Texas-1997; Ft. Worth, Texas-2004;
Kennedale, Texas-2005; Greensboro, North Carolina-2003; Amarillo, Texas-1977;
Jackson County, Missouri-2008; Louisville, Kentucky-2004; New York, New York
Times Square-1994; the Report of the Attorney General's Working Group On The
Regulation Of Sexually Oriented Businesses, (June 6, 1989, State of Minnesota);
Dallas, Texas-2007; Fulton County, Georgia-2001; Manatee County, Florida-2006;
Daytona Beach, Florida-2003; Various Media Articles; and "Rural Hotspots: The
Case of Adult Businesses," 19 Criminal Justice Policy Review 153 (2008); the
Village Board of Trustees finds:
         (a)   Sexually oriented businesses, as a category of commercial uses,
are associated with a wide variety of adverse secondary effects including, but
not limited to, personal and property crimes, prostitution, potential spread of
disease, lewdness, public indecency, obscenity, illicit drug use and drug
trafficking, negative impacts on surrounding properties, urban blight, litter,
and sexual assault and exploitation. Alcohol consumption impairs judgment and
lowers inhibitions, thereby increasing the risk of adverse secondary effects.
         (b)   Each of the foregoing negative secondary effects constitutes a
harm which the village has a substantial government interest in preventing and/
or abating. This substantial government interest in preventing secondary
effects, which is the village's rationale for this chapter, exists independent
of any comparative analysis between sexually oriented and non-sexually oriented
businesses. Additionally, the village's interest in regulating sexually
oriented businesses extends to preventing future secondary effects of either
current or future sexually oriented businesses that may locate in the village.
The village finds that the cases and documentation relied on in this chapter
are reasonably believed to be relevant to said secondary effects.
   (C)   The village hereby adopts and incorporates herein its stated findings
and legislative record related to the adverse secondary effects of sexually
oriented businesses, including the judicial opinions and reports related to
such secondary effects.
   (D)   The village notes that the City of Metropolis, Illinois passed a
similar ordinance, which ordinance was upheld as constitutional by the Federal
District Court of the Southern District of Illinois in the case of Metro Pony
LLC v. Metropolis IL, Case No. 2011 CV 144 (S.D.111. 2011) and this chapter is
modeled after and substantially the same as the Metropolis ordinance.
(Ord. 25-02-01, passed 2-25-2025)
§ 116.02 DEFINITIONS.
   For purposes of this chapter the following definitions shall apply unless
the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ADULT BOOKSTORE or ADULT VIDEO STORE. A commercial establishment which, as
one of its principal business activities, offers for sale or rental for any
form of consideration any one or more of the following: books, magazines,
periodicals or other printed matter, or photographs, films, motion pictures,
video cassettes, compact discs, digital video discs, slides, or other visual
representations which are characterized by their emphasis upon the display of
specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas. A principal business
activity exists where the commercial establishment meets any one or more of the
following criteria:
      (1)   At least 35% of the establishment's displayed merchandise consists
of said items;
      (2)   At least 35% of the wholesale value of the establishment's
displayed merchandise consists of said items;
      (3)   At least 35% of the retail value (defined as the price charged to
customers) of the establishment's displayed merchandise consists of said items;
      (4)   At least 35% of the establishment's revenues derive from the sale
or rental, for any form of consideration, of said items;
      (5)   The establishment maintains at least 35% of its floor space for the
display, sale, and/or rental of said items (aisles and walkways used to access
said items shall be included in floor space maintained for the display, sale,
or rental of said items);
      (6)   The establishment maintains at least 500 square feet of its floor
space for the display, sale, and/or rental of said items (aisles and walkways
used to access said items shall be included in floor space maintained for the
display, sale, or rental of said items);
      (7)   The establishment regularly offers for sale or rental at least
2,000 of said items;
      (8)   The establishment regularly features said items and regularly
advertises itself or holds itself out, by using "adult," "adults-only," "XXX,"
"sex," "erotic," "novelties," or substantially similar language, as an
establishment that caters to adult sexual interests; or
      (9)   The establishment maintains an adult arcade, which means any place
to which the public is permitted or invited wherein coin-operated or slug-
operated or electronically, electrically, or mechanically controlled still or
motion picture machines, projectors, or other image-producing devices are
regularly maintained to show images to five or fewer persons per machine at any
one time, and where the images so displayed are characterized by their emphasis
upon matter exhibiting specified sexual activities or specified anatomical
areas.
   ADULT CABARET. A nightclub, bar, juice bar, restaurant, bottle club, or
similar commercial establishment, regardless of whether alcoholic beverages are
served, which regularly features live conduct characterized by semi-nudity. No
establishment shall avoid classification as an adult cabaret by offering or
featuring nudity.
   ADULT MOTION PICTURE THEATER. A commercial establishment where films, motion
pictures, video cassettes, slides, or similar photographic reproductions which
are characterized by their emphasis upon the display of specified sexual
activities or specified anatomical areas are regularly shown to more than five
persons for any form of consideration.
   CHARACTERIZED BY. Describing the essential character or quality of an item.
As applied in this chapter, no business shall be classified as a sexually
oriented business by virtue of showing, selling, or renting materials rated NC-
17 or R by the Motion Picture Association of America.
   EMPLOY, EMPLOYEE, and EMPLOYMENT. Describe and pertain to any person who
performs any service on the premises of a sexually oriented business, on a full
time, part time, or contract basis, regardless of whether the person is
denominated an employee, independent contractor, agent, lessee, or otherwise.
EMPLOYEE does not include a person exclusively on the premises for repair or
maintenance of the premises or for the delivery of goods to the premises.
   ESTABLISH or ESTABLISHMENT. Includes any of the following:
      (1)   The opening or commencement of any sexually oriented business as a
new business;
      (2)   The conversion of an existing business, whether or not a sexually
oriented business, to any sexually oriented business; or
      (3)   The addition of any sexually oriented business to any other
existing sexually oriented business.
   FLOOR SPACE. The floor area inside a sexually oriented business that is
visible or accessible to patrons for any reason, excluding restrooms.
   HEARING OFFICER. An attorney, not otherwise employed by the village, who is
licensed to practice law in Illinois, and retained to serve as an independent
tribunal to conduct hearings under this chapter.
   INFLUENTIAL INTEREST. Any of the following:
      (1)   The actual power to operate the sexually oriented business or
control the operation, management or policies of the sexually oriented business
or legal entity which operates the sexually oriented business;
      (2)   Ownership of a financial interest of 30% or more of a business or
of any class of voting securities of a business; or
      (3)   Holding an office (e.g., president, vice president, secretary,
treasurer, managing member, managing director, etc.) in a legal entity which
operates the sexually oriented business.
   LICENSEE. A person in whose name a license to operate a sexually oriented
business has been issued, as well as the individual or individuals listed as an
applicant on the application for a sexually oriented business license. In the
case of an employee, it shall mean the person in whose name the sexually
oriented business employee license has been issued.
   NUDITY. The showing of the human male or female genitals, pubic area, vulva,
or anus with less than a fully opaque covering, or the showing of the female
breast with less than a fully opaque covering of any part of the nipple and
areola.
   OPERATOR. Any person on the premises of a sexually oriented business who
causes the business to function or who puts or keeps in operation the business
or who is authorized to manage the business or exercise overall operational
control of the business premises. A person may be found to be operating or
causing to be operated a sexually oriented business regardless of whether that
person is an owner, part owner, or licensee of the business.
   PERSON. An individual, proprietorship, partnership, corporation,
association, or other legal entity.
   PREMISES. The real property upon which the sexually oriented business is
located, and all appurtenances thereto and buildings thereon, including, but
not limited to, the sexually oriented business, the grounds, private walkways,
and parking lots and/or parking garages adjacent thereto, under the ownership,
control, or supervision of the licensee, as described in the application for a
sexually oriented business license.
   REGULARLY. The consistent and repeated doing of an act on an ongoing basis.
   SEMI-NUDE or SEMI-NUDITY. The showing of the female breast below a
horizontal line across the top of the areola and extending across the width of
the breast at that point, or the showing of the male or female buttocks. This
definition shall include the lower portion of the human female breast, but
shall not include any portion of the cleavage of the human female breasts
exhibited by a bikini, dress, blouse, shirt, leotard, or similar wearing
apparel provided the areola is not exposed in whole or in part.
   SEMI-NUDE MODEL STUDIO. A place where persons regularly appear in a state of
semi-nudity for money or any form of consideration in order to be observed,
sketched, drawn, painted, sculptured, photographed, or similarly depicted by
other persons. This definition does not apply to any place where persons
appearing in a state of semi-nudity did so in a class operated:
      (1)   By a college, junior college, or university supported entirely or
partly by taxation;
      (2)   By a private college or university which maintains and operates
educational programs in which credits are transferable to a college, junior
college, or university supported entirely or partly by taxation; or
      (3)   In a structure:
         (a)   Which has no sign visible from the exterior of the structure and
no other advertising that indicates a semi-nude person is available for
viewing; and
         (b)   Where, in order to participate in a class a student must enroll
at least three days in advance of the class.
   SEXUAL DEVICE. Any three-dimensional object designed for stimulation of the
male or female human genitals, anus, buttocks, female breast, or for
sadomasochistic use or abuse of oneself or others and shall include devices
commonly known as dildos, vibrators, penis pumps, cock rings, anal beads, butt
plugs, nipple clamps, and physical representations of the human genital organs.
Nothing in this definition shall be construed to include devices primarily
intended for protection against sexually transmitted diseases or for preventing
pregnancy.
   SEXUAL DEVICE SHOP. A commercial establishment that regularly features
sexual devices. This definition shall not be construed to include any pharmacy,
drug store, medical clinic, any establishment primarily dedicated to providing
medical or healthcare products or services, or any establishment that does not
limit access to its premises or a portion of its premises to adults only.
   SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESS. An adult bookstore or adult video store, an
adult cabaret, an adult motion picture theater, a semi-nude model studio, or a
sexual device shop.
   SPECIFIED ANATOMICAL AREAS. Includes:
      (1)   Less than completely and opaquely covered: human genitals, pubic
region; buttock; and female breast below a point immediately above the top of
the areola; and
      (2)   Human male genitals in a discernibly turgid state, even if
completely and opaquely covered.
   SPECIFIED CRIMINAL ACTIVITY. Any of the following specified crimes for which
less than five years has elapsed since the date of conviction or the date of
release from confinement for the conviction, whichever is the later date:
      (1)   Rape, sexual assault, public indecency, statutory rape, rape of a
child, sexual exploitation of a minor, indecent exposure, or any offense that
requires the offender to register with the State of Illinois as a convicted sex
offender;
      (2)   Prostitution, patronizing prostitution, promoting prostitution;
      (3)   Obscenity;
      (4)   Manufacturing, delivering, or possessing with intent to deliver any
controlled substances or cannabis;
      (5)   Racketeering, tax evasion, money laundering;
      (6)   Any attempt, solicitation, or conspiracy to commit one of the
foregoing offenses; or
      (7)   Any offense in another jurisdiction that, had the predicate act(s)
been committed in Illinois, would have constituted any of the foregoing
offenses.
   SPECIFIED SEXUAL ACTIVITY. Any of the following:
      (1)   Intercourse, oral copulation, masturbation or sodomy; or
      (2)   Excretory functions as a part of or in connection with any of the
activities described in division (1) above.
   TRANSFER OF OWNERSHIP OR CONTROL OF A SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESS. Any of the
following:
      (1)   The sale, lease, or sublease of the business;
      (2)   The transfer of securities which constitute an influential interest
in the business, whether by sale, exchange, or similar means; or
      (3)   The establishment of a trust, gift, or other similar legal device
which transfers the ownership or control of the business, except for transfer
by bequest or other operation of law upon the death of the person possessing
the ownership or control.
   VIEWING ROOM. The room, booth, or area where a patron of a sexually oriented
business would ordinarily be positioned while watching a film, videocassette,
digital video disc, or other video reproduction.
   VILLAGE. Mahomet, Illinois.
(Ord. 25-02-01, passed 2-25-2025)
§ 116.03 LICENSE REQUIRED.
   (A)   Business license. It shall be unlawful for any person to operate a
sexually oriented business in the village without a valid sexually oriented
business license.
   (B)   Employee license. It shall be unlawful for any person to be an
employee, as defined in this chapter, of a sexually oriented business in the
village without a valid sexually oriented business employee license, except
that a person who is a licensee under a valid sexually oriented business
license shall not be required to also obtain a sexually oriented business
employee license.
   (C)   (1)   Application. An applicant for a sexually oriented business
license or a sexually oriented business employee license shall file in person
at the office of the Village Clerk a completed application made on a form
provided by the Village Clerk. A sexually oriented business may designate an
individual with an influential interest in the business to file its application
for a sexually oriented business license in person on behalf of the business.
The application shall be signed as required by division (D) herein and shall be
notarized. An application shall be considered complete when it contains, for
each person required to sign the application, the information and/or items
required in this division, accompanied by the appropriate licensing fee:
      (a)   The applicant's full legal name and any other names used by the
applicant in the preceding five years.
      (b)   Current business address or another mailing address for the
applicant.
      (c)   Written proof of age, in the form of a driver's license, a picture
identification document containing the applicant's date of birth issued by a
governmental agency, or a copy of a birth certificate accompanied by a picture
identification document issued by a governmental agency.
      (d)   If the application is for a sexually oriented business license, the
business name, location, legal description, mailing address and phone number of
the sexually oriented business.
      (e)   If the application is for a sexually oriented business license, the
name and business address of the statutory agent or other agent authorized to
receive service of process.
      (f)   A statement of whether an applicant has been convicted of or has
pled guilty or nolo contendere to a specified criminal activity as defined in
this chapter, and if so, each specified criminal activity involved, including
the date, place, and jurisdiction of each as well as the dates of conviction
and release from confinement, where applicable.
      (g)   A statement of whether any sexually oriented business in which an
applicant has had an influential interest, has, in the previous five years (and
at a time during which the applicant had the influential interest):
         1.   Been declared by a court of law to be a nuisance; or
         2.   Been subject to a court order of closure or padlocking.
      (h)   An application for a sexually oriented business license shall be
accompanied by a legal description of the property where the business is
located and a sketch or diagram showing the configuration of the premises,
including a statement of total floor area occupied by the business and a
statement of floor area visible or accessible to patrons for any reason,
excluding restrooms. The sketch or diagram need not be professionally prepared
but shall be drawn to a designated scale or drawn with marked dimensions of the
interior of the premises to an accuracy of plus or minus six inches. Applicants
who are required to comply with the stage, booth, and/or room configuration
requirements of this chapter shall submit a diagram indicating that the setup
and configuration of the premises meets the requirements of the applicable
regulations. The Village Clerk may waive the requirements of this division for
a renewal application if the applicant adopts a legal description and a sketch
or diagram that was previously submitted and certifies that the configuration
of the premises has not been altered since it was prepared.
      (2)   The information provided pursuant to this division (C) shall be
supplemented in writing by certified mail, return receipt requested, to the
Village Clerk within ten working days of a change of circumstances which would
render the information originally submitted false or incomplete.
   (D)   Signature. A person who seeks a sexually oriented business employee
license under this section shall sign the application for a license. If a
person who seeks a sexually oriented business license under this section is an
individual, he or she shall sign the application for a license as applicant. If
a person who seeks a sexually oriented business license is other than an
individual, each person with an influential interest in the sexually oriented
business or in a legal entity that controls the sexually oriented business
shall sign the application for a license as applicant. Each applicant must be
qualified under this chapter and each applicant shall be considered a licensee
if a license is granted. Each person who files in person either an application
for a sexually oriented business license or an application for a sexually
oriented business employee license shall also submit, with the application, a
set of fingerprints taken by the Police Department on a form provided by the
Police Department. The Police Department shall take fingerprints, during normal
business hours, within four business hours of receiving a request for such
service.
   (E)   The information provided by an applicant in connection with an
application for a license under this chapter shall be maintained by the office
of the Village Clerk on a confidential basis, and such information may be
disclosed only as may be required, and only to the extent required, by
governing law or court order. Any information protected by the right to privacy
as recognized by state or federal law shall be redacted prior to such
disclosure.
(Ord. 25-02-01, passed 2-25-2025)
§ 116.04 ISSUANCE OF LICENSE.
   (A)   Business license. Upon the filing of a completed application for a
sexually oriented business license, the Village Clerk shall immediately issue a
temporary license to the applicant if the completed application is from a
preexisting sexually oriented business that is lawfully operating in the
village and the completed application, on its face, indicates that the
applicant is entitled to an annual sexually oriented business license. The
temporary license shall expire upon the final decision of the village to deny
or grant an annual license. Within 30 days of the filing of a completed
sexually oriented business license application, the Village Clerk shall either
issue a license to the applicant or issue a written notice of intent to deny a
license to the applicant. The Village Clerk shall issue a license unless:
      (1)   An applicant is less than 18 years of age.
      (2)   An applicant has failed to provide information required by this
chapter for issuance of a license or has falsely answered a question or request
for information on the application form.
      (3)   The license application fee required by this chapter has not been
paid.
      (4)   The sexually oriented business, as defined herein, is not in
compliance with the interior configuration requirements of this chapter or is
not in compliance with locational requirements of this code.
      (5)   Any sexually oriented business in which an applicant has had an
influential interest, has, in the previous five years (and at a time during
which the applicant had the influential interest):
         (a)   Been declared by a court of law to be a nuisance; or
         (b)   Been subject to an order of closure or padlocking.
      (6)   An applicant has been convicted of or pled guilty or nolo
contendere to a specified criminal activity, as defined in this chapter.
   (B)   Employee license. Upon the filing of a completed application for a
sexually oriented business employee license, the Village Clerk shall
immediately issue a temporary license to the applicant if the applicant seeks
licensure to work in a licensed sexually oriented business and the completed
application, on its face, indicates that the applicant is entitled to an annual
sexually oriented business employee license. The temporary license shall expire
upon the final decision of the village to deny or grant an annual license.
Within 30 days of the filing of a completed sexually oriented business employee
license application, the Village Clerk shall either issue a license to the
applicant or issue a written notice of intent to deny a license to the
applicant. The Village Clerk shall issue a license unless:
      (1)   The applicant is less than 18 years of age;
      (2)   The applicant has failed to provide information as required by this
chapter for issuance of a license or has falsely answered a question or request
for information on the application form;
      (3)   The license application fee required by this chapter has not been
paid;
      (4)   Any sexually oriented business in which the applicant has had an
influential interest, has, in the previous five years (and at a time during
which the applicant had the influential interest):
         (a)   Been declared by a court of law to be a nuisance; or
         (b)   Been subject to an order of closure or padlocking; or
      (5)   The applicant has been convicted of or pled guilty or nolo
contendere to a specified criminal activity, as defined in this chapter.
   (C)   The license, if granted, shall state on its face the name of the
person or persons to whom it is granted, the number of the license issued to
the licensee(s), the expiration date, and, if the license is for a sexually
oriented business, the address of the sexually oriented business. The sexually
oriented business license shall be posted in a conspicuous place at or near the
entrance to the sexually oriented business so that it may be read at any time
that the business is occupied by patrons or is open to the public. A sexually
oriented business employee shall keep the employee's license on his or her
person or on the premises where the licensee is then working or performing.
(Ord. 25-02-01, passed 2-25-2025)
§ 116.05 FEES.
   The initial license and annual renewal fees for sexually oriented business
licenses and sexually oriented business employee licenses shall be as follows:
$125 for the initial fee for a sexually oriented business license and $70 for
annual renewal; $75 for the initial sexually oriented business employee license
and $40 for annual renewal.
(Ord. 25-02-01, passed 2-25-2025)
§ 116.06 INSPECTION.
   Sexually oriented businesses and sexually oriented business employees shall
permit the Village Clerk and his or her agents to inspect, from time to time on
an occasional basis, the portions of the sexually oriented business premises
where patrons are permitted, for the purpose of ensuring compliance with the
specific regulations of this chapter, during those times when the sexually
oriented business is occupied by patrons or is open to the public. This section
shall be narrowly construed by the village to authorize reasonable inspections
of the licensed premises pursuant to this chapter, but not to authorize a
harassing or excessive pattern of inspections.
(Ord. 25-02-01, passed 2-25-2025)
§ 116.07 EXPIRATION AND RENEWAL OF LICENSE.
   (A)   Each license shall remain valid for a period of one calendar year from
the date of issuance unless otherwise suspended or revoked. Such license may be
renewed only by making application and payment of a fee as provided in this
chapter.
   (B)   Application for renewal of an annual license should be made at least
90 days before the expiration date of the current annual license, and when made
less than 90 days before the expiration date, the expiration of the current
license will not be affected.
(Ord. 25-02-01, passed 2-25-2025)
§ 116.08 SUPSENSION.
   (A)   The Village Clerk shall issue a written notice of intent to suspend a
sexually oriented business license for a period not to exceed 30 days if the
sexually oriented business licensee has knowingly or recklessly violated this
chapter or has knowingly or recklessly allowed an employee or any other person
to violate this chapter.
   (B)   The Village Clerk shall issue a written notice of intent to suspend a
sexually oriented business employee license for a period not to exceed 30 days
if the employee licensee has knowingly or recklessly violated this chapter.
(Ord. 25-02-01, passed 2-25-2025)
§ 116.09 REVOCATION.
   (A)   The Village Clerk shall issue a written notice of intent to revoke a
sexually oriented business license or a sexually oriented business employee
license, as applicable, if the licensee knowingly or recklessly violates this
chapter or has knowingly or recklessly allowed an employee or any other person
to violate this chapter and a suspension of the licensee's license has become
effective within the previous 12-month period.
   (B)   The Village Clerk shall issue a written notice of intent to revoke a
sexually oriented business license or a sexually oriented business employee
license, as applicable, if:
      (1)   The licensee has knowingly given false information in the
application for the sexually oriented business license or the sexually oriented
business employee license;
      (2)   The licensee has knowingly or recklessly engaged in or allowed
possession, use, or sale of controlled substances on the premises of the
sexually oriented business;
      (3)   The licensee has knowingly or recklessly engaged in or allowed
prostitution on the premises of the sexually oriented business;
      (4)   The licensee knowingly or recklessly operated the sexually oriented
business during a period of time when the license was finally suspended or
revoked;
      (5)   The licensee has knowingly or recklessly engaged in or allowed any
specified sexual activity or specified criminal activity to occur in or on the
premises of the sexually oriented business;
      (6)   The licensee has knowingly or recklessly allowed a person under the
age of 21 years to consume alcohol on the premises of the sexually oriented
business; or
      (7)   The licensee has knowingly or recklessly allowed a person under the
age of 18 to appear in a state of semi-nudity or nudity on the premises of the
sexually oriented business.
   (C)   The fact that any relevant conviction is being appealed shall have no
effect on the revocation of the license, provided that, if any conviction which
serves as a basis of a license revocation is overturned or reversed on appeal,
that conviction shall be treated as null and of no effect for revocation
purposes.
   (D)   When, after the notice and hearing procedure described in this
chapter, the village revokes a license, the revocation shall continue for one
year and the licensee shall not be issued a sexually oriented business license
or sexually oriented business employee license for one year from the date
revocation becomes effective.
   (E)   Notwithstanding other provisions of this code, a sexually oriented
business license or a sexually oriented business employee license, as
applicable, shall not be revoked except for a reason set forth in divisions (A)
or (B) above. The village shall not enforce a revocation of a sexually oriented
business license or a sexually oriented business employee license, as
applicable, unless the revocation is accomplished in accordance with this
section and §
116.10 of this chapter.
(Ord. 25-02-01, passed 2-25-2025)
§ 116.10 HEARINGS; LICENSE DENIAL, SUSPENSION, REVOCATION; APPEAL.
   (A)   (1)   When the Village Clerk issues a written notice of intent to
deny, suspend, or revoke a license, the Village Clerk shall immediately send
such notice, which shall include the specific grounds under this chapter for
such action, to the applicant or licensee (respondent) by personal delivery or
certified mail. The notice shall be directed to the most current business
address or other mailing address on file with the Village Clerk for the
respondent. The notice shall also set forth the following: the respondent shall
have ten days after the delivery of the written notice to submit, at the office
of the Village Clerk, a written request for a hearing. If the respondent does
not request a hearing within said ten days, the Village Clerk's written notice
shall become a final denial, suspension, or revocation, as the case may be, on
the thirtieth day after it is issued, and shall be subject to the provisions of
division (B) of this section.
      (2)   If the respondent does make a written request for a hearing within
said ten days, then the Village Clerk shall, within ten days after the
submission of the request, send a notice to the respondent indicating the date,
time, and place of the hearing. The hearing shall be conducted not less than
ten days nor more than 20 days after the date that the hearing notice is
issued. The village shall provide for the hearing to be transcribed.
      (3)   At the hearing, the respondent shall have the opportunity to
present all of respondent's arguments and to be represented by counsel, present
evidence and witnesses on his or her behalf, and cross-examine any of the
Village Clerk's witnesses. The Village Clerk shall also be represented by
counsel, and shall bear the burden of proving the grounds for denying,
suspending, or revoking the license. The hearing shall take no longer than two
days, unless extended at the request of the respondent to meet the requirements
of due process and proper administration of justice. The Hearing Officer shall
issue a final written decision, including specific reasons for the decision
pursuant to this chapter, to the respondent within five days after the hearing.
      (4)   If the decision is to deny, suspend, or revoke the license, the
decision shall advise the respondent of the right to appeal such decision to a
court of competent jurisdiction, and the decision shall not become effective
until the thirtieth day after it is rendered. If the Hearing Officer's decision
finds that no grounds exist for denial, suspension, or revocation of the
license, the Hearing Officer shall, contemporaneously with the issuance of the
decision, order the Village Clerk to immediately withdraw the intent to deny,
suspend, or revoke the license and to notify the respondent in writing by
certified mail of such action. If the respondent is not yet licensed, the
Village Clerk shall contemporaneously therewith issue the license to the
applicant.
   (B)   If any court action challenging a licensing decision is initialed, the
village shall prepare and transmit to the court a transcript of the hearing
within 30 days after receiving written notice of the filing of the court
action. The village shall consent to expedited briefing and/or disposition of
the action, shall comply with any expedited schedule set by the court, and
shall facilitate prompt judicial review of the proceedings. The following shall
apply to any sexually oriented business that is lawfully operating as a
sexually oriented business, or any sexually oriented business employee that is
lawfully employed as a sexually oriented business employee, on the date on
which the completed business or employee application, as applicable, is filed
with the Village Clerk: upon the filing of any court action to appeal,
challenge, restrain, or otherwise enjoin the village's enforcement of any
denial, suspension, or revocation of a temporary license or annual license, the
Village Clerk shall immediately issue the respondent a provisional license. The
provisional license shall allow the respondent to continue operation of the
sexually oriented business or to continue employment as a sexually oriented
business employee and will expire upon the court's entry of a judgment on the
respondent's appeal or other action to restrain or otherwise enjoin the
village's enforcement.
(Ord. 25-02-01, passed 2-25-2025)
§ 116.11 TRANSFER OF LICENSE.
   A licensee shall not transfer his or her license to another, nor shall a
licensee operate a sexually oriented business under the authority of a license
at any place other than the address designated in the sexually oriented
business license application.
(Ord. 25-02-01, passed 2-25-2025)
§ 116.12 HOURS OF OPERATION.
   No sexually oriented business shall be or remain open for business between
12:00 midnight and 6:00 a.m. on any day.
(Ord. 25-02-01, passed 2-25-2025)
§ 116.13 REGULATIONS PERTAINING TO EXHIBITION OF SEXUALLY EXPLICIT FILMS ON
PREMISES.
   (A)   A person who operates or causes to be operated a sexually oriented
business which exhibits in a booth or viewing room on the premises, through any
mechanical or electronic image-producing device, a film, video cassette,
digital video disc, or other video reproduction characterized by an emphasis on
the display of specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas shall
comply with the following requirements.
      (1)   Each application for a sexually oriented business license shall
contain a diagram of the premises showing the location of all operator's
stations, booths or viewing rooms, overhead lighting fixtures, and restrooms,
and shall designate all portions of the premises in which patrons will not be
permitted. Restrooms shall not contain equipment for displaying films, video
cassettes, digital video discs, or other video reproductions. The diagram shall
also designate the place at which the license will be conspicuously posted, if
granted. A professionally prepared diagram in the nature of an engineer's or
architect's blueprint shall not be required; however, each diagram shall be
oriented to the north or to some designated street or object and shall be drawn
to a designated scale or with marked dimensions sufficient to show the various
internal dimensions of all areas of the interior of the premises to an accuracy
of plus or minus six inches. The Village Clerk may waive the foregoing diagram
for renewal applications if the applicant adopts a diagram that was previously
submitted and certifies that the configuration of the premises has not been
altered since it was prepared.
      (2)   It shall be the duty of the operator, and of any employees present
on the premises, to ensure that no patron is permitted access to any area of
the premises which has been designated as an area in which patrons will not be
permitted.
      (3)   The interior premises shall be equipped with overhead lighting
fixtures of sufficient intensity to illuminate every place to which patrons are
permitted access at an illumination of not less than five foot candles as
measured at the floor level. It shall be the duty of the operator, and of any
employees present on the premises, to ensure that the illumination described
above is maintained at all times that the premises is occupied by patrons or
open for business.
      (4)   It shall be the duty of the operator, and of any employees present
on the premises, to ensure that no specified sexual activity occurs in or on
the licensed premises.
      (5)   It shall be the duty of the operator to post conspicuous signs in
well-lighted entry areas of the business stating all of the following:
         (a)   That the occupancy of viewing rooms less than 150 square feet is
limited to one person;
         (b)   That specified sexual activity on the premises is prohibited;
         (c)   That the making of openings between viewing rooms is prohibited;
         (d)   That violators will be required to leave the premises; and
         (e)   That violations of these regulations are unlawful.
      (6)   It shall be the duty of the operator to enforce the regulations
articulated in divisions (A)(5)(a) through (e) above.
      (7)   The interior of the premises shall be configured in such a manner
that there is an unobstructed view from an operator's station of every area of
the premises, including the interior of each viewing room but excluding
restrooms, to which any patron is permitted access for any purpose. An
operator's station shall not exceed 32 square feet of floor area. If the
premises has two or more operator's stations designated, then the interior of
the premises shall be configured in such a manner that there is an unobstructed
view of each area of the premises to which any patron is permitted access for
any purpose, excluding restrooms, from at least one of the operator's stations.
The view required in this division must be by direct line of sight from the
operator's station. It is the duty of the operator to ensure that at least one
employee is on duty and situated in each operator's station at all times that
any patron is on the premises. It shall be the duty of the operator, and it
shall also be the duty of any employees present on the premises, to ensure that
the view area specified in this division remains unobstructed by any doors,
curtains, walls, merchandise, display racks or other materials or enclosures at
all times that any patron is present on the premises.
      (8)   It shall be the duty of the operator to ensure that no porous
materials are used for any wall, floor, or seat in any booth or viewing room.
   (B)   It shall be unlawful for a person having a duty under divisions (A)(1)
through (A)(8) to knowingly or recklessly fail to fulfill that duty.
   (C)   No patron shall knowingly or recklessly enter or remain in a viewing
room less than 150 square feet in area that is occupied by any other patron.
   (D)   No patron shall knowingly or recklessly be or remain within one foot
of any other patron while in a viewing room that is 150 square feet or larger
in area.
   (E)   No person shall knowingly or recklessly make any hole or opening
between viewing rooms.
(Ord. 25-02-01, passed 2-25-2025)
§ 116.14 LOITERING, EXTERIOR LIGHTING AND MONITORING, AND INTERIOR LIGHTING
REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   It shall be the duty of the operator of a sexually oriented business
to:
      (1)   Ensure that at least two conspicuous signs stating that no
loitering is permitted on the premises are posted on the premises;
      (2)   Designate one or more employees to monitor the activities of
persons on the premises by visually inspecting the premises at least once every
90 minutes or inspecting the premises by use of video cameras and monitors; and
      (3)   Provide lighting to the exterior premises to provide for visual
inspection or video monitoring to prohibit loitering. Said lighting shall be of
sufficient intensity to illuminate every place to which customers are permitted
access at an illumination of not less than one foot candle as measured at the
floor level. If used, video cameras and monitors shall operate continuously at
all times that the premises are open for business. The monitors shall be
installed within an operator's station.
   (B)   It shall be the duty of the operator of a sexually oriented business
to ensure that the interior premises shall be equipped with overhead lighting
of sufficient intensity to illuminate every place to which customers are
permitted access at an illumination of not less than five foot candles as
measured at the floor level and the illumination must be maintained at all
times that any customer is present in or on the premises.
   (C)   No sexually oriented business shall erect a fence, wall, or similar
barrier that prevents any portion of the parking lot(s) for the establishment
from being visible from a public right-of-way.
   (D)   It shall be unlawful for a person having a duty under this section to
knowingly or recklessly fail to fulfill that duty.
(Ord. 25-02-01, passed 2-25-2025)
§ 116.15 APPLICABILITY OF CHAPTER TO EXISTING BUSINESSES.
   (A)   Licensing. Each preexisting sexually oriented business lawfully
operating in the village in compliance with all state and local laws prior to
the effective date of this chapter, and each sexually oriented business
employee lawfully working as such in the village prior to the effective date of
this chapter, is hereby granted a de facto temporary license to continue
operation or employment for a period of 30 days following the effective date of
this chapter. By the end of said 30 days, all sexually oriented businesses and
sexually oriented business employees must apply for a license under this
chapter.
   (B)   Interior configuration and conduct requirements. Any preexisting
sexually oriented businesses which are required to, but do not, have interior
configurations or stages that meet at least the minimum requirements of §§
116.13 and
116.16(B) shall have 180 days from the effective date of this chapter to
conform their premises to said requirements. During said 180 days, any employee
who appears within view of any patron in a semi-nude condition shall
nevertheless remain, while semi-nude, at least six feet from all patrons.
(Ord. 25-02-01, passed 2-25-2025)
§ 116.16 PROHIBITED CONDUCT.
   (A)   No patron, employee, or any other person shall knowingly or
intentionally, in a sexually oriented business, appear in a state of nudity or
engage in a specified sexual activity.
   (B)   No person shall knowingly or intentionally, in a sexually oriented
business, appear in a semi-nude condition unless the person is an employee who,
while seminude, remains at least six feet from all patrons and on a stage at
least 18 inches from the floor in a room of at least 600 square feet.
   (C)   No employee who regularly appears semi-nude in a sexually oriented
business shall knowingly or intentionally touch a customer or the clothing of a
customer on the premises of a sexually oriented business.
   (D)   No person shall possess, use, or consume alcoholic beverages on the
premises of a sexually oriented business. In the case of a preexisting sexually
oriented business lawfully operating in the village which holds a license to
sell alcoholic beverages on the effective date of this chapter, this division
shall apply only upon the expiration, revocation, or other termination of the
annual liquor license that is in effect at the preexisting sexually oriented
business on the effective date of this chapter. In no case shall any person
possess, use, or consume alcoholic beverages on the premises of a sexually
oriented business at any time after the first anniversary of the effective date
of this chapter.
   (E)   No person shall knowingly or recklessly allow a person under the age
of 18 years to be or remain on the premises of a sexually oriented business.
   (F)   No operator or licensee of a sexually oriented business shall
knowingly violate the regulations in this section or knowingly allow an
employee or any other person to violate the regulations in this section.
   (G)   A sign in a form to be prescribed by the Village Clerk, and
summarizing the provisions of divisions (A), (B), (C), (D), and (E), shall be
posted near the entrance of the sexually oriented business in such a manner as
to be clearly visible to patrons upon entry. No person shall cover, obstruct,
or obscure said sign.
(Ord. 25-02-01, passed 2-25-2025)
§ 116.17 SCIENTER REQUIRED TO PROVE VIOLATION OR BUSINESS LICENSEE LIABILITY.
   This chapter does not impose strict liability. Unless a culpable mental
state is otherwise specified herein, a showing of a knowing or reckless mental
state is necessary to establish a violation of a provision of this chapter.
Notwithstanding anything to the contrary, for the purposes of this chapter, an
act by an employee that constitutes grounds for suspension or revocation of
that employee's license shall be imputed to the sexually oriented business
licensee for purposes of finding a violation of this chapter, or for purposes
of license denial, suspension, or revocation, only if an officer, director, or
general partner, or a person who managed, supervised, or controlled the
operation of the business premises, knowingly or recklessly allowed such act to
occur on the premises. It shall be a defense to liability that the person to
whom liability is imputed was powerless to prevent the act.
(Ord. 25-02-01, passed 2-25-2025)
§ 116.18 FAILURE OF VILLAGE TO MEET DEADLINE NOT TO RISK APPLICANT/LICENSEE
RIGHTS.
   In the event that a village official is required to act or to do a thing
pursuant to this chapter within a prescribed time, and fails to act or to do
such thing within the time prescribed, said failure shall not prevent the
exercise of constitutional rights of an applicant or licensee. If the act
required of the village official under this chapter, and not completed in the
time prescribed, includes approval of condition(s) necessary for approval by
the village of an applicant or licensee's application for a sexually oriented
business license or a sexually oriented business employee's license (including
a renewal), the license shall be deemed granted and the business or employee
allowed to commence operations or employment the day after the deadline for the
village's action has passed.
(Ord. 25-02-01, passed 2-25-2025)
§ 116.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   A person who violates any of the provisions of this chapter shall be
guilty of a misdemeanor, and, upon conviction, shall be punishable by a fine
not less than $500 plus court costs and not to exceed $750 plus courts costs
and imprisonment in a penal institution, other than the penitentiary, for a
period not to exceed six months, or both fine and imprisonment. Each day a
violation is committed, or permitted to continue, shall constitute a separate
offense and shall be fined as such.
   (B)   Any premises, building, dwelling, or other structure in which a
sexually oriented business is repeatedly operated or maintained in violation of
this chapter shall constitute a nuisance and shall be subject to civil
abatement proceedings in a court of competent jurisdiction.
   (C)   The village's legal counsel is hereby authorized to institute civil
proceedings necessary for the enforcement of this chapter to enjoin, prosecute,
restrain, or correct violations hereof. Such proceedings shall be brought in
the name of the village, provided, however, that nothing in this section and no
action taken hereunder, shall be held to exclude such criminal or
administrative proceedings as may be authorized by other provisions of this
chapter, or any of the laws in force in the village or to exempt anyone
violating this code or any part of the said laws from any penalty which may be
incurred.
(Ord. 25-02-01, passed 2-25-2025)
TITLE XIII: GENERAL OFFENSES
   Chapter
      
130.   GENERAL OFFENSES
      
131.   OFFENSES AGAINST PUBLIC PEACE AND SAFETY
      
132.    OFFENSES AGAINST PROPERTY
      
133.   OFFENSES AGAINST PUBLIC MORALS
      
134.   OFFENSES CONCERNING MINORS
      
135.   MOTOR VEHICLES USED IN COMMISSION OF CERTAIN OFFENSES
CHAPTER 130: GENERAL OFFENSES
Section
General Provisions
   
130.01   Aiding and abetting
   
130.02   Effective date of title
Offenses Affecting Government Function
   
130.15   Resisting or obstructing a peace officer
   
130.16   Impersonation of village officers and employees
   
130.17   False alarms and reports
   
130.18   Obstructing justice
Cross-reference:
   Fine schedule, see §
35.01
   Offenses in village parks, see
Chapter 95
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 130.01 AIDING AND ABETTING.
   Any person who aids, abets, assists or encourages the commission of any act
prohibited by this Title or by any ordinance, or by any indirect means procures
any offense to be committed or who commits an offense through the intervention
of an agent, servant, employee or person under his or her control shall be
deemed guilty to the same extent and may be preceded against in the same manner
as though the offense had been committed by him or her directly and with his or
her own hand. Any agent, servant or other person, doing any prohibited act for
and on behalf of another, shall be deemed guilty of the act equally with his or
her employer or principal and be subject to the same penalty, except in those
cases where a different or other penalty is provided by ordinance for the agent
or employee.
(Ord. 03-09-02, § 1-1, passed 9-23-2003)
Cross-reference:
   For fine, see §
35.01
§ 130.02 EFFECTIVE DATE OF TITLE.
   This Title shall be in effect ten days after its passage, approval and
publication on September 24, 2003.
(Ord. 03-09-02, § 10, passed 9-23-2003)
OFFENSES AFFECTING GOVERNMENT FUNCTION
§ 130.15 RESISTING OR OBSTRUCTING A PEACE OFFICER.
   (A)   No person shall knowingly resist or obstruct the performance, by one
known to the person to be a peace officer for the village, of any authorized
act within the peace officer’s official capacity.
   (B)   No person shall persist in any attempt to engage a peace officer in
conversation in person when the person knows the person to be a peace officer
for the village, while the peace officer is engaged in attempting to control
other persons or traffic, after a peace officer directs the person to cease the
attempt at conversation.
(Ord. 03-09-02, § 2-1, passed 9-23-2003)
Cross-reference:
   For fine, see §
35.01
§ 130.16 IMPERSONATION OF VILLAGE OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES.
   No person shall impersonate any officer or employee of the village by
representing to be that officer or employee, or without being duly authorized,
exercise or attempt to exercise any of the duties and functions of a village
officer or employee.
(Ord. 03-09-02, § 2-2, passed 9-23-2003)
Cross-reference:
   For fine, see §
35.01
§ 130.17 FALSE ALARMS AND REPORTS.
   (A)   No person shall knowingly make, turn in or give a false alarm of fire
or of need for police or ambulance assistance, or aid or abet in the commission
of such an act.
   (B)   No person shall make or file with the Police Department any false,
misleading or unfounded statement or report concerning the commission or
alleged commission of any crime occurring within the village.
(Ord. 03-09-02, § 2-3, passed 9-23-2003)
Cross-reference:
   For fine, see §
35.01
§ 130.18 OBSTRUCTING JUSTICE.
   (A)   No person shall knowingly obstruct justice.
   (B)   A person obstructs justice when, with the intent to prevent
apprehension or to obstruct the prosecution or defense of any person, the
person knowingly commits any of the following acts:
      (1)   Destroys, alters, conceals or disguises physical evidence, plants
false evidence, furnishes false information;
      (2)   Induces a witness having knowledge material to the subject at issue
to leave the state or conceal himself or herself; or
      (3)   Leaves the state or conceals himself or herself possessing
knowledge that is material to the subject at issue.
(Ord. 03-09-02, § 2-4, passed 9-23-2003)
Cross-reference:
   For fine, see §
35.01
CHAPTER 131: OFFENSES AGAINST PUBLIC PEACE AND SAFETY
Section
Offenses Against Persons
   
131.01   Assault
   
131.02   Battery
   
131.03   Reckless conduct
   
131.04   Fighting
Offenses Against Public Peace
   
131.15   Loitering
   
131.16   Disorderly conduct
   
131.17   Mob actions prohibited
   
131.18   Aggressive panhandling prohibited
   
131.19   Nonvehicular noise prohibitions
Offenses Against Public Safety
   
131.30   Throwing or depositing dangerous and offensive materials
   
131.31   Storage, sale, use or explosion of fireworks
   
131.32   Possession of a weapon
   
131.33   Discharge of a weapon
Cross-reference:
   Fine schedule, see §
35.01
OFFENSES AGAINST PERSONS
§ 131.01 ASSAULT.
   (A)   A person commits an assault when, without lawful authority, the person
engages in conduct which places another in reasonable apprehension of receiving
a battery.
   (B)   No person shall commit an assault in the village.
(Ord. 03-09-02, § 3-1, passed 9-23-2003)
Cross-reference:
   For fine, see §
35.01
§ 131.02 BATTERY.
   (A)   A person commits battery if the person intentionally or knowingly,
without legal justification and by any means:
      (1)   Causes bodily harm to an individual; or
      (2)   Makes physical contact of an insulting or provoking nature with an
individual.
   (B)   No person shall commit a battery in the village.
(Ord. 03-09-02, § 3-2, passed 9-23-2003)
Cross-reference:
   For fine, see §
35.01
§ 131.03 RECKLESS CONDUCT.
   (A)   A person who causes bodily harm to or endangers the bodily safety of
an individual by any means commits reckless conduct if the person performs
recklessly the acts which cause the harm or endanger safety, whether they
otherwise are lawful or unlawful.
   (B)   No person shall commit reckless conduct in the village.
(Ord. 03-09-02, § 3-3, passed 9-23-2003)
Cross-reference:
   For fine, see §
35.01
§ 131.04 FIGHTING.
   No person shall knowingly start a fight, or fight in the village.
(Ord. 03-09-02, § 3-4, passed 9-23-2003)
Cross-reference:
   For fine, see §
35.01
OFFENSES AGAINST PUBLIC PEACE
§ 131.15 LOITERING.
   (A)   No person shall loiter, loaf, wander, stand or remain idle either
alone and/or in consort with others in a public place in a manner so as to:
      (1)   Obstruct any public street, public highway, public sidewalk or any
other public place or building by hindering or impeding, or tend to hinder or
impede the free and uninterrupted passage of vehicles, traffic or pedestrians;
      (2)   Commit in or upon any public street, public highway, public
sidewalk or any other public place or building any act or thing which is an
obstruction or interference to the free and uninterrupted use of property or
with any business lawfully conducted by anyone in or upon or facing or fronting
on any public street, public highway, public sidewalk or any other public place
or building, all of which prevents the free and uninterrupted ingress, egress
and regress therein, thereon and thereto.
   (B)   When any person causes or commits any of the conditions enumerated in
division (A) above, a police officer or any law enforcement officer shall order
that person to stop causing or committing those conditions and to move on or
disperse. Any person who fails or refuses to obey the orders shall be guilty of
a violation of this section.
(Ord. 03-09-02, § 5-1, passed 9-23-2003)
Cross-reference:
   For fine, see §
35.01
§ 131.16 DISORDERLY CONDUCT.
   No person shall commit disorderly conduct. A person commits disorderly
conduct when the person knowingly:
   (A)   Does any act in such an unreasonable manner as to alarm or disturb
another and to provoke a breach of the peace;
   (B)   Transmits in any manner to another a false alarm to the effect that a
bomb or other explosive of any nature is concealed in such place that its
explosion would endanger human life, knowing at the time of the transmission
that there is no reasonable ground for believing that the bomb or explosive is
concealed in that place;
   (C)   Transmits in any manner to any peace officer, public officer or public
employee a report to the effect that an offense will be committed, is being
committed, or has been committed, knowing at the time of the transmission that
there is no reasonable ground for believing that an offense has been committed;
   (D)   Enters upon the property of another and for a lewd or unlawful purpose
deliberately looks into a dwelling on the property through any window or other
opening in it; or
   (E)   In a public or private place, engages in violent, abusive, indecent,
profane, boisterous, unreasonably loud or otherwise disorderly conduct under
circumstances in which the conduct tends to cause or provoke a disturbance.
(Ord. 03-09-02, § 5-2, passed 9-23-2003)
Cross-reference:
   False alarms, see
Chapter 90
   For fine, see §
35.01
§ 131.17 MOB ACTIONS PROHIBITED.
   No person shall engage in mob action. Mob action consists of any of the
following:
   (A)   The use of force or violence disturbing the public peace by two or
more persons acting together and without authority of law;
   (B)   The assembly of two or more persons to do an unlawful act; or
   (C)   The assembly of two or more persons, without authority of law, for the
purpose of doing violence to the person or property of any one supposed to have
been guilty of a violation of the law or for the purpose of exercising
correctional powers or regulative powers over any person by violence.
(Ord. 03-09-02, § 5-3, passed 9-23-2003)
Cross-reference:
   For fine, see §
35.01
§ 131.18 AGGRESSIVE PANHANDLING PROHIBITED.
   (A)   Definitions. For the purpose of this section, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.
      AGGRESSIVE PANHANDLING.  
         (a)   Panhandling which is accompanied by one or more of the
following:
            1.   Approaching, speaking to or following a person in such a
manner as would cause a reasonable person to fear bodily harm or the commission
of a criminal act upon the person, or upon property in the person’s immediate
possession;
            2.   Touching another person in the course of panhandling without
that person’s consent;
            3.   Repeatedly panhandling from a person, or following the person,
after the person has made a negative response; and/or
            4.   Intentionally blocking or interfering with the safe passage of
a person or a vehicle by any means, including unreasonably causing a person to
take evasive action to avoid physical contact.
         (b)   AGGRESSIVE PANHANDLING does not include passively panhandling
without engaging in the acts specified in this section.
      PANHANDLING.  Any act by which one person asks, begs or solicits from
another or other in person, by requesting an immediate donation of money or
other thing of value. PANHANDLING includes the spoken, written or printed word
or any other act conducted with the purpose of obtaining an immediate donation
of money or thing of value.
      PLACE OPEN TO THE GENERAL PUBLIC.  Any public place as defined by §
10.02.
   (B)   Aggressive panhandling prohibited. It is unlawful for any person to
engage in aggressive panhandling in any place open to the general public.
   (C)   Panhandling prohibited in specific locations. It is unlawful for any
person to engage in panhandling:
      (1)   Within ten feet of any automatic teller machine (ATM);
      (2)   In any public transportation vehicle or at any bus or train
station;
      (3)   Within ten feet of any official sign indicating a bus stop; or
      (4)   On private property or residential property, if the owner, tenant
or occupant has asked the person not to panhandle on the property or has posted
a sign prohibiting soliciting.
   (D)   Panhandling prohibited from operator or occupant of motor vehicle. It
is unlawful for any person to engage in panhandling from any operator or
occupant of a motor vehicle in a lane of traffic on a public street.
(Ord. 03-09-02, § 5-4, passed 9-23-2003)
Cross-reference:
   For fine, see §
35.01
§ 131.19 NONVEHICULAR NOISE PROHIBITIONS.
   (A)   Definitions. For the purpose of this section, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.
      BOUNDARY LINE.
         (1)   In the case of a residential unit, the BOUNDARY LINE shall be
the perimeter of the unit. Residential unit shall be that area under the
exclusive use or control of the owner or occupant.
         (2)   In the case of publicly owned property, the BOUNDARY LINE shall
be the perimeter of the publicly owned property or right-of-way.
         (3)   In all other cases, the BOUNDARY LINE shall be the perimeter of
the lot.
      COMMERCIAL. A use of the property for purposes other than residential.
      CONSTRUCTION. On-site erection, fabrication, installation, alteration,
repair, remodeling, demolition or removal of any structure, facility or
addition thereto, including all related activities, including, but not
restricted to, clearing of land, earth moving, excavation, drilling, blasting
and landscaping.
      RESIDENTIAL. A legal use of property for temporary or permanent dwelling
purposes.
    (B)   Applicability. The provisions of this section shall apply to all
sources of sound except:
      (1)   Motor vehicles, as defined in the State Vehicle Code (ILCS Ch.
625), in operation on a public right-of-way;
      (2)   Aircraft in flight; and
      (3)   Railroad equipment in operation on railroad right-of-way.
   (C)   Specific prohibitions. No person shall conduct any of the following
activities if any activity produces clearly audible sound beyond the boundary
line of the property or residential unit on which or in which the activity is
conducted:
      (1)   Construction between 10:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m.;
      (2)   The operation of power tools or power equipment, except that the
tools or equipment may be used between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 10:00 p.m.
for reasonable lengths of time;
      (3)   The operation of any bell, siren, whistle or similar device, except
that amplified or unamplified bells or chimes may be used for noncommercial
purposes for reasonable lengths of time;
      (4)   The operation of any device for killing, trapping, attracting or
repelling insects, except that the device may be used between the hours of 7:00
a.m. and 10:00 p.m.;
      (5)   Except as specified in division (C)(3) above, the operation or use
of any sound amplification device, except that sound amplification devices may
be used in commercial areas between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 10:00 p.m., if
the sound produced by the device is not clearly audible at the boundary line of
any residential unit, and not clearly audible at any one location for an
unreasonable length of time; or
      (6)   The use of any musical instrument, except that single musical
instrument without amplification may be used between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and
10:00 p.m. for reasonable lengths of time.
   (D)   Exemptions. The following activities are exempted from the
prohibitions:
      (1)   Emergency work necessary to restore property to a safe condition
following a fire, accident or natural disaster, to restore public utilities, or
to protect persons or property from an imminent danger;
      (2)   Sound made to alert persons to the existence of an emergency,
danger or attempted crime;
      (3)   Parades, concerts, festivals, fairs or other activities which are
open to the general public and operated or conducted in accordance with other
applicable ordinances; block parties shall not be considered open to the
general public;
      (4)   Athletic, musical or cultural activities or events, including
practices and rehearsals, conducted by or under the auspices of governmental
units or educational institutions;
      (5)   Parties sponsored by private individuals on private property, not
open to the general public. The parties shall be exempt from the following
limitations:
         (a)   11:00 p.m. Sunday through Thursday;
         (b)   12:00 midnight, Friday and Saturday;
         (c)   12:00 midnight on any Sunday which falls immediately prior to a
holiday observed on a Monday by the federal government.
         (d)   Notwithstanding divisions (D)(5)(a), (D)(5)(b) or (D)(5)(c)
above, in the event the Police Department receives multiple complaints of
amplified sound generated by a private party; and if the Police Department
verifies that the amplified sound may be heard beyond the boundary lines of the
property; and if, in the opinion of the Police Chief or his or her designee,
the amplified sound constitutes a threat to the public health, safety or
welfare, the Police Chief of his or her designee may cause the party to be shut
down.
   (E)   Presumption of accountability.
      (1)   The occupant of the property or residential unit, or the agent of
the occupant on which a generally or specifically prohibited activity takes
place shall be presumed to have permitted the activity to occur.
      (2)   The occupant of the property or residential unit, or the agent of
the occupant who shall permit another person to create a noise or conduct an
activity in violation of this subchapter shall be deemed responsible for the
noise or activity to the same extent as the person creating the noise or
conducting the activity and shall be subject to the same punishment.
   (F)   Waiver. The Village Administrator may temporarily waive or alter the
time limits in the following events:
      (1)   The village or another governmental entity is engaged in a
construction project;
      (2)   The public interest will be served by the increased number of hours
during which construction might take place; or
      (3)   The impact upon residential units will be slight when compared to
the public benefit of completing the construction expeditiously.
   (G)   Determination.  The Village Administrator shall, at the inception or
during any construction projects conducted by the village or other governmental
entity, make a written determination that each of the above factors is present
and shall forward the determination to the Village Board prior to the
commencement of construction during hours other than as provided for. The
Village Building Inspector shall take steps to notify persons that are or may
be affected by the Village Administrator’s determination prior to the
commencement of construction.
(Ord. 03-09-02, § 5-5, passed 9-23-2003)
Cross-reference:
   For fine, see §
35.01
OFFENSES AGAINST PUBLIC SAFETY
§ 131.30 THROWING OR DEPOSITING DANGEROUS AND OFFENSIVE MATERIALS.
   (A)   Throwing of dangerous materials. No person shall throw or cause to be
thrown litter or any dangerous or offensive substance at a person, vehicle,
house, building or fence.
   (B)   Dumping, deposit and the like of litter prohibited. No person shall
dump, deposit, drop, throw, discard, leave, cause or permit the dumping,
depositing, dropping, throwing, discarding or leaving of litter upon any public
or private property in this state, or upon or into any river, lake, pond, or
other stream or body of water in this state, unless:
      (1)   The property has been designated by the state or any of its
agencies, political subdivisions, units of local government or school districts
for the disposal of litter, and the litter is disposed of on that property in
accordance with the applicable rules and regulations of the Pollution Control
Board;
      (2)   The litter is placed into a receptacle or other container intended
by the owner or tenant in lawful possession of that property for the deposit of
litter;
      (3)   The person is the owner or tenant in lawful possession of the
property or has first obtained the consent of the owner or tenant in lawful
possession, or unless the act is done under the personal direction of the owner
or tenant and does not create a public health or safety hazard, a public
nuisance, or a fire hazard;
      (4)   The person is acting under the direction of proper public officials
during special cleanup days; or
      (5)   The person is lawfully acting in or reacting to an emergency
situation where health and safety is threatened, and removes and properly
disposes of the litter, including, but not limited to, potentially infectious
medical waste as defined in § 3.84 of the Environmental Protection Act, being
ILCS Ch. 415, Act 5, § 3.360 as amended, when the emergency situation no longer
exists.
   (C)   Dumping, deposit and the like from motor vehicle prohibited. No person
shall dump, deposit, drop, throw, discard or otherwise dispose of litter from
any motor vehicle upon any public highway, upon any public or private property
or upon or into any river, lake, pond, stream or body of water in this state
except as permitted under any of divisions (B)(1) through (B)(5) above. Nor
shall any person transport by any means, garbage or refuse from any dwelling,
residence, place of business, farm or other site to and deposit the material
in, around or on top of trash barrels or other receptacles placed along public
highways or at roadside rest areas.
(Ord. 03-09-02, § 7-1, passed 9-23-2003)
Cross-reference:
   For fine, see §
35.01
§ 131.31 STORAGE, SALE, USE OR EXPLOSION OF FIREWORKS.
   (A)   Prohibitions.
      (1)   No person shall store, offer for sale, expose for sale, sell, use
or explode fireworks.
      (2)   For purposes of this section, FIREWORKS shall mean and include any
composition, substance, combinations of substances or article defined as
“fireworks” in division (B) below.
   (B)   Fireworks; defined. For the purpose of this section, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.
      FIREWORKS.
         (a)   1. Blank cartridges;
            2.   Toy cannons in which explosives are used;
            3.   Firecrackers, torpedoes, skyrockets, Roman candles, bombs or
other devices of similar construction;
            4.   Any fireworks containing any explosive compound; and
            5.   Any tablets or other devices containing any explosive
substance, or containing combustible substances producing visual effects.
         (b)   The term FIREWORKS shall not include the following:
            1.   Auto flares;
            2.   Snake or glow worm pellets;
            3.   Smoke devices;
            4.   Trick noisemakers known as “party poppers”, “booby traps”,
“snappers”, “trick matches”, “cigarette loads” and “auto burglar alarms”;
            5.   SPARKLERS. The term SPARKLERS means a wire or stick coated
with pyrotechnic composition which may not exceed 100 grams per item, that
produces a shower of sparks upon ignition. The term SPARKLERS shall not include
other sparkling devices, including but not limited to items commonly known as
“fountains”, “spinners”, “wheels” or similar devices, the sale and use of which
is expressly prohibited;
            6.   Toy pistols, toy canes, toy guns or other devices in which
paper or plastic caps containing twenty-five–hundredths grains or less of
explosive compound are used, provided they are so constructed that the hand
cannot come in contact with the cap when in place for the explosion; and
            7.   Toy pistol paper or plastic caps which contain less than
twenty-five–hundredths grains of explosive mixture.
   (C)   No person shall store, offer for sale, expose for sale, sell at
retail, use or explode any fireworks except as provided in rules and
regulations issued by the Fire Chief and only if the person has a current
permit for supervised public displays of fireworks.
(Ord. 03-09-02, § 7-2, passed 9-23-2003)
Cross-reference:
   For fine, see §
35.01
§ 131.32 POSSESSION OF A WEAPON.
   No person shall carry or possess any weapons or firearms in the village in
violation of the laws of this state.
(Ord. 03-09-02, § 7-3, passed 9-23-2003)
Cross-reference:
   For fine, see §
35.01
§ 131.33 DISCHARGE OF A WEAPON.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to fire or discharge on any
street, public parkway, public alley or other public place or way within the
village or out of doors of any place in the village within 1,000 feet of any
public way, any air gun, air rifle or air pistol, spring gun or spring pistol
or other projectile-type weapon device, which is calculated or intended to
propel or project a bullet, pellet, arrow or similar projectile.
   (B)   This section shall not be construed to prohibit any officer of the law
to discharge a firearm in the performance of his or her duty, nor to any
citizen to discharge a firearm when lawfully defending person or property. It
shall be unlawful to shoot any bow or to discharge any arrow in the village.
(Ord. 03-09-02, § 7-4, passed 9-23-2003)
Cross-reference:
   For fine, see §
35.01
CHAPTER 132: OFFENSES AGAINST PROPERTY
Section
Trespass and Property Damage
   
132.01   Application of graffiti prohibited
   
132.02   Trespass generally
   
132.03   Criminal trespass to government-supported land
   
132.04   Breaking and entering
   
132.05   Damaging village property
   
132.06   Damaging property
Theft
   
132.15   Theft generally
   
132.16   Retail theft
   
132.17   Burglar’s tools; altering keys
   
132.18   Tampering with cable television equipment
   
132.19   Theft of labor, services or use of property
   
132.20   Theft of lost or mislaid property
Cross-reference:
   Fine schedule, see §
35.01
TRESPASS AND PROPERTY DAMAGE
§ 132.01 APPLICATION OF GRAFFITI PROHIBITED.
   (A)   Definitions. For the purpose of this section, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.
      DEFACEMENT or DEFACING. The intentional and unauthorized altering of the
physical appearance or shape of any real or personal property within the
village limits.
      GRAFFITI. The condition caused by the defacing of property by producing
drawings, symbols, inscriptions, scratching, scrawling, painting, spraying or
marking through the use of graffiti materials as defined in this subchapter.
      GRAFFITI MATERIALS. Include paint, aerosol or pressurized containers of
paint, indelible markers, pens, chalk unless water soluble, pencils, ink, dye,
charcoal, acrylic materials or any other substance or implement capable of
altering the physical appearance of public or private property.
   (B)   Prohibition. It is unlawful for any person to assist, aid, abet,
allow, permit or encourage another to violate the provisions of this section,
by words, overt act, failure to act, or by lack of supervision and control over
minors.
   (C)   Removal of graffiti. After notice by the village, it shall be unlawful
for any person who has defaced property with graffiti within the village to
fail to remove the graffiti within the timeframe set forth in the notice.
   (D)   Prohibition of graffiti materials at public facilities. During the
time when any public facility is closed, no person shall have in his or her
possession any graffiti materials while in or upon the public facility. This
section shall not apply to authorized employees of the village, any party under
contract with the village, or persons authorized by the public entity in
control of the facility to possess the materials. PUBLIC FACILITY for the
purposes of this section means any and all facilities or grounds owned or
controlled by any governmental entity.
   (E)   Restitution, parental responsibility. In addition to any other
penalties and as restitution for a violation of any section of this subchapter,
a violator shall pay for the costs of repairing any damages to property caused
by that violator’s unlawful conduct. When the violator is a person under 18
years of age, any parent, guardian or other person having legal custody of the
violator shall be responsible to pay for damages caused by the violator or
abatement of the nuisance which is the result of the violator’s act.
   (F)   Cumulative remedies. The procedures set forth in this chapter are not
exclusive and nothing contained herein shall be deemed to preclude the Village
Attorney, or any person damaged by an act prohibited by this section,
initiating any civil or criminal action or from the pursuit of any available
remedy.
   (G)   Exceptions. This section shall not be applicable to the use of water-
soluble chalk on public sidewalks by a child under the age of 13 or by the
child’s parents or guardians.
(Ord. 03-09-02, § 4-1, passed 9-23-2003)
Cross-reference:
   For fine, see §
35.01
§ 132.02 TRESPASS GENERALLY.
   (A)   No person shall commit a trespass. A person commits a trespass when
that person:
      (1)   Enters upon the lands or premises, or any part thereof, of another,
after receiving prior to the entry notice from the owner, occupant or
authorized person that the entry is forbidden, or remains upon the lands or
premises of another after receiving notice from the owner, occupant or
authorized person to depart; or
      (2)   Enters upon any vehicle, aircraft or watercraft of another after
receiving, immediately prior to the entry, notice from the owner, occupant or
authorized person that the entry is forbidden, or remains upon the vehicle,
aircraft or watercraft of another after receiving notice from the owner,
occupant or authorized person to depart.
   (B)   For the purpose of this section, a person has received notice from the
owner, occupant or authorized person if that person has been notified
personally, either orally or in writing, or if a printed or written notice
forbidding the entry has been conspicuously posted or exhibited at the main
entrance to the land, premises or forbidden part thereof.
   (C)   For the purposes of this section, LANDS OR PREMISES shall include all
lands or premises whether publicly or privately owned.
(Ord. 03-09-02, § 4-2, passed 9-23-2003)
Cross-reference:
   For fine, see §
35.01
§ 132.03 CRIMINAL TRESPASS TO GOVERNMENT-SUPPORTED LAND.
   (A)   Any person who enters upon land supported in whole or in part with
village funds, or federal or state funds administered or granted through the
village or any of its agencies, or any building on the land, after receiving,
immediately prior to the entry, notice from the village or its representative
that the entry is forbidden, or remains upon the land or in the building after
receiving notice from the village or its representative to depart, and who
thereby interferes with another person’s lawful use or enjoyment of the
building or land, shall be guilty of an offense.
   (B)   A person has received notice from the village within the meaning of
this section if notified personally, either orally or in writing, or if a
printed or written notice forbidding entry to the person or a group of which
the person is a part has been conspicuously posted or exhibited at the main
entrance to the land or the forbidden part thereof.
(Ord. 03-09-02, § 4-3, passed 9-23-2003)
Cross-reference:
   For fine, see §
35.01
§ 132.04 BREAKING AND ENTERING.
   Any person who unlawfully, willfully, maliciously and forcibly breaks and
enters, or unlawfully, willfully and maliciously, without force through open
doors or windows, enters into any dwelling, office, shop, storehouse,
warehouse, factory or other business establishment, garage, trailer, motor
vehicle, watercraft or any other building within the village, without the
implied or express consent of the owner thereof, shall be guilty of the offense
of breaking and entering.
(Ord. 03-09-02, § 4-4, passed 9-23-2003)
Cross-reference:
   For fine, see §
35.01
§ 132.05 DAMAGING VILLAGE PROPERTY.
   No person without lawful authority shall damage, destroy, deface or
interfere with any property belonging to the village.
(Ord. 03-09-02, § 4-5, passed 9-23-2003)
Cross-reference:
   For fine, see §
35.01
§ 132.06 DAMAGING PROPERTY.
   (A)   Generally. A person commits an illegal act when he or she:
      (1)   Knowingly damages any property of another without his or her
consent;
      (2)   Recklessly by means of fire or explosive damages property of
another;
      (3)   Knowingly starts a fire on the land of another without his or her
consent;
      (4)   Knowingly injures a domestic animal of another without his or her
consent;
      (5)   Knowingly deposits on the land or in the building of another,
without his or her consent, any stink bomb or any offensive smelling compound
and thereby intends to interfere with the use by another of the land or
building;
      (6)   Damages any property, other than as described, with intent to
defraud an insurer; or
      (7)   Knowingly shoots a firearm at any portion of a railroad train.
   (B)   Criminal defacement of property. A person commits criminal defacement
of property when the person knowingly damages the property of another without
his or her consent by defacing, deforming or otherwise damaging the property by
the use of paint or any other similar substance, or by the use of a writing
instrument, etching tool or any other similar device.
(Ord. 03-09-02, § 4-6, passed 9-23-2003)
Cross-reference:
   For fine, see §
35.01
THEFT
§ 132.15 THEFT GENERALLY.
   No person shall commit theft. A person commits theft when the person
knowingly:
   (A)   Obtains or exerts unauthorized control over property of the owner;
   (B)   Obtains by deception control over property of the owner;
   (C)   Obtains by threat control over property of the owner;
   (D)   Obtains control over stolen property knowing the property to have been
stolen by another or under circumstances that would reasonably induce the
person to believe that the property was stolen, and:
      (1)   Fails to promptly notify the owner or Village Police Department of
the possession;
      (2)   Intends to deprive the owner permanently of the use or benefit of
the property;
      (3)   Knowingly uses, conceals or abandons the property in such manner as
to deprive the owner permanently of the use or benefit; or
      (4)   Uses, conceals or abandons the property knowing the use,
concealment or abandonment probably will deprive the owner permanently of the
use or benefit.
   (E)   Obtains the permanent or temporary use of property, labor or services
of another which are available only for hire by means of threat or deception,
or knowing that the use is without the consent of the person providing the
property, labor or services.
(Ord. 03-09-02, § 4-7, passed 9-23-2003)
Cross-reference:
   For fine, see §
35.01
§ 132.16 RETAIL THEFT.
   (A)   Definitions. For the purpose of this section, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.
      CONCEAL. To CONCEAL merchandise means that, although there may be some
notice of its presence, that merchandise is not visible through ordinary
observation.
      FULL RETAIL VALUE. The merchant’s stated or advertised price of the
merchandise.
      MERCHANDISE.  Any item of tangible personal property.
      MERCHANT.  An owner or operator of any retail mercantile establishment or
any agent, employee, lessee, consignee, officer, director, franchisee or
independent contractor of the owner or operator.
      MINOR.  A person who is less than 19 years of age, is unemancipated and
resides with his or her parents or legal guardian.
      PEACE OFFICER. Any person who by virtue of his or her office or public
employment is vested by law with a duty to maintain public order or to make
arrests for offenses, whether that duty extends to all offenses or is limited
to specific offenses.
      PERSON. Any natural person or individual.
      PREMISES OF A RETAIL MERCANTILE ESTABLISHMENT.  Includes but is not
limited to the retail mercantile establishment, and common use areas in
shopping centers and all parking areas set aside by a merchant or on behalf of
a merchant for the parking of vehicles for the convenience of the patrons of
the retail mercantile establishment.
      RETAIL MERCANTILE ESTABLISHMENT. Any place where merchandise is
displayed, held, stored or offered for sale to the public.
      SHOPPING CART. Those push carts of the type or types which are commonly
provided by grocery stores, drug stores or other retail mercantile
establishments for the use of the public in transporting commodities in stores
and markets and, incidentally, from the stores to a place outside the store.
      UNDER-RING. To cause register or other sales recording device to reflect
less than the full retail value of the merchandise.
   (B)   Offense of retail theft. No person shall commit retail theft. A person
commits the offense of retail theft when the person:
      (1)   Takes possession of, carries away, transfers or causes to be
carried away or transferred any merchandise displayed, held, stored or offered
for sale in a retail mercantile establishment with the intention of retaining
the merchandise or with the intention of depriving the merchant permanently of
the possession, use or benefit of the merchandise without paying the full
retail value of the merchandise;
      (2)   Alters, transfers or removes any label, price tag, marking, indicia
of value or other markings which aid in determining value affixed to any
merchandise displayed, held, stored or offered for sale in a retail mercantile
establishment and attempts to purchase the merchandise personally or in consort
with another at less than full retail value with the intention of depriving the
merchant of the full retail value of the merchandise;
      (3)   Transfers any merchandise displayed, held, stored or offered for
sale, in a retail merchandise establishment from the container or place in or
on which the merchandise is displayed to any other container or place with the
intention of depriving the merchant of the full retail value of the
merchandise;
      (4)   Under-rings with the intention of depriving the merchant of the
full retail value of the merchandise;
      (5)   Removes a shopping cart from the premises of a retail mercantile
establishment without the consent of the merchant given at the time of the
removal with the intention of depriving the merchant permanently of the
possession, use or benefit of the cart;
      (6)   Represents to a merchant that he or she is the lawful owner of
property, knowing that the representation is false, and conveys or attempts to
convey the property to a merchant who is the owner of the property in exchange
for money, merchandise credit or other property of the merchant; or
      (7)   Obtains or exerts unauthorized control over property of the owner
and thereby intends to deprive the owner permanently of the use or benefit of
the property when, as the lessee of the personal property of another, fails to
return it to the owner, or fails to pay the full retail value of the property
to the lessor in satisfaction of a contractual provision requiring it, within
30 days after written demand from the owner for its return. A notice in
writing, given after the expiration of the leasing agreement, by registered
mail, to the lessee at the address given by the lessee and shown in the leasing
agreement shall constitute property demand.
   (C)   Presumptions. If any person does either (C)(1) or (C)(2) below, the
person shall be presumed to have possessed, carried away or transferred the
merchandise with the intention of retaining it or with the intention of
depriving the merchant permanently of the possession, use or benefit of the
merchandise:
      (1)   Conceals upon his or her person or among his or her belongings,
unpurchased merchandise displayed, held, stored or offered for sale in a retail
mercantile establishment; and
      (2)   Removes that merchandise beyond the last known station for
receiving payments for merchandise in that retail mercantile establishment
without paying the full retail value of the merchandise
   (D)   Detention. Any merchant who has reasonable grounds to believe that a
person has committed retail theft may detain the person, on or off the premises
of a retail mercantile establishment, in a reasonable manner and for a
reasonable length of time for all or any of the following purposes:
      (1)   To request identification;
      (2)   To verify the identification;
      (3)   To make reasonable inquiry as to whether the person has in his or
her possession unpurchased merchandise and, to make reasonable investigation of
the ownership of the merchandise;
      (4)   To inform a peace officer of the detention of the person and
surrender that person to the custody of a peace officer; or
      (5)   In the case of a minor, to inform a peace officer, the parents,
guardian or other private person interested in the welfare of that minor of
this detention and to surrender custody of the minor to the person.
   (E)   Affirmative defense. A detention as permitted in this section does not
constitute an arrest or an unlawful restraint, as defined in Ill. Rev. Stat.
Ch. 38, § 10-3, nor shall it render the merchant liable to the person so
detained.
(Ord. 03-09-02, § 4-8, passed 9-23-2003)
Cross-reference:
   For fine, see §
35.01
§ 132.17 BURGLAR’S TOOLS; ALTERING KEYS.
   (A)   No person shall have in his or her possession any burglar’s nippers,
pick lock, skeleton key, bit jimmy or any other burglar’s instrument or tool
unless the possession is innocent or for a lawful purpose.
   (B)   No person shall make or alter or attempt to make or alter any key or
other instrument that will open the lock of a building unless requested to do
so by some person having the right and authority to make the request.
(Ord. 03-09-02, § 4-9, passed 9-23-2003)
Cross-reference:
   For fine, see §
35.01
§ 132.18 TAMPERING WITH CABLE TELEVISION EQUIPMENT.
   (A)    No person shall damage, destroy or cause to be damaged or destroyed
any wire, cable, conduit, apparatus or equipment belonging to a person
authorized by the village to provide cable television service within the
village without first having obtained the consent of the owner.
   (B)   No person shall tap, tamper with or connect any wire or device to a
wire, cable, conduit or equipment of another authorized by the village to
provide cable television service within the village with intent to obtain a
signal or impulse therefrom without first having obtained the consent of the
owner.
(Ord. 03-09-02, § 4-10, passed 9-23-2003)
Cross-reference:
   For fine, see §
35.01
§ 132.19 THEFT OF LABOR, SERVICES OR USE OF PROPERTY.
   (A)   A person commits theft when he or she obtains the temporary use of
property, labor or services of another which are available only for hire, by
means of threat or deception, or knowing that the use is without the consent of
the person providing the property, labor or services.
   (B)   A person commits theft when after renting or leasing a motor vehicle,
obtaining a motor vehicle through a “driveaway” service mode of transportation
or renting or leasing any other type of personal property exceeding $500 in
value, under an agreement in writing which provides for the return of the
vehicle or other personal property to a particular place at a particular time,
he or she without good cause willfully fails to return the vehicle or other
personal property to that place within the time specified, and is thereafter
served or sent a written demand mailed to the last known address, made by
certified mail return receipt requested, to return the vehicle or other
personal property within three days from the mailing of the written demand, and
who without good cause willfully fails to return the vehicle or any other
personal property to any place of business of the lessor within the period.
(Ord. 03-09-02, § 4-11, passed 9-23-2003)
Cross-reference:
   For fine, see §
35.01
§ 132.20 THEFT OF LOST OR MISLAID PROPERTY.
   A person who obtains control over lost or mislaid property commits theft
when the person:
   (A)   Knows or learns the identity of the owner or knows, is aware of, or
learns of a reasonable method of identifying the owner;
   (B)   Fails to take reasonable measures to restore the property to the
owner; and
   (C)   Intends to deprive the owner permanently of the use or benefit of the
property.
(Ord. 03-09-02, § 4-12, passed 9-23-2003)
Cross-reference:
   For fine, see §
35.01
CHAPTER 133: OFFENSES AGAINST PUBLIC MORALS
Section
General Provisions
   
133.01   Public indecency
   
133.02   Public urination and defecation prohibited
   
133.03   Prostitution
   
133.04   Solicitation
   
133.05   Littering; definitions
Gambling
   
133.15   Gambling generally
   
133.16   Definitions
   
133.17   Confiscation of money
   
133.18   Seizure of gambling paraphernalia; disposition; hearing
Drugs
   
133.30   Possession of cannabis prohibited
   
133.31   Possession of drug paraphernalia prohibited
Cross-reference:
   Fine schedule, see §
35.01
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 133.01 PUBLIC INDECENCY.
    No person shall commit a public indecency. Any person of the age of 17
years and upwards who performs any of the following acts in a public place
commits a public indecency:
   (A)   An act of sexual intercourse;
   (B)   An act of sexual penetration as defined by the Illinois Compiled
Statutes; or
   (C)   A lewd exposure of the body done with intent to arouse or to satisfy
the sexual desire of the person.
(Ord. 03-09-02, § 6-1, passed 9-23-2003)
Cross-reference:
   For fine, see §
35.01
§ 133.02 PUBLIC URINATION AND DEFECATION PROHIBITED.
   No person shall urinate or defecate on any street, alley, sidewalk, parking
lot, floor of any public building or any building where the public gathers, or
in any other place commonly open to the public except in a public place that
has been designated as a restroom.
(Ord. 03-09-02, § 6-2, passed 9-23-2003)
Cross-reference:
   For fine, see §
35.01
§ 133.03 PROSTITUTION.
   No person shall commit an act of prostitution. Any person who performs,
offers or agrees to perform any of the following acts for money commits an act
of prostitution:
   (A)   Any act of sexual intercourse; or
   (B)   Any act of sexual penetration, as defined in the Illinois Compiled
Statutes.
(Ord. 03-09-02, § 6-3, passed 9-23-2003)
Cross-reference:
   For fine, see §
35.01
§ 133.04 SOLICITATION.
   (A)   No person shall solicit or otherwise entice any other person to visit
or patronize any prostitute or place of prostitution.
   (B)   No person shall make public display of himself or herself on any
street or other public place in any manner so as to attract attention to
himself or herself for the purpose of soliciting customers for prostitution.
(Ord. 03-09-02, § 6-4, passed 9-23-2003)
Cross-reference:
   For fine, see §
35.01
§ 133.05 LITTERING; DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this section, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   LITTER.  Any discarded, used or unconsumed substance or waste. LITTER may
include, but is not limited to, any garbage, trash, refuse, debris, rubbish,
grass clippings or other lawn or garden waste, newspaper, magazines, glass,
metal, plastic or paper containers or other packaging construction material,
abandoned vehicle (as defined in the Illinois Vehicle Code), motor vehicle
parts, furniture, oil, carcass of a dead animal, any nauseous or offensive
matter of any kind, any object likely to injure any person or create a traffic
hazard, potentially infectious medical waste as defined in § 3.360 of the
Environmental Protection Act, being ILCS Ch. 415, Act 5, § 3.360, as amended,
or anything else of an unsightly or unsanitary nature, which has been
discarded, abandoned or otherwise disposed of improperly.
   MOTOR VEHICLE. The meaning ascribed to that term defined in § 3.360 of the
Environmental Protection Act, being ILCS Ch. 415, Act 5, § 3.360.
   PERSON. Any individual, partnership, co-partnership, firm, company,
corporation, association, joint stock company, trust, estate, or any other
legal entity, or his, her or their legal representative, agent or assigns.
(Ord. 03-09-02, § 6-10, passed 9-23-2003) Penalty, see §
10.99
GAMBLING
§ 133.15 GAMBLING GENERALLY.
   (A)   Gambling. A person commits gambling when he or she:
      (1)   Plays a game of chance or skill for money or other thing of value,
unless excepted in division (B) of this section;
      (2)   Makes a wager upon the result of any game, contest or any political
nomination, appointment or election;
      (3)   Operates, keeps, owns, uses, purchases, exhibits, rents, sells,
bargains for the sale or lease of, manufactures or distributes any gambling
device;
      (4)   Knowingly owns or possesses any book, instrument or apparatus by
means of which bets or wagers have been or are recorded or registered, or
knowingly possesses any money which he or she has received in the course of a
bet or wager;
      (5)   Sells pools upon the result of any game or contest of skill or
chance, political nomination, appointment or election;
      (6)   Sets up or promotes any lottery or sells, offers to sell or
transfers any ticket or share for any lottery;
      (7)   Sets up or promotes any policy game or sells, offers to sell or
knowingly possesses or transfers any policy ticket, slip, record, document or
other similar device;
      (8)   Knowingly advertises any lottery or policy game or drafts, prints
or publishes any lottery ticket or share, or any policy ticket, slip, record,
document or similar device, or any advertisement of any lottery or policy game;
or
      (9)   Knowingly transmits information as to wagers, betting odds, or
changes in betting odds by telephone, telegraph, radio, semaphore or similar
means; or knowingly installs or maintains equipment for the transmission or
receipt of the information; except that nothing in this division (A)(9)
prohibits transmission or receipt of that information for use in news reporting
of sporting events or contests.
   (B)   Exceptions. Participants in any of the following activities shall not
be convicted of gambling:
      (1)   Agreements to compensate for loss caused by the happening of
chance, including without limitation contracts of indemnity or guaranty and
life or health or accident insurance;
      (2)   Offers of prizes, award or compensation to the actual contestants
in any bona fide contest for the determination of skill, speed, strength or
endurance or to the owners of animals or vehicles entered in the contest;
      (3)    Pari-mutuel betting as authorized by the law of this state;
      (4)   Manufacture of gambling devices, including the acquisition of
essential parts therefor and the assembly thereof, for transportation in
interstate or foreign commerce to any place outside this state when the
transportation is not prohibited by any applicable federal law;
      (5)   The game commonly known as “bingo”, when conducted in accordance
with the Bingo License and Tax Act (ILCS Ch. 230, Act 25, §§ 1 et seq.);
      (6)   Lotteries when conducted by the state in accordance with the
Illinois Lottery Law, enacted by the 78th General Assembly (ILCS Ch. 20, Act
1605, §§ 1 et seq.);
      (7)   Possession of an antique slot machine, which is one manufactured 25
years ago or earlier, that is neither used nor intended to be used in the
operation or promotion of any unlawful gambling activity or enterprise;
      (8)   Raffles when conducted in accordance with the Raffles Act, enacted
by the 81st General Assembly (ILCS Ch. 230, Act 15, §§ 1 et seq.); and/or
      (9)   Keeping, possession, ownership, use or playing of a licensed video
gaming terminal in a licensed establishment, licensed truck stop establishment,
licensed fraternal establishment, or licensed veterans establishment, which is
licensed by the Illinois Gaming Board to conduct or allow such specific
activities under the Video Gaming Act, ILCS Ch. 230, Act. 40, §§ 1 et seq.
   (C)   Frequenting gambling places. No person shall frequent any gambling
house or premises used for the purpose of gambling.
   (D)   Leasing for gambling. No person shall knowingly permit any structure
or property under his or her control to be used in violation of any section of
this subchapter.
   (E)   Advertising gambling house. No person shall advertise any gambling
house or gambling resort in any street, alley or public place in the village.
(Ord. 03-09-02, § 6-5, passed 9-23-2003; Ord. 15-11-07, passed 11-24-2015)
Cross-reference:
   For fine, see §
35.01
§ 133.16 DEFINITIONS.
   (A)   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
      GAMBLING DEVICE. Any clock, tape machine, slot machine or other machines
or device for the reception of money or thing of value on chance or skill or
upon the action of which money or other thing of value is staked, hazarded,
bet, won or lost; or any mechanism, furniture, fixture, equipment or other
device designed primarily for use in a gambling place. A GAMBLING DEVICE does
not include:
         (a)   A coin-in-the-slot operated mechanical device played for
amusement which rewards the player with the right to replay the mechanical
device, which device is so constructed or devised as to make the result of the
operation thereof depend in part upon the skill of the player and which returns
to the player thereof no money, property or right to receive money or property;
         (b)   Vending machines by which full and adequate return is made for
the money invested and in which there is no element of chance or hazard;
         (c)   Crane game machines;
         (d)   Redemption machines; or
         (e)   Any video gaming terminal, as defined in the Video Gaming Act,
ILCS Ch. 230, Act 40, § 5.
      KEEPING A GAMBLING PLACE. A GAMBLING PLACE is any real estate, vehicle,
boat or any other property whatsoever used for the purposes of gambling other
than gambling conducted in the manner authorized by the Riverboat Gambling Act,
being ILCS Ch. 230, Act 10, §§ 1 et seq., or the Video Gaming Act, being ILCS
Ch. 230, Act 40, §§ 1 et seq. Any person who knowingly permits any premises or
property owned or occupied by him or her or under his or her control to be used
as a gambling place commits a violation. When any premises is determined by the
court to be a GAMBLING PLACE:
         (a)   The premises is a public nuisance and may be proceeded against
as such;
         (b)   All licenses, permits or certificates issued by the village or
any subdivision or public agency thereof authorizing the serving of food or
liquor on the premises shall be void; and no license, permit or certificate so
cancelled shall be reissued for the premises for a period of 60 days
thereafter; nor shall any person convicted of keeping a gambling place be
reissued the license for one year from his or her conviction and, after a
second conviction of keeping a gambling place, the person shall not be reissued
the license; and
         (c)   The premises of any person who knowingly permits thereon a
violation of any section of this subchapter shall be held liable for, and may
be sold to pay any unsatisfied judgment that may be recovered.
      LOTTERY. Any scheme or procedure whereby one or more prizes are
distributed by chance among persons who have paid or promised consideration for
a chance to win such prizes, whether the scheme or procedure is called a
LOTTERY, raffle, gift, sale or some other name.
      POLICY GAME. Any scheme or procedure whereby a person promises or
guarantees by any instrument, bill, certificate, writing, token or other device
that any particular number, character, ticket or certificate shall in the event
of any contingency in the nature of a lottery entitle the purchaser or holder
to receive money, property or evidence of debt.
   (B)   Every device designed for gambling which is incapable of lawful use or
every device used unlawfully for gambling shall be considered a gambling
device, and shall be subject to seizure, confiscation and destruction. As used
in this section, a GAMBLING DEVICE includes any slot machine, and includes any
machine or device constructed for the reception of money or other thing of
value and so constructed as to return, or to cause someone to return, on chance
to the player thereof money, property or a right to receive money or property.
With the exception of any device designed for gambling  which is incapable of
lawful use, no gambling device shall be forfeited or destroyed unless an
individual with a property interest in the device knows of the unlawful use of
the device.
(Ord. 03-09-02, § 6-5(a), passed 9-23-2003; Ord. 09-12-03, passed 12-22-2009;
Ord. 15-11-07, passed 11-24-2015)
§ 133.17 CONFISCATION OF MONEY.
   All money or stakes being used in the conduct of any gambling game, when
seized by police officers shall be brought before the court, and if the court,
upon hearing the evidence, finds the money or stakes to have been used in
conducting a gambling game, the money or stakes shall be forfeited to the
village by the court ordering the money or stakes deposited in the village
treasury.
(Ord. 03-09-02, § 6-6, passed 9-23-2003)
§ 133.18 SEIZURE OF GAMBLING PARAPHERNALIA; DISPOSITION; HEARING.
   (A)   Seizure.
      (1)   The Police Department or any law enforcement agency shall seize any
gambling paraphernalia, article, machine, device, contrivance or apparatus of
any kind kept, owned or possessed in violation of this division.
      (2)   The materials seized shall be held for use as evidence and for
final disposition by the court.
   (B)   Notice of hearing on confiscated property. The village shall give
notice to the person from whom the monies were seized, or to the person in
possession as owner, or lessee of the premises where the furniture or monies
were found, or if the names of any of these persons are unknown to the village,
by posting notice upon the outer door of the premises, The notice shall be
directed to any person claiming an interest in the property or money, to come
before the court on a certain date, not less than three days from the date of
the notice, and to show cause, if any, why the articles should not be sold at a
public auction as contraband or why any of the monies seized by the police
should not be held as contraband and ordered forfeited by the court. The notice
shall also contain a list of each item of furniture, fixtures or apparatus
seized and the amount of any monies seized.
   (C)   Hearing; sale of contraband; forfeiture.
      (1)   If, in the court’s opinion, after a full hearing, or upon the
default of those notified to appear, it appears to the court that the
furniture, fixtures or equipment sought to be classified as contraband is in
fact contraband, the court shall order the furniture, apparatus or fixtures
sold by the village at a public auction to the highest bidder for cash and the
proceeds paid into the village treasury.
      (2)   After the hearing, if it appears to the court that any of the money
seized was, at the time of the seizure, being kept, used or intended to be used
by the persons named in the notice, or by any person, in violation of the
gaming or gambling laws of the village, or of the state, the court shall order
the monies confiscated as contraband and forfeited to the village treasury.
(Ord. 03-09-02, § 6-7, passed 9-23-2003) Penalty, see §
10.99
DRUGS
§ 133.30 POSSESSION OF CANNABIS PROHIBITED.
   (A)   No person shall possess ten grams or less of any substance containing
cannabis.
   (B)   For the purpose of this section, CANNABIS includes marijuana, hashish
and other substances which are identified as including any parts of the plant
Cannabis sativa, whether growing or not; the seeds thereof, the resin extracted
from any part of the plant; and any compound, manufacture, salt, derivative and
all other cannabinol derivatives, including its naturally occurring or
synthetically produced ingredients, whether produced directly or indirectly by
extraction, or independently by means of chemical synthesis or by a combination
of extraction and chemical synthesis; but shall not include the mature stalks
of the plant, fiber produced from the stalks, oil or cake made from the seeds
of the plant, any other compound, manufacture, salt, derivative, mixture or
preparation of the mature stalks (except the resin extracted there from),
fiber, oil or cake, or the sterilized seed of the plant which is incapable of
germination.
(Ord. 03-09-02, § 6-8, passed 9-23-2003)
Cross-reference:
   For fine, see §
35.01
§ 133.31 POSSESSION OF DRUG PARAPHERNALIA PROHIBITED.
   (A)   Violation. No person shall knowingly possess within the corporate
limits of the village any item of drug paraphernalia with the intent to use it
for the purpose of unlawfully ingesting, inhaling or otherwise introducing
cannabis or a controlled substance into the human body.
   (B)   Definitions. As used in this section, the following terms shall
include and have the following meanings:
      CANNABIS.  Includes any substance defined as “cannabis” in the Illinois
Cannabis Control Act, ILCS Ch. 720, Act 550, § 3.
      CONTROLLED SUBSTANCE. Includes any substance defined as a controlled
substance in the Illinois Controlled Substances Act, ILCS Ch. 720, Act 570, §§
201 et seq.
      DRUG PARAPHERNALIA. Any object or device used, designed for use or
intended for use in unlawfully ingesting, smoking, administering, or storing
cannabis or a controlled substance. For the purposes of this section, DRUG
PARAPHERNALIA includes but is not limited to:
         (a)   Metal, wooden, plastic, glass, stone or ceramic pipes, with or
without screens;
         (b)   Water pipes;
         (c)   Carburetion tubes and devices;
         (d)   Smoking and carburetion masks;
         (e)   Roach clips;
         (f)   Cocaine spoons and vials;
         (g)   Bongs; and
         (h)   One-hitters.
   (C)   Forfeiture. Drug paraphernalia as defined herein, seized by police
officers pursuant to an arrest or issuance of a notice to appear for a
violation of this section, shall be forfeited to the village upon a conviction
for violation of this section, or upon payment of a minimum fine in settlement
of the violation.
(Ord. 03-09-02, § 6-9, passed 9-23-2003)
Cross-reference:
   For fine, see §
35.01
CHAPTER 134: OFFENSES CONCERNING MINORS
Section
   
134.01   Curfew established; hours
   
134.02   Permitting a child to violate curfew
   
134.03   Sale of tobacco to minors prohibited
   
134.04   Unlawful use of identification
Cross-reference:
   Fine schedule, see §
35.01
§ 134.01 CURFEW ESTABLISHED; HOURS.
   It is unlawful for a person less than 17 years of age to be present at or
upon any public assembly, building, place, street or highway at the following
times unless accompanied and supervised by a parent, legal guardian, or other
responsible companion at least 18 years of age approved by a parent or legal
guardian or unless engaged in a business or occupation which the laws of this
state authorize a person less than 17 years of age to perform:
   (A)   Between 12:01 a.m. and 6:00 a.m. Saturday;
   (B)   Between 12:01 a.m. and 6:00 a.m. Sunday; and
   (C)   Between 11:00 p.m. on Sunday to Thursday, inclusive, and 6:00 a.m. on
the following day.
(Ord. 03-09-02, § 8-1, passed 9-23-2003)
Cross-reference:
   For fine, see §
35.01
§ 134.02 PERMITTING A CHILD TO VIOLATE CURFEW.
   It is unlawful for a parent, legal guardian or other person to knowingly
permit a person in his or her custody or control to violate §
134.01.
(Ord. 03-09-02, § 8-2, passed 9-23-2003)
Cross-reference:
   For fine, see §
35.01
§ 134.03 SALE OF TOBACCO TO MINORS PROHIBITED.
   (A)   No minor under 18 years of age shall buy any cigar, cigarette,
smokeless tobacco or tobacco in any of its forms. No person shall sell, buy
for, distribute samples of or furnish any cigar, cigarette, smokeless tobacco
or tobacco in any of its forms, to any minor under 18 years of age.
   (B)   For the purpose of this section, SMOKELESS TOBACCO means any tobacco
products that are suitable for dipping or chewing.
(Ord. 03-09-02, § 8-3, passed 9-23-2003)
Cross-reference:
   For fine, see §
35.01
§ 134.04 UNLAWFUL USE OF IDENTIFICATION.
   (A)   For the purposes of this section, IDENTIFICATION CARD means a written
form of identification containing date of birth issued by a public officer in
the performance of official duties and shall include, but shall not be limited
to the following:
      (1)   Driver’s license or permit;
      (2)   University or other school identification;
      (3)   Department of Public Aid identification;
      (4)   Armed forces identification; and/or
      (5)   Federal Selective Service registration certificate.
   (B)   A person shall be guilty of unlawful use of identification if that
person:
      (1)   Allows or permits the use of his or her identification card by
another person who is under the age of 21 years;
      (2)   Is under the age of 21 years and possesses the identification card
of another; or
      (3)   Alters or defaces the date of birth or name on his or her
identification card or the identification card of another.
(Ord. 03-09-02, § 8-6, passed 9-23-2003) Penalty, see §
10.99
CHAPTER 135: MOTOR VEHICLES USED IN COMMISSION OF CERTAIN OFFENSES
Section
   
135.01   Definitions
   
135.02   Violations; exceptions
   
135.03   Seizure and impoundment
   
135.04   Notice
   
135.05   Hearing
   
135.06   Hearing officer; proceedings
   
135.07   Disposition of impounded vehicle
   
135.08   Posting of bond
   
135.09   Failure to pay fee
§ 135.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For purposes of this chapter, and the interpretation and enforcement
thereof, the words, terms and phrases set forth below shall have these meanings
respectively ascribed to them in this section as follows:
   MOTOR VEHICLE. Every vehicle which is self-propelled, including, but not
limited to automobiles, trucks, vans, motorcycles, and motor scooters.
   OWNER OF RECORD. Collectively, the record title holder of the motor vehicle.
(Ord. 23-02-01, passed 2-28-2023; Ord. 23-10-01, passed 10-24-2023)
§ 135.02 VIOLATIONS; EXCEPTIONS.
   (A)   The village, in addition to: (i) any other penalties that may be
assessed by a court of law for the underlying violations; and (ii) any towing
or storage fees, or both, charged by the towing agent; shall impose on the
registered owner of the motor vehicle or the agents of that owner, an
administrative fee of $500 related to its administrative and processing costs
associated with the investigation, arrest, and detention of an offender, or the
removal, impoundment, storage and release of a vehicle whenever any such motor
vehicle is used in the commission of any of the following offenses: operation
or use of a motor vehicle in the commission of, or in the attempt to commit, an
offense for which a motor vehicle may be seized and forfeited pursuant to
Section 36-1 of the Criminal Code of 2012;
      (1)   Driving under the influence of alcohol, another drug or drugs, an
intoxicating compound or compounds, or any combination thereof, in violation of
Section 11-501 of the Illinois Vehicle Code;
      (2)   Operation or use of a motor vehicle in the commission of, or in the
attempt to commit, a felony or in violation of the Cannabis Control Act;
      (3)   Operation or use of a motor vehicle in the commission of, or in the
attempt to commit, an offense in violation of the Illinois Controlled
Substances Act;
      (4)   Operation or use of a motor vehicle in the commission of, or in the
attempt to commit, an offense in violation of Section 24-1, 24-1.5, or 24- 3.1
of the Criminal Code of 1961 or the Criminal Code of 2012;
      (5)   Driving while a driver's license, permit, or privilege to operate a
motor vehicle is suspended or revoked pursuant to Section 6-303 of the Illinois
Vehicle Code; except that vehicles shall not be subjected to seizure or
impoundment if the suspension is for an unpaid citation (parking or moving) or
due to failure to comply with emission testing;
      (6)   Operation or use of a motor vehicle while soliciting, possessing,
or attempting to solicit or possess cannabis or a controlled substance, as
defined by the Cannabis Control Act or the Illinois Controlled Substances Act;
      (7)   Operation or use of a motor vehicle with an expired driver's
license, in violation of Section 6-101 of the Illinois Vehicle Code, if the
period of expiration is greater than one year;
      (8)   Operation or use of a motor vehicle without ever having been issued
a driver's license or permit, in violation of Section 6-101 of the Illinois
Vehicle Code, or operating a motor vehicle without ever having been issued a
driver's license or permit due to a person's age;
      (9)   Operation or use of a motor vehicle by a person against whom a
warrant has been issued by a circuit clerk in Illinois for failing to answer
charges that the driver violated Section 6-101, 6-303, or 11-501 of the
Illinois Vehicle Code;
      (10)   Operation or use of a motor vehicle in the commission of, or in
the attempt to commit, an offense in violation of Article 16 or 16A of the
Criminal Code of 1961 or the Criminal Code of 2012;
      (11)   Operation or use of a motor vehicle in the commission of, or in
the attempt to commit, any other misdemeanor or felony offense in violation of
the Criminal Code of 1961 or the Criminal Code of 2012; or
      (12)   Operation or use of a motor vehicle in violation of Section 11-503
of the Illinois Vehicle Code:
         (a)   While the vehicle is part of a funeral procession; or
         (b)   In a manner that interferes with a funeral procession.
   (B)   Any motor vehicle used in the commission of any such violation shall
be subject to seizure and impoundment as provided in this chapter. A police
officer has the authority to seize and impound said vehicle. All administrative
fees and towing and storage charges shall be imposed on the registered owner of
the motor vehicle or the agents of that owner.
   (C)   No administrative fees shall be imposed on the registered owner or the
agents of that owner if the motor vehicle was stolen or hijacked at the time
the vehicle was impounded. To demonstrate that the motor vehicle was hijacked
or stolen at the time the vehicle was impounded, the owner or the agents of the
owner must submit proof that a report concerning the motor vehicle was filed
with a law enforcement agency in a timely manner.
(Ord. 23-02-01, passed 2-28-2023; Ord. 23-10-01, passed 10-24-2023)
§ 135.03 SEIZURE AND IMPOUNDMENT.
   (A)   Whenever a police officer has cause to believe that a motor vehicle is
subject to impoundment, the officer shall provide for the towing of the vehicle
to a facility authorized by the village.
   (B)   At the time the vehicle is towed, the village shall notify or make a
reasonable attempt to notify the owner, lessee, or person identifying himself
or herself as the owner or lessee of the vehicle, or any person who is found to
be in control of the vehicle at the time of the alleged offense, of the fact of
the seizure, and of the vehicle owner's or lessee's right to an administrative
hearing.
   (C)   The village shall also provide notice that the motor vehicle will
remain impounded pending the completion of an administrative hearing, unless
the owner or lessee of the vehicle or a lienholder posts with the village a
bond equal to the administrative fee as provided by ordinance and pays for all
towing and storage charges.
(Ord. 23-02-01, passed 2-28-2023; Ord. 23-10-01, passed 10-24-2023)
§ 135.04 NOTICE.
   (A)   Within 72 hours after a motor vehicle is seized and impounded pursuant
to this chapter, the police department shall notify by first class mail the
owner of record, lessee of the vehicle and any lien holder of record of the
fact of the seizure and impoundment and the right to a motor vehicle
impoundment hearing under this chapter.
   (B)   However, no such notice need be sent to the owner of record if the
owner of record is personally served with the notice at the time the motor
vehicle is seized and impounded and the owner of record acknowledges receipt of
such notice in writing. A copy of such notice shall be forwarded to the hearing
officer. The notice shall contain the date, time, and location of the
administrative hearing. An initial hearing shall be scheduled and convened no
later than 45 days after the date of the mailing of the notice of hearing. The
notice shall state the penalties that may be imposed, including that a motor
vehicle not released by payment of the administrative fee and applicable towing
and storage fees may be sold or disposed of by the village in accordance with
applicable law.
(Ord. 23-02-01, passed 2-28-2023; Ord. 23-10-01, passed 10-24-2023)
§ 135.05 HEARING.
   If, after the vehicle impoundment hearing, the hearing officer determines by
a preponderance of the evidence that the motor vehicle was used in the
violation, the hearing officer shall enter an order finding the owner of record
liable to the village for the amount of the administrative fee prescribed, plus
applicable towing and storage fees payable to the towing agent. If, after a
hearing, the hearing officer does not determine by a preponderance of the
evidence that the motor vehicle was used in such a violation, the hearing
officer shall enter an order finding for the owner of record and for the return
of the motor vehicle and any previously paid administrative fee and applicable
towing and storage fees; provided that if the motor vehicle was seized and
impounded pursuant to state or federal drug asset forfeiture laws, the motor
vehicle shall not be returned unless and until the village receives notice from
the appropriate, state, or where applicable, federal officials that forfeiture
proceedings will not be instituted; or forfeiture proceedings have concluded
and there is a settlement or a court order providing that the motor vehicle
shall be returned to the owner of record. If no interested party appears at the
administrative hearing, the owner of record and all other interested parties
shall be deemed to have waived their right to such a hearing and the hearing
officer shall enter a default order in favor of the village for the amount of
the administrative fee prescribed, plus applicable towing and storage fees
payable to the towing agent. However, if the owner of record pays such
administrative fee and applicable towing and storage fees and the motor vehicle
is returned to the owner of record, no default order need be entered if the
owner of record is informed of his right to a hearing and signs a written
waiver, in which case an order of liability shall be deemed to have been made
when the village receives the written waiver.
(Ord. 23-02-01, passed 2-28-2023; Ord. 23-10-01, passed 10-24-2023)
§ 135.06 HEARING OFFICER; PROCEEDINGS.
   (A)   Administrative hearings shall be conducted by a hearing officer who is
an attorney licensed to practice law in this state for a minimum of three
years.
   (B)   The hearing officer shall consider as a defense to the vehicle
impoundment that the motor vehicle was stolen or hijacked at the time the
vehicle was impounded; to demonstrate that the motor vehicle was hijacked or
stolen at the time the vehicle was impounded, the owner or the agents of the
owner or a lessee must submit proof that a report concerning the motor vehicle
was filed with a law enforcement agency in a timely manner.
   (C)   At the conclusion of the administrative hearing, the hearing officer
shall issue a written decision either sustaining or overruling the vehicle
impoundment.
   (D)   If the basis for the vehicle impoundment is sustained by the
administrative hearing officer, any administrative fee posted to secure the
release of the vehicle shall be forfeited to the village.
   (E)   All final decisions of the administrative hearing officer shall be
subject to review under the provisions of the Administrative Review Law.
   (F)   Unless the administrative hearing officer overturns the basis for the
vehicle impoundment, no vehicle shall be released to the owner, lessee, or
lienholder of record until all administrative fees and towing and storage
charges are paid.
   (G)   If the administrative hearing officer finds that the village exceeded
its authority under the Illinois Vehicle Code, the village shall be liable to
the registered owner or lessee of the vehicle for the cost of storage fees and
reasonable attorney's fees.
   (H)   Notwithstanding any other provision of law to the contrary, if the
administrative hearing officer finds that a village impounded a motor vehicle
that was stolen or hijacked at the time the vehicle was impounded, the village
shall refund any administrative fees already paid by the registered owner or
lessee of the vehicle.
   (I)   All interested persons shall be given a reasonable opportunity to be
heard at any vehicle impoundment hearing. The formal rules of evidence will not
apply at any such hearing.
   (J)   Any sworn or affirmed report, including a report prepared in
compliance with Section 11-501.1 of the Illinois Vehicle Code (ILCS Ch. 625,
Act 5, § 11-501.1) that is prepared in the performance of a law enforcement
officer's duties and sufficiently describes the circumstances leading to the
impoundment, shall be admissible evidence of the owner of record's liability,
and shall support a finding of the owner of record's liability, unless rebutted
by clear and convincing evidence.
   (K)   The technical rules of evidence shall not apply.
   (L)   The hearings shall be recorded, and the person conducting the hearing
on behalf of the traffic compliance administrator shall be empowered to
administer oaths and to issue subpoena for both the attendance and testimony of
witnesses and the production of relevant books and papers.
(Ord. 23-02-01, passed 2-28-2023; Ord. 23-10-01, passed 10-24-2023)
§ 135.07 DISPOSITION OF IMPOUNDED VEHICLE.
   (A)   Unless stayed by a court of competent jurisdiction, any administrative
fee imposed under this section which remains unpaid in whole or in part after
the expiration of the deadline for seeking judicial review under the
Administrative Review Law may be enforced in the same manner as a judgment
entered by a court of competent jurisdiction. Except as otherwise provided in
this chapter, a motor vehicle impounded pursuant to this chapter shall remain
impounded until:
      (1)   The administrative fee is paid in full to the village and all
applicable towing and storage fees are paid to the towing agent, in which case
the owner of record shall be given possession of the motor vehicle;
      (2)   A cash bond in the amount of $500 is posted with the village
treasurer and all applicable towing and storage fees are paid to the towing
agent, at which time the motor vehicle shall be released to the owner of
record; or
      (3)   The motor vehicle is sold or otherwise disposed of to satisfy a
judgment or enforce a lien as provided by law.
   (B)   Notwithstanding any other provision of this section, whenever a person
with a lien of record against a motor vehicle impounded under this section has
commenced foreclosure proceedings, possession of the motor vehicle shall be
given to that person if he pays the applicable towing and storage fees and
agrees in writing to refund to the village the net proceeds of any foreclosure
sale, less any amounts necessary to pay all lien holders of record, up to the
total amount of administrative penalties imposed under this chapter.
Notwithstanding any other provision of this section, no vehicle that was seized
and impounded pursuant to state or federal drug asset forfeiture laws shall be
returned to the owner of record unless and until the village has received
notice from the appropriate state, or where applicable, federal officials that
forfeiture proceedings will not be instituted; or forfeiture proceedings have
concluded and there is a settlement or a court order providing that the vehicle
shall be returned to the owner of record.
(Ord. 23-02-01, passed 2-28-2023; Ord. 23-10-01, passed 10-24-2023)
§ 135.08 POSTING OF BOND.
   If a cash bond as required by this charter is posted with the village
treasurer, the impounded motor vehicle shall be released to the owner of record
upon the payment of any applicable towing and storage fees to the towing agent.
If an administrative fee is imposed for any violation, the cash bond will be
forfeited to the village; however, in the event a violation is not proven by a
preponderance of the evidence, the cash bond will be returned to the person
posting the bond. All bond money to be forfeited to the village pursuant to
this section shall be held by the village treasurer until 35 days after an
administrative fee is imposed by the hearing officer under this section, or, if
there is a judicial review, until a final judgment is rendered by a court of
competent jurisdiction.
(Ord. 23-02-01, passed 2-28-2023; Ord. 23-10-01, passed 10-24-2023)
§ 135.09 FAILURE TO PAY FEE.
   If the administrative fee and applicable towing and storage fees are not
paid within 35 days after an administrative fee is imposed under this chapter
against an owner of record who defaults by failing to appear at the vehicle
impoundment hearing, the motor vehicle shall be deemed unclaimed and shall be
disposed of in the manner provided by law for the disposition of unclaimed
vehicles. In all other cases, if the administrative fee and applicable towing
and storage fees are not paid within 35 days after the expiration of time at
which administrative review of the hearing officer's determination may be
sought, or within 35 days after an action seeking administrative review has
been resolved in favor of the village, whichever is applicable, the motor
vehicle shall be deemed unclaimed and shall be disposed of in the manner
provided by law for the disposition of unclaimed vehicles; provided that, if
the motor vehicle was seized and impounded pursuant to state or federal drug
asset forfeiture laws and proceedings have been instituted under state or
federal drug asset forfeiture laws, the motor vehicle may not be disposed of by
the village except as consistent with those proceedings.
(Ord. 23-02-01, passed 2-28-2023; Ord. 23-10-01, passed 10-24-2023)
TITLE XV: LAND USAGE
   Chapter
      
150.   RESERVED
      
151.   DEVELOPMENT WITHIN FLOODPLAIN AREAS
      
152.   ZONING CODE
      
153.   MINIMUM HOUSING STANDARDS
      
154.   SUBDIVISIONS
      
155.   FEES IN LIEU OF CONSTRUCTION
      
156.   PUBLIC RIGHT-OF-WAY
CHAPTER 150: RESERVED
CHAPTER 151: DEVELOPMENT WITHIN FLOODPLAIN AREAS
Section
General Provisions
   
151.01   Purpose
   
151.02   Definitions
   
151.03   Base flood elevation
   
151.04   Administration
   
151.05   Floodplain development permit
   
151.06   Other regulations
   
151.07   Certificate of occupancy
   
151.08   Permit review
   
151.09   Floodplain development permit requirements
   
151.10   Consent for inspections
   
151.11   Revocation of a floodplain development permit
   
151.12   Completion of work heretofore authorized
   
151.13   Application fees
Specific Provisions
   
151.25   Preventing increased flood heights and resulting damages
   
151.26   Protecting buildings and building related development
   
151.27   Subdivision requirements
   
151.28   Public health and other standards
   
151.29   Channel carrying capacity
   
151.30   Variances
   
151.31   Disclaimer of liability
   
151.32   Abrogation and greater restrictions
 
   
151.99   Penalty
Cross-reference:
   General village administrative provisions, see Title III
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 151.01 PURPOSE.
   This chapter is enacted pursuant to the police powers granted to the village
by the Illinois Municipal Code (ILCS Ch. 65, Act 5, §§ 1-2-1, 11-12-12, 11-30-
2, 11-30-8 and 11-31-2) in order to accomplish the following purposes:
   (A)   To prevent unwise developments from increasing flood or drainage
hazards to others;
   (B)   To protect new and existing buildings and major improvements to
buildings from flood damage;
   (C)   To promote and protect the public health, safety and general welfare
of the citizens from the hazards of flooding;
   (D)   To lessen the burden on the taxpayer for flood control, repairs to
public facilities and utilities, and flood rescue and relief operations;
   (E)   To maintain property values and a stable tax base by minimizing the
potential for creating flood blight areas;
   (F)   To make federally subsidized flood insurance available to property
within the village; and
   (G)   To preserve the natural characteristics and functions of watercourses
and floodplains in order to moderate flood and stormwater impacts, improve
water quality, reduce soil erosion, protect aquatic and
riverine habitat, provide recreational opportunities, provide aesthetic
benefits, and enhance economic development.
(Ord. 13-09-1, passed 9-10-2013)
§ 151.02 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   BASE FLOOD. The flood having a 1% probability of being equaled or exceeded
in any given year. The BASE FLOOD is also known as the 100-YEAR FLOOD. The base
flood elevation at any location is as defined in §
151.03.
   BASE FLOOD ELEVATION (BFE). The elevation in relation to mean-sea level
(National Geodetic Survey Vertical Datum of 1988) of the crest of the base
flood.
   BASEMENT. That portion of a building having its floor subgrade (below ground
level) on all sides.
   BUILDING. A structure that is principally above ground and is enclosed by
walls and a roof, including manufactured homes, prefabricated buildings, and
gas or liquid storage tanks. The term also includes recreational vehicles and
travel trailers installed on a site for more than 180 days per year.
   CRITICAL FACILITY. Any facility which is critical to the health and welfare
of the population and, if flooded, would create an added dimension to the
disaster or increase the hazard to life and health. Damage to these CRITICAL
FACILITIES can impact the delivery of vital services, can cause greater damage
to other sectors of the community, or can put special populations at risk.
Examples of critical care facilities where flood protection should be required
include: emergency service facilities (such as fire and police stations),
schools, hospitals, retirement homes and senior care facilities, major roads
and bridges, critical utility sites (telephone switching stations or electrical
transformers), and hazardous material treatment, handling or storage facilities
(chemicals, petrochemicals, hazardous or toxic substances).
   DEVELOPMENT.  
      (1)   Any man-made change to real estate including, but not necessarily
limited to:
         (a)   Demolition, construction, reconstruction, repair, placement of a
building, or any structural alteration to a building;
         (b)   Substantial improvement of an existing building;
         (c)   Installation of a manufactured home on a site, preparing a site
for a manufactured home, or installing a travel trailer on a site for more than
180 days per year;
         (d)   Installation of utilities, construction of roads, bridges,
culverts or similar projects;
         (e)   Construction or erection of levees, dams, walls or fences;
         (f)   Drilling, mining, filling, dredging, grading, excavating, paving
or other alterations of the ground surface;
         (g)   Storage of materials including the placement of gas and liquid
storage tanks;
         (h)   Channel modifications or any other activity that might change
the direction, height or velocity of flood or surface waters; or
         (i)   Any combination of the above.
      (2)   DEVELOPMENT does not include routine maintenance of existing
buildings and facilities; resurfacing roads, gardening, plowing, agricultural
tillage operations and similar practices that do not involve filling, grading
or construction of levees.
   EXISTING MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION. A manufactured home park or
subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on
which the manufactured homes are to be affixed or buildings to be constructed
(including, at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of
streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is
completed before the effective date of the floodplain management regulations
adopted by a community.
   EXPANSION TO AN EXISTING MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION. The
preparation of additional sites by the construction of facilities for servicing
the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including the
installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site
grading or the pouring of concrete pads).
   FEMA. Federal Emergency Management Agency.
   FLOOD. A general and temporary condition of partial or complete inundation
of normally dry land areas from the overflow, the unusual and rapid
accumulation, or the runoff of surface waters from any source.
   FLOOD FRINGE. The portion of the floodplain outside of the regulatory
floodway.
   FLOOD INSURANCE RATE MAP. A map prepared by the Federal Emergency Management
Agency that depicts the floodplain or special flood hazard area (SFHA) within a
community. This map includes insurance rate zones and may or may not depict
floodways and show base flood elevations.
   FLOOD INSURANCE STUDY. An examination, evaluation and determination of flood
hazards and, if appropriate, corresponding water surface elevations.
   FLOOD PROTECTION ELEVATION (FPE). The elevation of the base flood plus one
foot of freeboard at any given location in the floodplain.
   FLOODPLAIN. Synonymous with SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD AREA (SFHA). Those lands
within the jurisdiction of the village that are subject to inundation by the
base flood. The floodplains of the county and the village are generally
identified on the countywide Flood Insurance Rate Map of Champaign County
prepared by the Federal Emergency Management Agency and dated October 2, 2013.
FLOODPLAIN also includes those areas of known flooding as identified by the
community that are not necessarily shown on the published Flood Insurance Rate
Map of Champaign County.
   FLOODPLAIN DEVELOPMENT PERMIT. A permit required for any development in the
floodplain. A zoning use permit or building permit is not a FLOODPLAIN
DEVELOPMENT PERMIT.
   FLOODPROOFING. Any combination of structural or nonstructural additions,
changes or adjustments to structures which reduce or eliminate flood damage to
real estate, property and their contents.
   FLOODPROOFING CERTIFICATE. A form published by the Federal Emergency
Management Agency that is used to certify that a building has been designed and
constructed to be structurally dry floodproofed to the flood protection
elevations.
   FLOODWAY. The portion of the floodplain required to store and convey the
base flood. The FLOODWAY for the floodplains of the Sangamon River shall be as
delineated on the countywide Flood Insurance Rate Map of Champaign County
prepared by FEMA and dated October 2, 2013. The FLOODWAYS for each of the
remaining floodplains within the village and the county shall be determined
according to the best data available from federal, state or other sources.
   FREEBOARD. An increment of elevation added to the base flood elevation to
provide a factor of safety for uncertainties in calculations, future watershed
development, unknown localized conditions, wave actions and unpredictable
effects such as those caused by ice or debris jams.
   HISTORIC STRUCTURE. Any structure that is:
      (1)   Listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places or
preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as meeting the
requirements for individual listing on the National Register;
      (2)   Certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the
Interior as contributing to the historic district or a district preliminarily
determined by the Secretary to qualify as a registered historic district;
      (3)   Individually listed on the state inventory of historic places by
the Illinois Historic Preservation Agency; or
      (4)   Individually listed on a local inventory of historic places that
has been certified by the Illinois Historic Preservation Agency.
   IDNR/OWR. Illinois Department of Natural Resources/Office of Water
Resources.
   IDNR/OWR JURISDICTIONAL STREAM. Illinois Department of Natural Resources
Office of Water Resources has jurisdiction over any stream serving a tributary
area of 640 acres or more in an urban area, or in the floodway of any stream
serving a tributary area of 6,400 acres or more in a rural area. Construction
on these streams requires a permit from the Department (Ill. Admin. Code tit.
17, pt. 3700.30). The Department may grant approval for specific types of
activities by issuance of a statewide permit which meets the standards defined
in § 
151.25 of this code.
   LEVEE. An earthen embankment, dike, or ridge of more than 18 inches in
height intended to provide protection to lands or structures from flooding.
   LOWEST FLOOR. The lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area (including
basement). An unfinished or flood resistant enclosure, usable solely for
parking of vehicles, building access or storage in an area other than a
basement area is not considered a building’s LOWEST FLOOR provided that such
enclosure is not built so as to render the structure in violation of the
applicable non-elevation design requirements of §
151.26 of this code.
   MANUFACTURED HOME. A structure transportable in one or more sections, that
is built on a permanent chassis and is designed to be used with or without a
permanent foundation when connected to required utilities.
   MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION. A parcel (or contiguous parcels) of
land divided into two or more lots for rent or sale intended for the
installation of manufactured homes.
   NEW CONSTRUCTION. Structures for which the start of construction commenced
on or after the effective date of floodplain management regulations adopted by
a community and includes any subsequent improvements of such structures.
   NEW MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION. A manufactured home park or
subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on
which the manufactured homes are to be affixed or buildings to be constructed
(including, at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of
streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is
completed on or after the effective date of the floodplain management
regulations adopted by a community.
   NFIP. National Flood Insurance Program.
   RECREATIONAL VEHICLE or TRAVEL TRAILER. A vehicle which is:
      (1)   Built on a single chassis;
      (2)   Four hundred square feet or less in size; and
      (3)   Designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a light
duty truck and designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling but as
temporary living quarters for recreational, camping, travel or seasonal use.
   REPETITIVE LOSS. Flood related damages sustained by a structure on two
separate occasions during a ten-year period for which the cost of repairs at
the time of each such flood event on the average equals or exceeds 25% of the
market value of the structure before the damage occurred.
   RIVERINE SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD AREA. Any special flood hazard area subject to
overbank flooding from a river, creek, stream, ditch or any other identified
major channel with an upstream drainage area larger than one square mile in
area. This term does not include areas subject to flooding from lakes (except
public bodies of water), ponding areas, areas of sheet flow, or other areas not
subject to overbank flooding.
   SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD AREA (SFHA). See definition of FLOODPLAIN.
   START OF CONSTRUCTION. Includes substantial improvement and means the date
the building permit was issued. This, provided the ACTUAL START OF
CONSTRUCTION, repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition placement or
other improvement, was within 180 days of the permit date. The ACTUAL START
means either the first placement of permanent construction of a structure on a
site, such as the pouring of slab or footings, the installation of piles, the
construction of columns or any work beyond the stage of excavation or placement
of a manufactured home on a foundation. For a substantial improvement, ACTUAL
START OF CONSTRUCTION means the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor or
other structural part of a building whether or not that alteration affects the
external dimensions of the building.
   STRUCTURE. See definition of BUILDING.
   SUBDIVISION. A division of a lot, tract, or parcel of land into two or more
lots, or other divisions of the land, including condominiums, planned unit
developments, for the purpose, whether immediate or future, of (1) transfer of
ownership, (2) building development, (3) redevelopment, or (4) lease, including
all changes in street lines.
   SUBSTANTIAL DAMAGE. Damage of any origin sustained by a structure whereby
the cumulative percentage of damage subsequent to the adoption of this chapter
equals or exceeds 50% of the market value of the structure before the damage
occurred regardless of actual repair work performed. Volunteer labor and
materials must be included in this determination. The term includes repetitive
loss buildings (see definition).
   SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVEMENT. Any reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition or
improvement of a structure subsequent to the adoption of this chapter, the cost
of which equals or exceeds 50% of the market value of the structure before the
improvement or repair is started, or increases the floor area by more than 20%.
SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVEMENT is considered to occur when the first alteration of any
wall, ceiling, floor or other structural part of the building commences,
whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the
structure. This term includes structures which have incurred repetitive loss or
substantial damage, regardless of the actual repair work done. The term does
not, however, include either:
      (1)   Any project for improvement of a structure to comply with existing
state or local health, sanitary or safety code specifications which are solely
necessary to assure safe living conditions; or
      (2)   Any alteration of a structure listed on the National Register of
Historic Places or the Illinois Register of Historic Places.
   VIOLATION. The failure of a structure or other development to be fully
compliant with the community’s floodplain management regulations. A structure
or other development without the required federal, state, and/or local permits
and elevation certification is presumed to be in VIOLATION until such time as
the documentation is provided.
(Ord. 13-09-1, passed 9-10-2013)
§ 151.03 BASE FLOOD ELEVATION.
   (A)   This chapter’s protection standard is the base flood. The best
available base flood data are listed below.
   (B)   Whenever a party disagrees with the best data available, the party
shall finance the detailed engineering study needed to replace the existing
data with better data and submit it to the village, the FEMA, and the IDNR/OWR
for approval prior to any development of the site.
   (C)   (1)   The base flood elevation for the floodplains of the Sangamon
River shall be as delineated on the 100 year profiles in the Countywide Flood
Insurance Study of Champaign County, Illinois prepared by the Federal Emergency
Management Agency dated October 2, 2013.
      (2)   The base flood elevation for each floodplain delineated as an “AH
Zone” or “AO Zone” shall be that elevation (or depth) delineated on the Flood
Insurance Rate Map of Champaign County, Illinois dated October 2, 2013.
      (3)   The base flood elevation for each of the remaining floodplains
delineated as an “A Zone” on the Flood Insurance Rate Map of the county shall
be according to the best data available from federal, state or other sources.
Should no other data exist, an engineering study must be financed by the
applicant to determine base flood elevations.
      (4)   The base flood elevation for the floodplains of those parts of
unincorporated Champaign County that are within the extraterritorial
jurisdiction of the village, or that may be annexed into the village, shall be
as delineated on the 100 year flood profiles of the Flood Insurance Study of
the county prepared by the Federal Emergency Management Agency dated October 2,
2013.
      (5)   The base flood elevation for the floodplains for any river, creek,
stream, ditch, or other identified major channel with an upstream drainage area
larger than one square mile in areas not designated on the Flood Insurance Rate
Map of the county shall be according to the best data available from federal,
state, or other sources. Should no other data exist, an engineering study must
be financed by the applicant to determine base flood elevations.
(Ord. 13-09-1, passed 9-10-2013)
§ 151.04 ADMINISTRATION.
   (A)   The Village Administrator and/or the person designated by the village
as the Building Inspector under the terms of the Village Zoning Ordinance shall
be responsible for the general administration of this chapter and ensure that
all development activities within the floodplains under the jurisdiction of the
village meet the requirements of this chapter.
   (B)   Specifically, the Village Administrator and/or the Building Inspector
shall:
      (1)   Review and process development permits in accordance with §
151.05;
      (2)   Assure that all development in a floodway (or a floodplain with no
delineated floodway) meets the damage prevention requirements of §
151.25;
      (3)   Assure that the building protection requirements for all buildings
subject to §
151.26 are met and maintain a record of the “as-built” elevation of the lowest
floor (including basement) or floodproof certificate for all buildings;
      (4)   Assure that all subdivisions and annexations meet the requirements
of §
151.27;
      (5)   Assure that water supply and waste disposal systems meet the public
health standards of §
151.28;
      (6)   Assure that all development activities within a special flood
hazard area or floodplain meet the requirements of this chapter;
      (7)   If a variance is requested, assure that the requirements of §
151.30 are met and maintain documentation of any variances granted;
      (8)   Observe all development projects and take any and all actions
outlined in §§
151.08, 151.11, and 151.99 as necessary to assure compliance with this chapter;
      (9)   Assure that applicants are aware of and obtain any and all other
required local, state and federal permits;
      (10)   Notify IDNR/OWR and any neighboring communities prior to any
alteration or relocation of a watercourse within a riverine special flood
hazard area;
      (11)   Provide information and assistance to citizens upon request about
permit procedures and floodplain construction techniques;
      (12)   Cooperate with state and federal floodplain management agencies to
coordinate base flood data and to improve the administration of this chapter;
      (13)   Maintain for public inspection base flood data, floodplain maps,
copies of state and
federal permits, and documentation of compliance for development activities
subject to this chapter;
      (14)   Perform site inspections and make substantial damage
determinations for structures within the floodplain;
      (15)   Maintain the accuracy of floodplain maps including notifying IDNR/
OWR and/or submitting information to FEMA within six months whenever a
modification of the floodplain may change the base flood elevation or result in
a change to the floodplain map; and
      (16)   Obtain technical assistance from the Village Engineer, State Water
Survey, IDNR/OWR or other appropriate and qualified individuals or agencies
whenever necessary for the administration and enforcement of this chapter.
(Ord. 13-09-1, passed 9-10-2013)
§ 151.05 FLOODPLAIN DEVELOPMENT PERMIT.
   (A)   No person, firm, corporation, or governmental body not exempted by law
shall commence any development in the floodplain without first obtaining a
floodplain development permit from the village. The Village Administrator and/
or Village Building Inspector shall not issue a floodplain development permit
if the proposed development does not meet the requirements of this chapter.
   (B)   (1)   Application for a floodplain development permit shall be
required for any of the following:
         (a)   Any development located on land identified as floodplain on the
current Flood Insurance Rate Map; or
         (b)   Any development located on land shown to be below the base flood
elevation and hydraulically connected to a flood source, but not identified as
floodplain on the current Flood Insurance Rate Map; or
         (c)   Any development located on land within 500 feet of a river,
stream, creek, or channel with a watershed area of one square mile or more for
which a floodplain has not been identified on the current Flood Insurance Rate
Map.
      (2)   Application for a floodplain development permit shall be made on a
form provided by the village and each application for floodplain development
permit shall be accompanied by:
         (a)   Drawings of the site, drawn to scale, showing property line
dimensions;
         (b)   Drawings of the site, drawn to scale, showing existing ground
elevations and all proposed changes in the ground elevations resulting from
excavation or filling;
         (c)   Drawings of the site, to scale, showing the location and
dimensions of all existing and proposed buildings and additions to buildings;
and
         (d)   The elevation of the lowest floor (including basement) of all
proposed buildings subject to the requirements of §
151.26 of this code.
         (e)   The application fee, as determined from time to time by a
resolution of the Board of Trustees.
         (f)   The base flood elevation for the development site, determined in
accordance with the provisions of this chapter.
         (g)   In the case of floodproofed structures, certification by a
licensed professional engineer or licensed architect that the floodproofing
methods are adequate to withstand the flood depths, pressures, velocities,
impact and uplift forces, and other factors associated with the base flood.
         (h)   Cost of the development as estimated by a licensed professional
engineer or licensed architect. A signed estimate by a contractor may also meet
this requirement.
         (i)   Drawings indicating the proposed wall and footing construction
in cross section in sufficient detail to prove compliance with this chapter and
including both the existing and the proposed ground elevations and the base
flood elevation.
         (j)   The existing or proposed elevation of any other part of the
development that is subject to the requirements of §§
151.26 and
151.28 of this code and drawings of that part of the development in sufficient
detail to prove compliance with this chapter or other submittals that may be
necessary to prove compliance with this chapter.
         (k)   Any other information or certification as may be reasonable
required by the Village Administrator in order to determine eligibility for
permits or to enforce the terms of this chapter.
         (l)   An application fee as determined by the Board of Trustees of the
village.
      (3)   Upon receipt of a fully complete application for a floodplain
development permit, the Village Administrator shall compare the elevation of
the site to the base flood elevation to determine which of the following
determinations is applicable:
         (a)   Any development located on land that is shown by survey
elevation to be below the current base flood elevation shall also be subject to
the provisions of §§
151.06 through
151.13,
151.25 through
151.31 and
151.99 of this code.
         (b)   Any development located on land shown to be below the base flood
elevation and hydraulically connected to a flood source, but not identified as
floodplain on the current Flood Insurance Rate Map, shall also be subject to
the provisions of §§
151.25 through
151.31 and
151.99 of this code.
         (c)   Any development located on land that can be shown by survey data
to be higher than the current base flood elevation and which has not been
filled after the date of the site’s first Flood Insurance Rate Map is not in
the floodplain and therefore not
subject to the provisions of §§
151.06 through
151.13,
151.25 through
151.31 and
151.99 of this code.
         (d)   Any development on land located within 500 feet of a river,
stream, creek or channel with a watershed of one square mile or more and any
portion of which is determined to be within a riverine floodplain shall also be
subject to the provisions of §§
151.06 through
151.13,
151.25 through
151.31 and
151.99 of this code.
      (4)   The Village Administrator shall maintain documentation of the
existing ground elevations at the development site and certification that these
ground elevations existed prior to the date of the site’s first Flood Insurance
Rate Map identification.
      (5)   The Village Administrator shall inform the applicant of any other
local, state and federal permits that may be required for the proposed
development activity.
      (6)   The Village Administrator shall be responsible for obtaining from
the applicant copies of all other federal, state and local permits, approvals
or permit-not-required letters that may be required for this type of activity.
The Village Administrator shall not issue a floodplain development permit
unless all other federal, state, and local permits have been obtained.
(Ord. 13-09-1, passed 9-10-2013) Penalty, see §
151.99
§ 151.06 OTHER REGULATIONS.
   Before starting any of the work regulated by this chapter, an applicant
shall comply with the requirements set forth in other applicable village
ordinances with respect to the submission and approval of preliminary and final
subdivision plats, improvements plans, zoning permits, building permits,
inspections, appeals, sanitary sewer connection permits, water supply
connection permits, and similar matters, along with those set forth in this
chapter and as may be required by federal or state laws and the regulations of
any department of the state. Where provisions of this chapter are more
restrictive than other requirements, the more restrictive provisions of this
chapter shall apply. Where provisions of other ordinances or regulations are
more restrictive than the requirements of this chapter, the more restrictive
provisions shall apply.
(Ord. 13-09-1, passed 9-10-2013)
§ 151.07 CERTIFICATE OF OCCUPANCY.
   It shall be unlawful to use or occupy any buildings or any development site
or any part thereof hereafter constructed in the special flood hazard area
without first making application for and obtaining a certificate of occupancy
from the village. Request for issuance of a certificate of occupancy shall be
submitted to the Building Inspector upon completion of the work authorized in
the floodplain development permit and building permit issued for the project in
question. If, upon final inspection of a building or development site, the
Building Inspector finds that the work has been performed in accordance with
the approved application and plans of the floodplain development permit and
building permit, certificate of occupancy may be issued. If final inspection
reveals otherwise, a certificate of occupancy may not be issued until all
deficiencies are corrected.
(Ord. 13-09-1, passed 9-10-2013) Penalty, see §
151.99
§ 151.08 PERMIT REVIEW.
   The Village Administrator shall examine each application for a floodplain
development permit within ten working days after filing. If, after examination,
it appears that the proposed development or use of the site will be in
compliance with this chapter and other ordinances and resolutions passed by the
Board of Trustees applicable thereto, the Village Administrator shall approve
the application and issue the appropriate permit as soon as practical. If the
examination reveals otherwise, the application shall be rejected and the
Village Administrator’s findings shall be set forth in
written notification, a copy of which shall be provided to the applicant.
(Ord. 13-09-1, passed 9-10-2013)
§ 151.09 FLOODPLAIN DEVELOPMENT PERMIT REQUIREMENTS.
   Floodplain development permit requirements shall be as follows.
   (A)   All work performed under a floodplain development permit shall conform
to the approved application and plans, and approved amendments thereto.
   (B)   A copy of the floodplain development permit shall be posted in a
conspicuous place on the premises, in plain view from a public road, during the
execution of the work and until completion of the same.
   (C)   A floodplain development permit under which no work is commenced
within six months after issuance shall expire by limitation and a new
floodplain development permit shall be secured before work is started.
(Ord. 13-09-1, passed 9-10-2013)
§ 151.10 CONSENT FOR INSPECTIONS.
   All work for which a floodplain development or building permit is required
shall be subject to inspection by the Building Inspector or his or her duly
authorized representative. It shall be unlawful to refuse to permit the
Building Inspector or his or her representative to enter the premises or
structure at any reasonable time to make an inspection. It shall be unlawful to
interfere with or hinder the Building Inspector or his or her representative
when in the performance of their duties.
(Ord. 13-09-1, passed 9-10-2013) Penalty, see §
151.99
§ 151.11 REVOCATION OF A FLOODPLAIN DEVELOPMENT PERMIT.
   The Village Administrator and/or Building Inspector may revoke a floodplain
development permit in a case where there has been any false statement or
misrepresentation as to a material fact in the application or plans on which
the permit was based. The Village Administrator and/or Building Inspector may
revoke a floodplain development permit when work is performed contrary to the
provisions of the application or plans on which the permit is based. When a
permit is revoked, the Building Inspector shall inform the permittee in writing
of the specific steps the permittee must take in order to have the permit
reissued. It shall be unlawful to continue any work authorized by a floodplain
development permit after revocation of that permit and until the permit is
reissued or until a new permit is issued.
(Ord. 13-09-1, passed 9-10-2013) Penalty, see §
151.99
§ 151.12 COMPLETION OF WORK HERETOFORE AUTHORIZED.
   Nothing in this chapter shall require retroactive changes in the plans,
construction or designated use of a building or other development project or
portion thereof which has been otherwise lawfully authorized, or the
construction of which shall have been actually begun and which entire building
or development project shall be completed within one year of the effective date
of this chapter.
(Ord. 13-09-1, passed 9-10-2013)
§ 151.13 APPLICATION FEES.
   An application for a floodplain development permit shall be accompanied by
an application fee. The application fee for a floodplain development permit
shall be as determined from time to time by resolution adopted by the Board of
Trustees. This application fee shall be in addition to any other application
fees required for other permits required for development upon the site.
(Ord. 13-09-1, passed 9-10-2013)
SPECIFIC PROVISIONS
§ 151.25 PREVENTING INCREASED FLOOD HEIGHTS AND RESULTING DAMAGES.
   Within the floodway identified on the flood insurance rate map, and within
all other floodplains within a riverine special flood hazard area where a
floodway has not been delineated, the following standards shall apply.
   (A)   Except as provided in division (B) below, no development shall be
allowed which, acting in combination with existing and anticipated development,
will cause a significant increase in flood heights or a damaging increase in
velocities of flow or a threat to public health and safety. The following
specific development activities shall be considered as meeting this
requirement:
      (1)   Bridge and culvert crossings of streams in rural areas meeting the
conditions of the IDNR/OWR Statewide Permit No. 2;
      (2)   Barge fleeting facilities meeting the conditions of IDNR/OWR
Statewide Permit No. 3;
      (3)    Aerial utility crossings meeting the conditions of IDNR/OWR
Statewide Permit No. 4;
      (4)    Minor boat docks meeting the conditions of IDNR/OWR Statewide
Permit No. 5;
      (5)   Minor, non-obstructive activities such as underground utility
lines, light poles, sign posts, driveways, athletic fields, patios, playground
equipment, minor storage buildings not exceeding 70 square feet in area and
raising buildings on the same footprint which does not involve fill and any
other activity meeting the conditions of IDNR/OWR Statewide Permit No 6;
      (6)   Outfall structures and drainage ditch outlets meeting the
conditions of IDNR/OWR Statewide Permit No. 7;
      (7)   Underground pipeline and utility crossings meeting the conditions
of IDNR/OWR Statewide Permit No. 8;
      (8)   Bank stabilization projects meeting the conditions of IDNR/OWR
Statewide Permit No. 9;
      (9)   Accessory structures and additions to existing residential
buildings meeting the conditions of IDNR/OWR Statewide Permit No. 10;
      (10)   Minor maintenance dredging activities meeting the conditions of
IDNR/OWR Statewide Permit No. 11;
      (11)   Bridge and culvert replacement structures and bridge widenings
meeting the conditions of IDNR/OWR Statewide Permit No. 12;
      (12)   Temporary construction activities meeting the conditions of IDNR/
OWR Statewide Permit No. 13;
      (13)   Any development determined to be located entirely within a flood
fringe area shall be exempt from the state floodway permit requirements; and
      (14)   Any other activities for which IDNR/OWR issues a statewide permit
in the future, which meets the requirements of that statewide permit.
   (B)   Other development activities not listed in division (A) above may be
permitted only if:
      (1)   A permit has been issued for the work by IDNR/OWR (or written
documentation is provided that an IDNR/OWR permit is not required); or
      (2)   Sufficient data has been provided to FEMA when necessary, and
approval obtained from FEMA for a revision of the regulatory map and base flood
elevation; or
      (3)   The development activity is located in a riverine floodplain that
is not part of an IDNR/OWR jurisdictional stream and which has a watershed area
of less than one square mile.
   (C)   Within all other floodplains of a riverine special flood hazard area
where a floodplain or a floodway has not been identified or delineated on the
Flood Insurance Rate Maps, the following standards shall apply:
      (1)   The total cumulative effect of the proposed development when
combined with all other existing development, will not increase the base flood
elevation more than one foot for the affected hydraulic reach of the stream and
will not increase flood damage or potential flood damage; and
      (2)   The requirements of the Village Stormwater Management Ordinance
codified in Chapter 51 shall be adhered to with respect to any modifications to
the channel or the floodplain.
(Ord. 13-09-1, passed 9-10-2013)
§ 151.26 PROTECTING BUILDINGS AND BUILDING RELATED DEVELOPMENT.
   (A)   In addition to the state permit damage prevention requirements of §
151.25 of this code, all buildings and building related development located in
the floodplain shall be protected from flood damage below the flood protection
elevation. This building protection requirement applies to the following
situations:
      (1)   Construction or placement of a new building or alteration or
addition to an existing building and/or building related development valued at
more than $1,000 or 70 square feet.
      (2)   Substantial improvements or structural alterations made to an
existing building and/or building related development that increase the floor
area by more than 20% or equal or exceed the market value by 50%. Alteration
shall be figured cumulatively subsequent to the adoption of this chapter. If
substantially improved, the existing structure and the addition must meet the
flood protection standards of this section.
      (3)   Repairs made to a substantially damaged building and/or building
related development. These repairs shall be figured cumulatively subsequent to
the adoption of this chapter. If substantially damaged the entire structure
must meet the flood protection standards of this section within 24 months of
the date the damage occurred.
      (4)   Installing a manufactured home on a new site or a new manufactured
home on an existing site. (The building protection requirements do not apply to
returning a manufactured home to the same site it lawfully occupied before it
was removed to avoid flood damage).
      (5)   Installing a travel trailer and recreational vehicle on a site for
more than 180 days per year.
      (6)   Repetitive loss to an existing building and/or building related
development as defined in §
151.02. If repetitive loss occurs the entire structure must meet the flood
protection standards of this section within 24 months of the date the damage
occurred.
   (B)   Residential or non-residential buildings can meet the building
protection requirements of division (A) above by one of the following methods.
      (1)   The building may be constructed on permanent clean fill utilizing
compacted earthen materials in accordance with the following:
         (a)   The lowest floor (including basement) shall be at or above the
flood protection elevation;
         (b)   The fill shall be placed in layers no greater than one foot
before compaction and should extend at least ten feet beyond the foundation
before sloping below the flood protection elevation;
         (c)   The fill shall be protected against erosion and scour during
flooding by vegetative cover, riprap or other structural measure;
         (d)   The fill shall be composed of rock or soil and not incorporate
any debris or refuse materials;
         (e)   The fill shall not adversely affect the flow of surface drainage
from or onto neighboring properties and when necessary, stormwater management
techniques such as swales or basins shall be incorporated; and
         (f)   Footings shall be placed on undisturbed earth or a licensed
professional engineer shall certify in writing that the building shall be
reasonably safe from flooding.
      (2)   The building or building related development may be elevated in
accordance with the following:
         (a)   The building or improvements and/or building related development
shall be elevated on stilts, piles, walls or other foundation that is
permanently open to floodwaters;
         (b)   The lowest floor and all electrical, heating, ventilating,
plumbing, and air conditioning equipment and utility meters on the property
shall be located at or above the flood protection elevation except that the
water and sewer pipes, electrical lines, telephone lines, submersible pumps and
other service facilities may be located below the flood protection elevation
provided they are waterproofed;
         (c)   The foundation and supporting members shall be anchored and
aligned in relation to flood flows and adjoining structures so as to minimize
exposure to hydrodynamic forces such as current, waves, ice and floating
debris;
         (d)   If walls are used to elevate the building and/or building
related development, all enclosed areas below the flood protection elevation
shall address hydrostatic pressures by allowing the automatic entry and exit of
floodwaters. Designs must either be certified by a licensed professional
engineer or by having a minimum of one permanent opening on each wall no more
than one foot above grade with a minimum of two openings per enclosed area. The
openings shall provide a total net area of not less than one square inch of
opening for every one square foot of enclosed area subject to flooding below
the base flood elevation. Insect screens may cover flood openings provided that
the insect screen does not unduly impede the entry and exit of floodwaters;
         (e)   The finished interior grade shall not be less than the finished
exterior grade;
         (f)   All structural components below the flood protection elevation
shall be constructed of materials resistant to flood damage;
         (g)   The area below the flood protection elevation shall be used
solely for parking or building access and not later modified or occupied as
habitable space;
         (h)   Footings shall be placed on undisturbed earth or a licensed
professional engineer shall certify in writing that the building shall be
reasonable safe from flooding; and
         (i)   In lieu of the above criteria, the design methods to comply with
these requirements may be certified by a licensed professional engineer or
licensed architect.
      (3)   The building and/or building related development may be constructed
with a crawlspace
located below the flood protection elevation provided that the following
conditions are met:
         (a)   The building and/or building related development must be
designed and adequately anchored to resist flotation, collapse, and lateral
movement of the structure resulting from hydrodynamic and hydrostatic loads,
including the effects of buoyancy;
         (b)   Any enclosed area below the flood protection elevation shall
have openings that equalize hydrostatic pressures by allowing for the automatic
entry and exit of floodwaters. There shall be a minimum of one opening on each
wall having a total net area of not less than one square inch of open area per
one square foot of enclosed area subject to flooding below the base flood
elevation. The openings shall be no more than one foot above grade with a
minimum of two openings per enclosed area. Insect screens may cover flood
openings provided that the insect screen does not unduly impede the entry and
exit of floodwaters;
         (c)   The interior grade of the crawlspace below the flood protection
elevation must not be more than two feet below the lowest adjacent exterior
grade;
         (d)   The interior height of the crawlspace measured from the interior
grade of the crawlspace to the top of the foundation wall must not exceed four
feet at any point;
         (e)   An adequate drainage system must be installed to remove
floodwaters from the interior area of the crawlspace within a reasonable period
of time after a flood event;
         (f)   Portions of the building and/or building related development
below the flood protection elevation must be constructed with materials
resistant to flood damage;
         (g)   Utility systems within the crawlspace and outside of the
crawlspace including all electrical, heating, ventilating, plumbing, air
conditioning equipment, and utility meters on the property, must be elevated
above the flood protection elevation except for the following:
            1.   Water and sewer pipes, electrical and telephone lines,
submersible pumps, and other service facilities may be located below the flood
protection elevation provided they are waterproofed;
            2.   Fuel storage tanks must either be elevated above the flood
protection elevation or adequately anchored to prevent flotation following
manufacturer’s recommendations and protected from flood debris impact.
         (h)   Footings shall be placed on undisturbed earth or a licensed
professional engineer shall certify in writing that the building shall be
reasonably safe from flooding.
   (C)   Manufactured homes or travel trailers to be permanently installed on
site must be in conformance with the Zoning Ordinance and shall be:
      (1)   Elevated to or above the flood protection elevation; and
      (2)   Anchored to resist flotation, collapse or lateral movement by being
tied down in accordance with the Rules and Regulations for the Illinois Mobile
Home Tie-Down Act issued pursuant to 77 Ill. Adm. Code 870.
   (D)   Travel trailers and recreational vehicles on site for more than 180
days per year shall meet the elevation requirements of division (C) above
unless the following conditions are met:
      (1)   The vehicle must be either self-propelled or towable by a light
duty truck. The hitch must remain on the vehicle at all times;
      (2)   The vehicle must not be attached to external structures such as
decks and porches;
      (3)   The vehicle must be designed solely for recreation, camping, travel
or seasonal use rather than as a permanent dwelling;
      (4)   The vehicle’s largest horizontal projections must be no larger than
400 square feet;
      (5)   The vehicle’s wheels must remain on the axles and with inflated
tires;
      (6)   Air conditioning units must be attached to the frame so as to be
safe for movement out of the floodplain;
      (7)   Propane tanks as well as electrical, water and sewage connections
must be quick- disconnect. Propane tanks must also be either elevated above the
flood protection elevation or adequately anchored to prevent flotation
following manufacturer’s recommendations and protected from flood debris
impact;
      (8)   The vehicle must be licensed and titled as a recreational vehicle
or park model; and
      (9)   The vehicle must be either:
         (a)   Entirely supported by jacks rather than blocks; or
         (b)   Have a hitch jack permanently mounted, have the tires touching
the ground, and be supported by blocks in a manner that will allow the blocks
to be easily removed by use of the hitch jack.
   (E)   Garages, sheds or other accessory structures constructed ancillary to
a residential use may be permitted but must meet the building protection
requirements of division (B) above unless the following conditions are met:
      (1)   The accessory structure must be non-habitable;
      (2)   The accessory structure must be used only for the storage of
vehicles and tools and cannot be modified later into another use;
      (3)   The accessory structure must be located outside of the floodway or
have the appropriate state and/or federal permits to be located within the
floodway;
      (4)   The accessory structure must be on a residential lot and be
accessory to an existing principal structure on the same lot;
      (5)   Below the flood protection elevation, the accessory structure must
be built of materials not susceptible to flood damage;
      (6)   All utilities, plumbing, heating, air conditioning, and electrical
must be elevated above the flood protection elevation except that water and
sewer pipes, electrical and telephone lines, submersible pumps, and other
service facilities may be located below the flood protection elevation provided
they are waterproofed;
      (7)   The garage or shed must have at least one permanent opening on each
wall not more than one foot above grade. The openings shall provide a total net
area of not less than one square inch of opening for every one square foot of
enclosed area subject to flooding below the base flood elevation. Insect
screens may cover flood openings provided that the insect screen does not
unduly impede the entry and exit of floodwaters;
      (8)   The accessory structure must have a market value or replacement
cost of less than $15,000, whichever is greater, or be less than 576 square
feet in area;
      (9)   The accessory structure shall be anchored to resist flotation and
overturning. Footings shall be placed on undisturbed earth or a licensed
professional engineer shall certify in writing that the building shall be
reasonably safe from flooding;
      (10)   All flammable or toxic materials (gasoline, paint, insecticides,
fertilizers, etc.) shall be stored above the flood protection elevation; and
      (11)   The lowest floor elevation shall be documented and the owner
advised of the flood insurance implications.
   (F)   Non-residential buildings and/or non-residential building related
development may be structurally dry floodproofed (in lieu of elevation) to meet
the building protection requirements of division (B) above provided a licensed
professional engineer or licensed architect certifies that:
      (1)   Below the flood protection elevation the structure and attendant
utility facilities are watertight and capable of resisting the effects of the
base flood;
      (2)   The design accounts for flood velocities, duration, rate of rise,
hydrostatic and hydrodynamic forces, the effects of buoyancy, and the impact
from debris and ice;
      (3)   Floodproofing measures shall be incorporated into the design and
operable without human intervention and without an outside source of
electricity;
      (4)   Levees, berms, floodwalls and similar works are not considered
floodproofing for the purpose of this division; and
      (5)   Footings shall be placed on undisturbed earth or a licensed
professional engineer shall certify in writing that the building shall be
reasonably safe from flooding.
   (G)   All buildings and/or building related development located upon a
property, a portion of which is located in the floodplain, shall be protected
from flood damage below the flood protection elevation. The requirements of
division (B) above shall also apply with respect to the regulated situations.
Residential or non-residential buildings can meet the building protection
requirements by the following methods:
      (1)   The buildings shall be located not less than ten feet away from the
floodplain, and the ground surrounding the building shall extend at least ten
feet beyond the foundation before sloping below the flood protection elevation;
      (2)   The lowest floor (including basement) shall be at or above the
flood protection elevation level; or
      (3)   All portions of the building below the flood protection elevation
shall be constructed of materials resistant to flood damage with all utilities
elevated above the flood protection elevation except that water and sewer
pipes, electrical lines, and other service facilities may be located below the
flood protection elevation provided that they are waterproofed.
(Ord. 13-09-1, passed 9-10-2013)
§ 151.27 SUBDIVISION REQUIREMENTS.
   The Board of Trustees and Plan and Zoning Commission shall take into account
flood hazards, to the extent that they are known, in all official actions
related to land management, use and development.
   (A)   New subdivisions, manufactured home parks, annexation agreements,
planned unit developments, and additions to manufactured home parks and
subdivisions shall meet the damage prevention and building protection standards
of §§
151.25 and
151.26.
   (B)   Any proposals for such development shall include the following data:
      (1)   The base flood elevation and the boundary of the floodplain. Where
the base flood elevation is not available from an existing study, the applicant
shall be responsible for calculating the base flood elevation and submitting
those analyses to the Village Engineer for review and approval as best
available regulatory data;
      (2)   The boundary of the floodway when applicable;
      (3)   A signed statement by a licensed professional engineer that the
proposed plat or plan accounts for changes in the drainage of surface waters in
accordance with the Plat Act (ILCS Ch. 765, Act 205, § 2); and
      (4)   Streets, blocks lots, parks and other public grounds shall be
located and laid out in such a manner as to preserve and utilize natural
streams and channels. Wherever possible the floodplains shall be included
within parks, common areas or other public grounds.
(Ord. 13-09-1, passed 9-10-2013)
§ 151.28 PUBLIC HEALTH AND OTHER STANDARDS.
   (A)   Public health standards must be met for all floodplain development. In
addition to the requirements of §§
151.25 and
151.26, the following standards also apply:
      (1)   No development in the floodplain shall include locating or storing
chemicals, explosives, buoyant materials, flammable liquids, pollutants or
other hazardous or toxic materials below the flood protection elevation unless
those materials are stored in a floodproofed and anchored storage tank and
certified by a licensed professional engineer or floodproofed building
constructed according to the requirements of §
151.26;
      (2)   Public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas and electric
shall be located and constructed to minimize or eliminate flood damage;
      (3)   Public sanitary sewer systems and water supply systems shall be
located and constructed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters
into the systems and discharges from the systems into floodwaters;
      (4)   New and replacement on-site sanitary sewer lines or waste disposal
systems shall be located and constructed to avoid impairment to them or
contamination from them during flooding. Manholes or other above ground
openings located below the flood protection elevation shall be watertight; and
      (5)   Construction of new or substantially improved critical facilities
shall be located outside the limits of the floodplain whenever possible.
Construction of new critical facilities shall be permissible within the
floodplain if no feasible alternative site is available and subject to the
following criteria:
         (a)   Critical facilities constructed within the SFHA shall have the
lowest floor (including basement) elevated or structurally dry floodproofed to
the 500 year flood frequency elevation or three feet above the level of the
base flood elevation, whichever is greater;
         (b)   Floodproofing and sealing measures must be taken to ensure that
toxic substances will not be displaced by or released into floodwaters; and
         (c)   Access routes elevated to or above the level of the base flood
elevation shall be provided to all critical facilities.
   (B)   All other activities defined as development shall be designated so as
not to alter flood flows or increase potential flood damages.
(Ord. 13-09-1, passed 9-10-2013)
§ 151.29 CHANNEL CARRYING CAPACITY.
   For all projects involving channel modification, channel fill, or stream
maintenance (including levees), the flood carrying capacity of the watercourse
shall not be adversely impacted. The total cumulative effect of the proposed
project when combined with other existing development will not increase the
base flood elevation more than one foot for the affected hydraulic reach of the
stream and will not increase flood damage or potential flood damage.
(Ord. 13-09-1, passed 9-10-2013)
§ 151.30 VARIANCES.
   (A)   Whenever the standards of this chapter place undue hardship on a
specific development proposal, the applicant may apply to the Board of Appeals
for a variance.
   (B)   The Village Administrator and the Plan and Zoning Commission shall
review the applicant’s request for a variance and shall submit its
recommendation to the Board of Appeals.
   (C)   The Board of Appeals shall consider the request and make a final
determination within a reasonable time.
   (D)   The Board of Appeals may attach the conditions to granting of a
variance as it deems necessary to further the intent of this chapter.
      (1)   No variations shall be granted unless the applicant demonstrates
that the following conditions are met:
         (a)   The development activity cannot be located outside the
floodplain;
         (b)   A significant hardship would result if the variance were not
granted;
         (c)   The relief requested is the minimum necessary;
         (d)   There will be no additional threat to public health or safety,
or creation of a nuisance;
         (e)   There will be no additional public expense for flood protection,
rescue or relief operations, policing, or repairs to roads, utilities or other
public facilities;
         (f)   The applicant’s circumstances are unique or unusual and do not
establish a pattern inconsistent with the intent of the NFIP; and
         (g)   All other required state and federal permits have been obtained.
      (2)   The Board of Appeals shall notify an applicant in writing that a
variance from the requirements of the building protection standards of §
151.26 that would lessen the degree of protection to a building will:
         (a)   Result in increased premium rates for flood insurance up to $25
per $100 of insurance coverage;
         (b)   Increase the risks to life and property; and
         (c)   Require that the applicant proceed with knowledge of these risks
and that the applicant acknowledge in writing the assumption of the risk and
liability.
      (3)   Historic structures. Variances to the building protection
requirements of §
151.26 which are requested in connection with the reconstruction, repair or
alteration of a historic site or historic structure as defined in §
151.02 of this code may be granted using criteria more permissive than the
requirements of §§
151.26 and
151.27, subject to the conditions that:
         (a)   The repair or rehabilitation is the minimum necessary to
preserve the historic character and design of the structure; and
         (b)   The repair or rehabilitation will not result in the structure
being removed as a certified historic structure.
      (4)   Agriculture. Any variance granted for an agricultural structure
shall be decided individually based on a case by case analysis of the
building’s unique circumstances. In order to minimize flood damages during the
100 year flood and the threat to public health and safety, the following
conditions shall be included for any variance issued for agricultural
structures that are constructed at grade and wet floodproofed:
         (a)   All agricultural structures considered for a variance from the
floodplain management regulations of this chapter shall demonstrate that the
structure is located in wide, expansive floodplain areas and no other alternate
location outside of the special flood hazard area exists for the agricultural
structure. Residential structures such as farm houses cannot be considered
agricultural structures;
         (b)   Use of the structures must be limited to agricultural purposes;
         (c)   For any new or substantially damaged agricultural structures,
the exterior and the interior building components and elements (i.e.,
foundation, wall framing, exterior and finishes, flooring, etc.) below the base
flood elevation, must be built with flood resistant materials in accordance
with §
151.26 of this code;
         (d)   Agricultural structures must be adequately anchored to prevent
flotation, collapse, or lateral movement of the structures in accordance with §
151.26. All of the building’s structural components must be capable of
resisting specific flood related forces including hydrostatic, buoyancy, and
hydrodynamic and debris impact forces;
         (e)   Any mechanical, electrical, or other utility equipment must be
located above the base flood elevation or floodproofed so that they are
contained within a watertight, floodproofed enclosure that is capable of
resisting damage during flood conditions in accordance with §
151.26;
         (f)   The NFIP requires that enclosures or foundation walls, subject
to the 100 year flood, contain openings that will permit the automatic entry
and exit of floodwaters in accordance with §
151.26(B);
         (g)   The agricultural structures must comply with the floodplain
management floodway provisions of §
151.25. No variances may be issued for agricultural structures within any
designated floodway; and
         (h)   Wet floodproofing techniques must be viewed and approved by the
Village Administrator and a licensed professional engineer or architect prior
to the issuance of any floodplain development permit for construction.
      (5)   Upon application for a variance, a public hearing shall be held by
the Village Board of Appeals. No less than 15 days’ and no more than 30 days’
notice shall be given in a newspaper of general circulation in the village. The
Plan and Zoning Commission shall review the request for a variance, and shall
submit its advisory opinion on the application. The Board of Appeals shall fix
a reasonable time for the hearing of the variance request. Every decision of
the Board of Appeals shall be by resolution, each of which shall contain a full
record of the findings of the Board in a particular case. Each resolution shall
be filed with the Village Clerk.
(Ord. 13-09-1, passed 9-10-2013)
§ 151.31 DISCLAIMER OF LIABILITY.
   The degree of protection required by this chapter is considered reasonable
for regulatory purposes and is based on available information derived from
engineering and scientific methods of study. Larger floods may occur or flood
heights may be increased by man-made or natural causes. This chapter does not
imply that development either inside or outside of the floodplain will be free
from flooding or damage. This chapter does not create liability on the part of
the village, or any officer or employee thereof for any flood damage that
results from proper reliance on this chapter or any administrative decision
made lawfully thereunder.
(Ord. 13-09-1, passed 9-10-2013)
§ 151.32 ABROGATION AND GREATER RESTRICTIONS.
   This chapter repeals and replaces other ordinances adopted by the village to
fulfill the requirements of the National Flood Insurance Program including Ord.
87-3-1 and Ord. 02-12-03. However, this chapter does not repeal the original
resolution or ordinance adopted to achieve eligibility in the program. Nor does
this chapter repeal, abrogate or impair any existing easements, covenants or
deed restrictions. Where this chapter and other ordinances, easements,
covenants or deed restrictions conflict or overlap, whichever imposes the more
stringent restrictions shall prevail.
(Ord. 13-09-1, passed 9-10-2013)
§ 151.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Failure to obtain a permit for development in the floodplain or
failure to comply with the conditions of a permit or a variance shall be deemed
to be a violation of this chapter.
   (B)   Upon due investigation, the Village Administrator may determine that a
violation of the minimum standards of this chapter exists. The Village
Administrator shall notify the property owner in writing of such violation.
      (1)   If such owner fails after ten days of notice to correct the
violation:
         (a)   The Village Administrator may make application to the circuit
court for an injunction
requiring conformance with this chapter or make such other order as the court
deems necessary to secure compliance with the chapter.
         (b)   Any person who violates this chapter shall upon conviction
thereof be fined not less than $50 nor more than $500 for each offense; and
         (c)   A separate offense shall be deemed committed upon each day
during or on which a violation occurs or continues.
         (d)   The Village Administrator may record a notice of violation on
the title to the property.
         (e)   The Village Administrator may implement proceedings to revoke
any site development permit, zoning use permit, or building permit for the
site.
      (2)   The Village Administrator shall inform the owner that any such
violation is considered a willful act to increase flood damages and therefore
may cause coverage by a standard flood insurance policy to be suspended.
      (3)   Nothing herein shall prevent the village from taking such other
lawful action to prevent or remedy any violations. All costs connected
therewith shall accrue to the person or persons responsible.
      (4)   The Village Administrator is authorized to issue an order requiring
the suspension of any development in violation of this chapter. The stop work
order shall be in writing, indicate the reason for the issuance, and shall
order the action, if necessary, to resolve the circumstances requiring the stop
work order. The stop work order constitutes a suspension of the floodplain
development permit.
      (5)   No site development permit, zoning use permit, or building permit
shall be permanently suspended or revoked until a hearing is held by the Board
of Appeals.
         (a)   Written notice of such hearing shall be served on the permittee
and shall state the following:
            1.   The grounds for the complaint, reasons for suspension or
revocation; and
            2.   The time and place of the hearing.
         (b)   At such hearing the permittee shall be given an opportunity to
present evidence on his or her behalf.
      (c)   At the conclusion of the hearing, the Board of Appeals shall
determine whether the permit shall be suspended or revoked.
(Ord. 13-09-1, passed 9-10-2013)
CHAPTER 152: ZONING CODE
Section
General Provisions
   
152.001   Purpose
   
152.002   Definitions
   
152.003   Compliance with regulations
   
152.004   Nature
   
152.005   Districts
   
152.006   Boundaries
District Regulations
   
152.020   AG Agricultural District
   
152.021   AC Conservation District
   
152.022   R-1A Single-Family Residential District
   
152.023   R-1B Single-Family Residential District
   
152.024   R-1C Single-Family Residential District
   
152.025   R-2 Two-Family Residential District
   
152.026   R-3A Multiple-Family Residential District
   
152.027   R-3B Multiple-Family Residential District
   
152.028   R-3C Multiple-Family Residential District
   
152.029   R-3G Multiple-Family Residential District
   
152.030   C-1 Neighborhood Commercial District
   
152.031   C-2 General Commercial District
   
152.032   C-3 Planned Commercial District
   
152.033   C-4 Planned Mixed Use District
   
152.034   I-1 Planned Industrial District
   
152.035   I-2 Industrial District
   
152.036   FP Forest Preserve District
Other Use Regulations
   
152.045   Large scale residential developments
   
152.046   Accessory buildings and uses
   
152.047   Mobile homes
   
152.048   Row houses
   
152.049   Utilities
   
152.050   Other regulations
   
152.051   Home occupations
   
152.052   Assisted living retirement communities
   
152.053   Standards for drive-through uses
   
152.054   Animal use requirements
   
152.055   Standards for multiple- family residential development
   
152.056   Chickens (hens only)
Regulations Regarding Signs
   
152.065   Purpose
   
152.066   Measurement standards and definitions
   
152.067   Permits for signs
   
152.068   Signs allowed in all districts without a permit
   
152.069   Temporary signs allowed with a special (temporary) permit
   
152.070   Prohibited signs
   
152.071   Residential districts
   
152.072   Commercial districts
   
152.073   Industrial districts
   
152.074   Outdoor advertising signs
   
152.075   Nonconforming signs
   
152.076   Existing signs
   
152.077   Standards by sign type
   
152.078   Enforcement procedures
Area, Height and Yard Regulations
   
152.090   Requirements
   
152.091   Area and height modifications
Off-Street Parking
   
152.105   Requirements
   
152.106   Rules for computing
   
152.107   Location of required parking spaces
   
152.108   Minimum improvement and maintenance standards
Conditional Uses
   
152.120   Generally
   
152.121   Requirements for conditional uses
Nonconforming Uses
   
152.135   Use of land, nonconforming
   
152.136   Use of buildings, nonconforming
   
152.137   Discontinuance of nonconforming uses
   
152.138   Destruction of a nonconforming use
   
152.139   Nonconforming advertising signs
   
152.140   Mobile homes or trailers
   
152.141   Conditional uses not nonconforming
   
152.142   Intermittent use
Board of Appeals
   
152.155   Composition
   
152.156   Duties
   
152.157   Powers
   
152.158   Procedure
Administration and Enforcement
   
152.170   Generally
   
152.171   Building permits
   
152.172   Certificate of occupancy
   
152.173   Amendment
   
152.174   Interpretation
 
   
152.999   Penalty
   
Appendix A: Sign illustrations
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 152.001 PURPOSE.
   (A)   This chapter has been prepared in accordance with a Comprehensive Plan
and is adopted in order to protect and to promote adequate light, pure air and
safety from fire and other dangers; that the taxable value of land and
buildings throughout the municipality and contiguous area may be conserved,
that congestion in the public streets may be lessened or avoided, and that the
public health, safety, comfort, morals and welfare may otherwise be promoted.
   (B)   Specifically, the powers of this chapter are as follows:
      (1)   To regulate and limit the height and bulk of buildings hereafter to
be erected;
      (2)   To establish, regulate and limit the buildings or setback lines on
or along any street, traffic-way, drive or parkway;
      (3)   To regulate and limit the intensity of the use of lot areas, and to
regulate and determine the area of open spaces, within and surrounding the
buildings;
      (4)   To regulate and restrict the location of trades and industries and
the location of buildings designed for specified industrial, business,
residential and other uses;
      (5)   To divide the entire municipality and all contiguous unincorporated
territory within one and one-half miles of the city corporate limits into
districts of a number, shape, area and of the different classes (according to
use of land and buildings, height and bulk of buildings, intensity of the use
of lot area, area of open spaces or other classifications) as may be deemed
best suited to carry out the purposes of this chapter;
      (6)   To prohibit uses, buildings or structures incompatible with the
character of the districts; and
      (7)   To prevent additions to and alterations or remodeling of existing
buildings or structures in a way so as to avoid the restrictions and
limitations lawfully imposed under this chapter.
(Ord. passed 7-23-2002)
§ 152.002 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning. The word
LOT includes the word PLOT or PARCEL; the word BUILDING includes the word
STRUCTURE; the word SHALL is always mandatory; the word USED or OCCUPIED as
applied to any land or building shall be construed to include the words
INTENDED, ARRANGED OR DESIGNED TO BE USED OR OCCUPIED.
   ACCESSORY BUILDINGS AND USES. A subordinate building or a portion of the
main building, the use of which is incidental to, or customarily found in
connection with, and (except as otherwise provided in this chapter) located on
the same lot as the use of the main building or principal use of the land. An
ACCESSORY USE is one, which is incidental to, or customarily found in
connection with, (except as otherwise provided in this chapter) on the same lot
as, the main use of the premises. When ACCESSORY is used in the text, it shall
have the same meaning as ACCESSORY USE.
   AGRICULTURAL ACTIVITY. The growing, harvesting and storage of crops,
including legumes, hay, grain, fruit or vegetables, truck gardening,
floriculture, horticulture, mushroom growing, orchards, forestry; and the
keeping, raising and feeding of livestock or poultry (except commercial feed
lots), including dairy, poultry, swine, sheep, beef cattle, pony and horse
production.
   ALTERATIONS, USE. A change or rearrangement of the structural parts of a
building or structure such as foundations, bearing walls, columns, beams or
girders; or the expansion or enlargement of the building or structure to
accommodate a change in the use. ALTERATIONS shall not include painting, window
replacement, siding replacement, wallpapering, repaneling, wallboard repair,
roof repairs or other similar activities.
   ANIMAL BOARDING. An establishment offering indoor overnight care for
domestic pet animals but not including an animal hospital in which the
overnight boarding of animals is necessary for and accessory to the diagnosis
and medical treatment of the physical disorders of animals.
   ANIMAL CLINIC. Any establishment used for the offices of one or more
licensed veterinarians for the examination and treatment of animals on an out-
patient basis only.
   ANIMAL DAYCARE. An establishment offering indoor non-overnight care for
domestic pet animals.
   ANIMAL GROOMING. Indoor services provided to domestic pet animals including
clipping, bathing and related services.
   ANIMAL HOSPITAL. Any establishment which is devoted primarily to the
maintenance and operation of facilities for the diagnosis and treatment or care
of animals which may be admitted for overnight stay or longer in order to
obtain veterinary treatment for illnesses, diseases, injuries and deformities.
   ANIMAL RUN. An enclosed outdoor area intended for the exercising and/or
containment of dogs and similar animals in the context of a commercial
establishment.
   ASSISTED LIVING RETIREMENT COMMUNITY. A residential complex developed as a
cohesive unit containing multi-family dwellings designed for and principally
occupied by senior citizens. Those facilities may include a congregate meals
program in a common dining area, but excludes institutional care such as is
provided by a nursing home. The facility generally provides residents with a
program of assisted living services to deal with the activities of daily
living, and may include limited assistance with medical issues.
   BED AND BREAKFAST ESTABLISHMENT. An operator-occupied residence providing
accommodations for a charge to the public with no more than two guestrooms for
rent. Breakfast only may be provided exclusively to the guests of the facility.
BED AND BREAKFAST ESTABLISHMENTS shall not include motels, hotels, boarding
houses or food service establishments. OPERATOR shall mean the owner of the bed
and breakfast establishment, or the owner’s agent, who is required by
definition to reside in the bed and breakfast establishment. The GUEST ROOM
shall mean a sleeping room intended to serve no more than two transient guests
per night, for no more than seven consecutive nights.
   BLOCK FRONT. All of the property on one side of the street between two
intersecting streets or between an intersecting street and the dead-end of a
street.
   BUILDING. Any structure including a roof supported by walls, designed or
intended for the support, enclosure, shelter or protection of persons, animals,
chattels or property forming a construction that is safe and stable; the word
BUILDING shall include the word structure.
   BUILDING, ATTACHED. A building having one or more walls in common with
another building or located within two feet of another building. Breezeways
between two buildings that provide a roof, but no enclosing walls shall not be
considered as making two BUILDINGS ATTACHED.
   BUILDING, DETACHED. A building having no walls in common with another
building and located more than two feet away from another building.
   BUILDING, HEIGHT OF.  The vertical distance from the grade (elevation of
curb, sidewalk or average elevation of the ground around the structure) to the
highest point of the coping of a flat roof, or to the deck line of a mansard
roof, or to the mean height level between eaves and ridge for gable, hip or
gambrel roofs.
   BUILDING INSPECTOR. The person designated by the Village Administrator to
perform inspections of the construction of buildings, structures and
improvements within the village to determine conformance with various village
ordinances and standards.
   BUILDING, ROW HOUSE. A building which contains a row of single-family
attached dwelling units, each unit being separated from the adjoining units in
each story by a party wall or walls without openings, and each unit having
independent access to the exterior of the building in the ground story and each
unit being located on a separate lot.
   BUILDING, TOWNHOUSE. A building that has single one-family dwelling units
erected in a row as a single building, in which adjoining units are separated
by a common wall or walls without openings extending from the basement floor to
the roof line, and in which each unit has independent access to the exterior of
the building in the ground story, and each building being separated from any
other building by space on all sides.
   BUFFER STRIP. An area, property, lot, tract of land, or portion thereof,
either vacant or landscaped with screen planting as herein specified, which
shall serve as a separating space between dissimilar land uses or districts,
established to provide protection between adjoining land uses or districts.
   CARPORT. A roofed structure not more than 50% enclosed by walls, either
attached to or detached from the main building designed for the storage of
motor vehicles and accessory to the main dwelling(s).
   CELLAR or BASEMENT. A portion of a building located partly or wholly
underground and having one-half or more of its floor-to-ceiling height below
the average grade of the adjoining ground.
   CERTIFICATE OF OCCUPANCY. A permit, issued by the Village Administrator or
Village Building Inspector authorizing the occupancy or use of a building or
structure.
   CLINIC. An establishment where patients are not lodged overnight but are
admitted for examination and treatment by a group of physicians or dentists
practicing together.
   CLUB. Buildings and facilities owned or operated by a corporation,
association, person or persons for a special, educational or recreational
purpose, but not primarily for profit and not primarily to render a service
which is customarily carried on as a business.
   COMMERCIAL FEEDLOT. A yard, corral, pen or other area wherein cattle,
horses, sheep, goats, swine or other large animals are raised and maintained in
close quarters for the purpose of feeding and growth of livestock for shipment
to market prior to slaughter.
   COMMERCIAL OUTDOOR RECREATION. A recreational land use conducted in open,
partially enclosed, or screened facilities. This use shall include the
COMMERCIAL OUTDOOR RECREATION, CONCENTRATED and COMMERCIAL OUTDOOR RECREATION,
GENERAL USES as defined below.
   COMMERCIAL OUTDOOR RECREATION, CONCENTRATED. A recreational land use
conducted outside of a building, characterized by potentially substantial
impacts on traffic, the natural environment, and the surrounding neighborhood,
including aerial tramway; alpine or water slide; amphitheater; amusement ride,
auto, cycle and go-cart race track; campgrounds without recreational vehicles;
coliseum, stadium; drive-in theater; and any other outdoor recreational use not
specifically cited in COMMERCIAL OUTDOOR RECREATION, GENERAL.
   COMMERCIAL OUTDOOR RECREATION, GENERAL. A recreational land use conducted
outside of a building, characterized by minimal to moderate impacts on traffic,
the natural environment, and the surrounding neighborhood, including athletic
fields; miniature golf; skateboard park; swimming, bathing, wading and other
therapeutic facilities; tennis, handball, basketball courts; batting cages,
trampoline facilities, arboretum, botanical garden, country club, golf course,
historic site, radio controlled car tracks and motorized model airplane flying
facilities.
   COMMISSION. The Plan and Zoning Commission of the village.
   CONFINED SPACE FACILITY. A lot or building or combination of lots and
buildings intended for the confined feeding, breeding, raising or holding of
livestock, poultry or other animals in a specifically designed confinement
area.
   CONFORMING USE. Any use of a building or land which conforms with the use
regulations of the district in which the building or land is situated. If the
use is a permitted use but does not conform with the intensity of use
regulations of the district in which it is situated, then the use shall not be
deemed to be a CONFORMING USE.
   CONSTRUCTION. The excavation of earth to provide for a foundation basement
or cellar; and/or, the addition to or removal of earth from a lot or tract of
land so as to prepare the lot or tract of land for the construction of a
structure; and/or the act of placing or affixing a component of a structure
upon the ground or upon another component; and/or the placing of construction
materials in a permanent position and fastening of the materials in a permanent
manner; and/or the demolition, elimination and/or removal of an existing
structure in connection with the construction.
   CONVENIENCE STORE. A retail store selling predominantly food items that has
a total floor area of the use less than five thousand (5,000) square feet.
   DAY CARE CENTER. Any child care facility which regularly provides day care
for less than 24 hours per day for more than eight children at any one time in
a family home or private school type facility.
   DAY CARE HOME. Any child care facility in a home which regularly provides
day care for a maximum of eight children at any one time for less than 24 hours
per day.
   DECK. An above grade, flat, floored, roofless, attached or detached
structure or platform which is not glassed-in or otherwise walled or enclosed
above a height of two and one-half feet. Open guardrails shall not be construed
as a violation of the enclosed height limitations.
   DRIVE-IN FACILITY. A building or portion thereof which is designed to
provide either wholly or in part, service to customers in vehicles that are
parked in a parking space.
   DRIVE-THROUGH FACILITY. A building or portion thereof which is designed to
provide either wholly or in part, service to customers in vehicles that are
stacked in a service lane.
   DRIVEWAY. A private roadway providing access for vehicles from a public
right-of-way to a parking space, garage, parking lot or other structure.
   DUPLEX. A structure containing two (2) dwelling units on a single lot.
   DWELLING. Any building or portion thereof designed and used exclusively for
residential purposes.
   DWELLING, COMMON LOT LINE. A dwelling unit that adjoins another dwelling
unit with a party wall at a common lot line with each single dwelling unit
being located on its own separate lot.
   DWELLING, COMMUNITY LIVING FACILITY. A dwelling operated under state license
or certification, or contract to provide supervision, food, lodging or other
services to a service dependent population as herein defined, living and
cooking together in a single cooperative housekeeping unit, consisting of:
      (1)   A basic group of members of a service dependent population; and
      (2)   Additional staff persons providing supervision of service to the
basic group, as specified in aforesaid licensing, certification or contract
regulations. COMMUNITY LIVING FACILITIES are limited to one per structure.
   DWELLING, COMMUNITY LIVING FACILITY, CATEGORY I. A community living facility
dwelling with a basic group limited to not more than five service dependent
individuals plus a maximum of two resident (live-in) staff at any given time,
subject to a higher number of staff if required to meet state or federal
regulations. The facility is intended for permanent placements, and shall not
be for crisis or short-term, transient placements.
   DWELLING, COMMUNITY LIVING FACILITY, CATEGORY II. A community living
facility dwelling with a basic group limited to not more than eight service
dependent individuals plus a maximum of two resident (live-in) staff at any
given time, subject to a higher number of staff if required to meet state or
federal regulations. The facility is intended for permanent placements, and
shall not be for crisis or short-term, transient placements.
   DWELLING, COMMUNITY LIVING FACILITY, CATEGORY III. A community living
facility dwelling with a basic group limited to not more than 15 service
dependent individuals plus a maximum of four resident (live-in) staff at any
time, subject to a higher number if required to meet state and federal
regulations. The facility may be used for temporary placement of service
dependent individuals.
   DWELLING, MULTIPLE-FAMILY. A dwelling which is designed for or occupied by
three or more families occupying separate living quarters, but not including a
row house building.
   DWELLING, ROW HOUSE. A dwelling unit which is part of a row house building.
   DWELLING, SINGLE-FAMILY. Any building or portion thereof designed or
occupied exclusively by one family.
   DWELLING, TOWNHOUSE. A dwelling unit which is part of a townhouse building.
   DWELLING UNIT. A room or group of rooms within a dwelling and forming a
single habitable unit with facilities for living, sleeping and cooking.
   FAMILY. A person living alone, or two or more persons living together as a
single housekeeping unit in a dwelling unit, as distinguished from a group
occupying a rooming house, motel, hotel, fraternity or sorority house,
provided, however, that for the purpose of definition, FAMILY shall not mean
more than four persons unrelated to each other by blood, marriage or legal
adoption. FAMILY shall include members of a service dependent population living
in community living facilities as herein defined.
   FARM. A tract of land of at least five acres used for the growing and
storage of the usual agricultural crops such as grain, vegetables and fruit, or
for the raising thereon of the usual farm animals such as horses, cattle, dairy
cows, sheep and swine on a limited basis. The term includes the utilization of
the land for one or more of the above uses, including the necessary operations
for treating or storing the produce incidental thereto. Any tract on which the
principal use is the raising of fur-bearing animals such as mink, muskrats,
rabbits and the like, shall not be considered a FARM. A commercial feed lot or
a confined space facility for the raising of sheep, cattle, chickens, swine,
turkeys, dairy cows or fish shall not be considered a FARM. Residential
structures occupied by persons primarily engaged in farming are included in the
term FARM; however, there shall not be more than two single-family dwellings on
any one FARM.
   FENCE. A constructed barrier erected as a means of protection or confinement
to enclose or screen areas of land.
   FENCE, ELECTRONIC. An underground means of controlling the movement of an
animal by emitting an electrical signal when the animal wearing an electronic
collar nears the boundary of the fence.
   FLOOR AREA.  The sum of the gross horizontal areas of all floors of a
building, measured from the exterior faces of the exterior walls or from the
centerline of walls separating buildings, but not including cellar or basement
space not used for retailing and not including accessory off-street parking or
loading space.
   GARAGE, PRIVATE. An enclosed structure either attached or detached from the
principal residence structure primarily used for the storage of vehicles owned
and operated by the occupants of the premises, inside which no business,
occupation or service for profit is in any way conducted, and which also may
contain incidental storage of personal property related to the maintenance of
the home and lot or items for private recreational purposes.
   GARAGE, PUBLIC. A garage other than a private garage.
   GUEST QUARTERS. An accessory building or portion of the main building
located on the same lot as the main building and used as living quarters for
guests and not rented or otherwise used as a separate domicile, and containing
no kitchen facilities.
   HOME OCCUPATION. An accessory use within a dwelling, involving an occupation
or activity related to the provision or sale of goods or services, which is
carried on by the residents of the dwelling unit, and which use is clearly
incidental and subordinate to the use of the premises for dwelling.
   HOTEL. A building in which lodging or lodging and meals are provided for
transient guests, having a lobby for the common use from which individual rooms
or suites are accessible.
   KENNEL. An establishment, use or structure intended and used for the
breeding of animals for sale or for the outdoor training or outdoor overnight
boarding of animals for persons other than the owner of the property.
   LOT. A parcel of land occupied or intended for occupancy by a use permitted
in this chapter, including one main building together with its accessory
building, and the open space and parking spaces required by this chapter, and
having its principal frontage upon a street.
   LOT COVERAGE. The portion of a lot that is covered by a dwelling, a
principal building, an accessory building or a carport.
   LOT, EXTERIOR ROW HOUSE. A lot which is intended to be a site for a row
house with a similar row house attached on only one side.
   LOT FRONTAGE. The portion of a lot (a lot line) abutting a street.
   LOT, INTERIOR ROW HOUSE. A lot which is or is intended to be a site for a
row house with a similar row house attached on each side.
   LOT LINE. The property line or title line bounding a lot.
   LOT OF RECORD. A lot or parcel of land, the plat, map or deed to which has
been recorded in the Office of the County Recorder prior to the adoption of
this chapter.
   LOT WIDTH. Minimum lot widths are established in §
152.090. For regularly shaped lots, the LOT WIDTH shall mean the average
distance between the side lot lines, measured at right angles to the depth of
the lot along the lot frontage. For irregularly shaped or wedge-shaped lots,
the LOT WIDTH shall be the distance between the side lot lines measured along
the curvature of the arc at the points of intersection of the front setback
line with the side lot lines. Through the subdivision plat review process, the
front yard setback line may be adjusted to increase the front yard setback to
meet the minimum lot width requirement for irregular lots, but in no case shall
the lot frontage at the front lot line be less than 40 feet.
   LOT, ZONING. One or more buildable lots located within a single block, which
is designated as a tract to be used, developed or built upon as a unit under
single ownership or control. A ZONING LOT may or may not coincide with a lot of
record and shall be located entirely within one zoning district.
   MAJOR STREET. A street designated as a major street or master street on the
Official Street Plan.
   MICRO-BREWERY. A licensed commercial establishment manufacturing beer in
quantities not exceeding 50,000 gallons (all beverages combined) per year.
   MIXED USE. The use of a tract of land or structure with two or more
different principal uses.
   MIXED USE DEVELOPMENT. An area, parcel of land, or structure developed in a
compact form for two or more different, principal land uses, such as but not
limited to residential, office, retail, service, public, light manufacturing,
or entertainment, and planned as a unified complementary whole, and
functionally integrated to the use of shared vehicular and pedestrian access
and parking areas.
   MIXED USE STRUCTURE. A building or structure which includes two or more
principal, compatible uses, such as but not limited to residential, office,
retail, service, public, light manufacturing, or entertainment, and planned as
a unified complementary whole, and functionally integrated to the use of shared
vehicular and pedestrian access and parking areas.
   MOBILE HOME OR TRAILER. A vehicle equipped to carry materials or to function
as a dwelling unit and designed to be hauled or transported along a highway,
including camping trailers, house trailers, tent trailers, boat trailers,
materials trailers and farm wagons.
   MOBILE HOME OR TRAILER COURT. An area where one or more inhabited mobile
homes can be or are intended to be parked.
   MODULAR HOME. A prefabricated building manufactured in whole or in part off
the site and transported to the site and which must be provided with and placed
upon a permanent fixed foundation as a part of its installation at the site.
   MOTEL. A building or group of buildings in which lodging and individual
automobile parking space in close proximity are provided for transients
traveling by motor vehicle.
   NONCONFORMING USE. Any building or land lawfully occupied by a use at the
time of passage of this chapter and all amendments thereto which does not
conform with the use regulations of the district within which it is located.
   NURSING HOME. A home for the aged or infirm in which three or more persons
not of the immediate family are received, kept or provided with food and
shelter or care for compensation; but not including hospitals, clinics or
similar institutions devoted primarily to the diagnosis and treatment of the
sick or injured.
   OCCUPANCY.  The residing of an individual overnight in a dwelling unit, or
the use of equipment, merchandise or machinery in any public, agricultural,
commercial or industrial building, or the utilization of a parcel or structure
for any permitted or conditional use set forth in this chapter.
   OPEN SPACE. The portion of the total land area excluding area set aside or
used for living units, storage, maintenance and mechanical buildings, parking,
loading, driveways and streets. Land and accessory buildings devoted
exclusively to recreation purposes to include swimming pools, tennis courts and
similar recreation uses shall be considered OPEN SPACE.
   PARKING SPACE. A surfaced area, not less than nine feet wide and 20 feet
long, enclosed or unenclosed, connected to a public street or alley by a
surfaced driveway and permanently reserved for the parking or storage of one
motor vehicle.
   PLAT, LOT. A drawing of a lot showing its dimensions, the building
arrangement thereon and other information as may be needed for enforcement of
this chapter.
   PORCH. A ground level or first story above grade, enclosed, roofed platform
structure, supported from the ground and extending out from the main part of
the building.
   PREMISES. A lot, together with all buildings and structures thereon.
   RESTAURANT. A facility that prepares and sells food directly to consumers
for immediate consumption. It does not include facilities that provide food to
interstate conveyances, central kitchens, and other similar facilities that do
not prepare and serve food directly to consumers.
   SALVAGE OR JUNK YARD. Any land or building, or other structure used for the
storage, collection, processing or conversion of any worn out, cast off or
discarded metal, paper, glass or other material which is ready for destruction,
or has been collected or stored for salvage or conversion to some use. This
includes, but is not limited to, such things as automobiles, machinery, farm
implements, household appliances and construction material.
   SERVICE DEPENDENT POPULATION. A group of individuals who, by reason of
mental or physical disability, require supervision offered in connection with
residence in a community living facility as herein defined, but do not require
medical or nursing care on site. The groups shall reside as members of a single
housekeeping unit in a quasi-parental relationship with staff. The groups shall
not include persons for whom the services are a requirement of a sentence upon
conviction of a criminal offense or whose need for the services arises during
or immediately following a sentence of incarceration for a criminal offense nor
for the treatment or rehabilitation of drug or alcohol addiction.
   SETBACK. The required minimum horizontal distance between the buildable area
of a lot and the related front, rear or side property line.
   SETBACK LINE. A line within a lot parallel to a corresponding lot line,
which is the boundary of any specified front, side or rear yard established to
govern the location of buildings, structures or uses.
   SHOPPING CENTER. A single tract of land or lot containing five or more
independent commercial establishments and a total business space of more than
5,000 square feet that is planned, constructed and administered as a total
entity with shared parking for customers and employees provided on-site.
   SIGN. A sign is any structure or part thereof, or any device attached to,
painted on or represented on a building or other structure, upon which is
displayed or included any letter, work model, banner, flag, pennant, insignia,
decoration, device or representation used as, or which is in the nature of an
announcement, direction, advertisement or other attention-directing device. A
SIGN shall not include a similar structure or device located within show
windows. A SIGN includes any billboard or poster panel, but does not include
the flag, pennant or insignia of any nation or association of nations, or of
any state, city or other political unit, or of any political, charitable,
educational, philanthropic, civic, professional, religious or like campaign,
drive, movement or event.
   SIGN AREA. That area within a line including the outer extremities of all
letters, figures, characters and delineations or within a line including the
outer extremities of the framework or background of the sign, whichever line
includes the larger area. The support for the sign background, whether it be
columns, a pylon or a building or part thereof, shall be excluded in the SIGN
AREA.
   STORY. The portion of a building, other than a basement, included between
the surface of any floor and the surface of the floor next above it or, if
there is no floor above it, the space between the floor and the ceiling next
above it. A HALF-STORY is a partial story under a gable, hip or gambrel roof,
the wall plates of which on at least two opposite exterior walls are not more
than four feet above the floor of the story.
   STREET. Any public or private way set aside as a permanent right-of-way for
street purposes.
   STRUCTURAL ALTERATION. Any change in the structural members of a building,
such as walls, columns, rafters, beams or girders.
   STRUCTURE. Anything constructed or erected, the use of which requires
permanent location on the ground.
   SWIMMING POOL. An artificially created permanent pool or tank either above
grade, below grade, or partially below grade, which has a depth of more than 24
inches covering more than 25 square feet or that has a capacity of more than
200 gallons of water, created for the purpose of swimming, wading or water
recreation.
   TEA ROOM. A restaurant when located in a pre-existing residential structure,
that serves tea, coffee, snacks, light lunches, and has seating capacity of no
more than 20 persons, and is only open between the hours of 10:00 a.m. and 4:00
p.m. daily.
   TRAILER. Any structure used for living, sleeping, business or storage
purposes which has no foundation other than wheels, blocks, skids, jacks,
horses or skirting and which has been, or reasonably may be, equipped with
wheels or other devices for moving the structure from place to place, whether
by motive power or other means. No TRAILER, as herein defined, shall be
construed as a dwelling.
   TRAILER CAMP. Any lot or parcel used for one or more trailers, house or camp
cars or other portable or mobile shelters used for living purposes.
   TRAVEL PLAZA OR TRUCK STOP. A use primarily engaged in the maintenance,
servicing, storage, parking or repair of commercial vehicles, including the
sale of motor fuels or other petroleum products, and the sale of accessories or
equipment for over-the-road trucks and similar commercial vehicles. A TRAVEL
PLAZA OR TRUCK STOP may also include overnight accommodations, showers, vehicle
scales, restaurant facilities, game rooms, and/or other services and diversions
intended mainly for use by truck drivers and interregional travelers.
   USE. The specific purpose for which land, a structure or premises is
designed, arranged, intended or for which it is, or may be, occupied or
maintained.
   USE, CONDITIONAL. A use, the character of which is not ordinarily permitted
in a zoning district, but which may be appropriate under certain specific
conditions as established by the Board of Trustees in accordance with §§
152.120 and
152.121.
   USE, PERMISSIVE. A use permitted or lawfully established in a particular
district, provided that it conforms to all of the requirements, regulations and
performance standards of the district.
   USE, PRINCIPAL. The predominant or main use to which land or buildings are
devoted.
   VISIBILITY OBSTRUCTION. Any physical barrier which impairs visibility;
provided, however, it shall not include wire fences or chain link fences which
are more than 95% open. And provided further, it shall not be construed to
include any physical barrier which is less than two feet or more than seven
feet from the mean grade of the lot within the visibility triangle. Traffic
controls, illuminators, trees, flag poles or public utility devices and items
which are less than twelve inches in width will not be defined as VISIBILITY
OBSTRUCTIONS.
   VISIBILITY TRIANGLE. The area within the vertices of an isosceles triangle
whose two equal legs are to be measured along the right-of-way lines of the
adjoining or intersecting streets or roads (or extensions thereof). The
TRIANGLE shall be formed by connecting two points on the right-of-way lines of
the intersecting streets located 30 feet from the point of intersection at the
street right-of-way lines.
   YARD. An open space on the same lot with a building, unobstructed from the
ground upward from any human made structure, except roof overhangs, cornices
and ornamental features, and measured as the minimum distance between the lot
line and main building.
   YARD, FRONT. An area extending across the front of a lot between the side
lot lines, and being the minimum horizontal distance between the right-of-way
line and the main building or any projections thereof other than the
projections of uncovered porches. On corner lots, the front yard shall be
considered as parallel to all streets upon which the lot has frontage.
   YARD, REAR. A yard extending across the rear of the lot between the side lot
lines and measured between the rear lot line and the rear of the main building
or any projection other than steps, unenclosed porches or entrance way.
   YARD, SIDE. A yard between the main building and the side lot line, and
extending from the front yard line to the rear yard line, and being the minimum
horizontal distance between a side lot line and the side of the main building
or any projections thereof.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/a9ca1b11a123a719de15c1f9e2aa74391beab565/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2213.png]
12-01-01, passed 1-24-2012; Ord. 17-09-02, passed 9-26-2017; Ord. 17-11-06,
passed 11-28-2017; Ord. 20-12-01, passed 12-15-2020)
§ 152.003 COMPLIANCE WITH REGULATIONS.
   (A)   Except as hereinafter provided, no building or land shall hereinafter
be used or occupied and no building or part thereof shall be erected, moved or
altered unless in conformity with the regulations herein specified for the
district in which it is located.
   (B)   No building shall hereinafter be erected or altered to exceed the
height, to accommodate or house a greater number of families, to occupy a
greater percentage of lot area, or to have narrower or smaller rear yards,
front yards, side yards, inner or outer courts than is specified herein for the
district in which the building is located.
   (C)   No part of a yard or other open space required about any building for
the purpose of complying with the provisions of this chapter shall be included
as a part of a yard or other open space similarly required for another
building.
(Ord. passed 7-23-2002) Penalty, see §
152.999
§ 152.004 NATURE.
   This chapter consists of a zoning district map describing certain districts
and a set of regulations set forth in this chapter.
(Ord. passed 7-23-2002)
§ 152.005 DISTRICTS.
   (A)   The districts into which the village and its one and one-half-mile
planning area are divided by the Zoning Ordinance shall be designated as
follows:
      (1)   AG Agricultural District;
      (2)   AC Conservation District;
      (3)   R-1A Single-Family Residential District;
      (4)   R-1B Single-Family Residential District;
      (5)   R-1C Single-Family Residential District;
      (6)   R-2 Two-Family Residential District;
      (7)   R-3A Multiple-Family Residential District;
      (8)   R-3B Multiple-Family Residential District;
      (9)   R-3C Multiple-Family Residential District;
      (10)   R-3G Multiple-Family Residential District;
      (11)   C-1 Neighborhood Commercial District;
      (12)   C-2 General Commercial District;
      (13)   C-3 Planned Commercial District;
      (14)   C-4 Planned Mixed Use District;
      (15)   I-1 Planned Industrial District;
      (16)   I-2 Industrial District; and
      (17)   P Forest Preserve District.
   (B)   The boundaries of these districts are shown on the "Zoning District
Official Map" dated November, 1971, Revised March, 1973, which accompanies and
is made a part of this chapter. The original of this map is properly attested
and on file with the Village Clerk, and the map and all information shown
thereon shall have the same force and effect as if fully set forth or described
herein.
   (C)   The zoning district map shall be corrected and brought up to date on
March 31 of each year.
   (D)   All land which may hereafter be incorporated into the zoning
jurisdictional area of the village, whether through annexation or otherwise,
shall, unless a valid pre-annexation agreement in effect at the time of
annexation provides otherwise; or unless, after a public hearing, specific
action by the Board of Trustees of the village provides otherwise,
automatically be classified from its present or most recent classification
under the County Zoning Ordinance, to a classification under the Village Zoning
Ordinance (this chapter), as determined by the Village Administrator and which
use of the land most generally conforms to the intent of the following table.
Former Zoning District  New Zoning District
Champaign County        Village of Mahomet
Former Zoning District        New Zoning District
Champaign County              Village of Mahomet
AG-1, Agricultural            AG Agriculture
AG-2, Agricultural            R-1A Single-Family Residential
CR, Conservation-Recreation   AC, Conservation
CR, Conservation-Recreation   F, Forest Preserve
R-1 Single Family Residence   R-1B Single-Family Residential
R-2 Single Family Residence   R-1C Single-Family Residential
R-3 Two-Family Residence      R-2 Two-Family Residential
R-4 Multiple Family Residence R-3A Multiple- Family Residential
B-2 Neighborhood Business     C-1 Neighborhood Business
B-3 Highway Business          C-2 General Commercial
B-4 General Business          C-2 General Commercial
B-5 Central Business          C-2 General Commercial
I-1 Light Industry            I-2 General Industrial
I-2 Heavy Industry            I-2 Industrial
 
(Ord. passed 7-23-2002; Ord. 09-04-02, passed 4-28-2009; Ord. 17-09-02, passed
9-26-2017; Ord. 20-12-01, passed 12-15-2020)
§ 152.006 BOUNDARIES.
   Where uncertainty exists with respect to the boundaries of any of the
aforesaid districts as shown on the zoning map, the following rules shall
apply.
   (A)   Where district boundaries are indicated as approximately following the
centerlines of alleys, streets or highways, the alley, street lines or highway
right-of-way lines shall be construed to be the boundaries.
   (B)   Where district boundaries are so indicated that they approximately
follow the lot lines, the lot lines shall be construed to be the boundaries.
(Ord. passed 7-23-2002)
DISTRICT REGULATIONS
§ 152.020 AG AGRICULTURAL DISTRICT.
   The primary purpose of the AG Agriculture District is to provide for limited
areas of agricultural activity and for activities associated with a rural
setting.
   (A)   Permissive uses:
      (1)   Agricultural activity;
      (2)   Single-family dwelling;
      (3)   Park or forest preserve;
      (4)   Church;
      (5)   Public school, elementary and high, or private school having a
curriculum equivalent to a public elementary or public high school and having
no rooms regularly used for housing or sleeping purposes;
      (6)   Golf course except miniature course or driving range;
      (7)   Roadside stand for the display or sale of agricultural products
raised on the premises;
      (8)   Greenhouse or nursery; and
      (9)   Large-scale residential development.
   (B)   Conditional uses:
      (1)   Extraction of coal, sand and gravel;
      (2)   Airport;
      (3)   Public building erected by any governmental agency;
      (4)   Hospital, nursing home and educational, religious and philanthropic
institution on sites of not less than five acres;
      (5)   Mobile home court;
      (6)   Radio and television towers and public utility substations;
      (7)   Sanitary landfill;
      (8)   Sewage treatment facility;
      (9)   Fertilizer processing, blending and sales;
      (10)   Riding stables, veterinary hospitals or the keeping of small
animals; provided that any building or enclosure housing animals shall be
located at least 100 feet from all property lines; and
      (11)   Grain elevator or similar storage structures, including buildings
for seasonal or temporary storage of grain, whenever the elevator and temporary
storage are located upon or adjacent to a railroad right-of-way.
(Ord. passed 7-23-2002; Ord. 17-09-02, passed 9-26-2017)
§ 152.021 AC CONSERVATION DISTRICT.
   The purpose of the AC Conservation District is to provide for recreational
and conservation uses. Some commercial recreational uses are also allowed. This
AC District is intended to be utilized primarily for parks or other similar
facilities. This AC District is also intended to be established within
floodplain areas along rivers and streams.
   (A)   Permissive uses:
      (1)   Park or forest preserve;
      (2)   Cemetery;
      (3)   Woodland preservation; and
      (4)   Wildlife habitat or fish hatchery.
   (B)   Conditional uses:
      (1)   Extraction of coal, sand or gravel;
      (2)   Privately operated outdoor recreational facility, including riding
stable, lake, swimming pool, tennis court and golf course on site of not less
than five acres;
      (3)   Motel, resort and incidental retail sales and services on site of
not less than five acres, provided they are protected from flooding;
      (4)   Guest ranch, hunting and fishing resort, ski resort and incidental
facilities, including swimming pool, restaurant, incidental retail sales and
services and personal services, on site of not less than 20 acres provided they
are protected from flooding;
      (5)   Marina, yacht club, boat house or bait shop;
      (6)   4-H clubs and related educational programs; and
      (7)   Transient or travel trailer camp sites.
(Ord. passed 7-23-2002; Ord. 17-09-02, passed 9-26-2017; Ord. 22-11-03, passed
11-22-2022)
§ 152.022 R-1A SINGLE-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT.
   The purpose of the R-1A Single-Family Residential District is to provide for
detached single-family dwellings with related uses on larger sized lots within
a low density setting.
   (A)   Permissive uses:
      (1)   Single-family dwelling;
      (2)   Public park or playground;
      (3)   Church;
      (4)   Public school, elementary and high, or private school having a
curriculum equivalent to a public elementary or public high school and having
no rooms regularly used for housing or sleeping purposes;
      (5)   Golf course except miniature course or driving range;
      (6)   Large-scale residential development; and
      (7)   Community Living Facility Dwelling, Category I.
   (B)   Conditional uses:
      (1)   Privately operated lake, swimming pool or tennis court on site of
not less than five acres;
      (2)   Public building erected by any governmental agency;
      (3)   Hospital, nursing home and educational, philanthropic or religious
institution on site of not less than five acres, provided not more than 50% of
the site area may be occupied by buildings, and provided further that the
building shall be set back from all required yard lines an additional foot for
each foot of building height;
      (4)   Nursery, pre-kindergarten, kindergarten, play, special and other
private school or day care center;
      (5)   Private recreational facility where buildings do not occupy more
than 10% of the site area;
      (6)   Greenhouse or nursery; and
      (7)   Public utility substations.
(Ord. passed 7-23-2002; Ord. 17-09-02, passed 9-26-2017)
§ 152.023 R-1B SINGLE-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT.
   The purpose of the R-1B Single-Family Residential District is to provide for
detached single-family dwellings with related uses on standard sized lots. The
R-1B District is intended to be the primary district customarily used for
single-family residential uses under most situations.
   (A)   Permissive uses:
      (1)   Single-family dwelling;
      (2)   Public park or playground;
      (3)   Church;
      (4)   Public school, elementary and high, or private school having a
curriculum equivalent to a public elementary or public high school and having
no rooms regularly used for housing or sleeping purposes;
      (5)   Golf course;
      (6)   Large-scale residential development; and
      (7)   Community Living Facility Dwelling, Category I.
   (B)   Conditional uses:
      (1)   Public building erected by any governmental agency;
      (2)   Hospital, nursing home and educational, philanthropic or religious
institution on site of not less than five acres, provided further that the
building shall be set back from all required yard lines an additional foot for
each foot of building height;
      (3)   Nursery, pre-kindergarten, kindergarten, play, special and other
private school or day care center;
      (4)   Greenhouse or nursery;
      (5)   Antique stores when located in a residential structure which is
operator-occupied, where OPERATOR shall mean the owner of the establishment or
the owner’s agent, provided that not more than 50% of the gross floor area of
the residential structure be devoted to the use of the antique store, provided
further that the remaining 50% be devoted to the residential use of the
structure, provided further that no more than one non-illuminated sign, not
exceeding four square feet may be erected on the property;
      (6)   Tea rooms when located in a residential structure which is
operator-occupied, where OPERATOR shall mean the owner of the establishment or
the owner’s agent, provided that not more than 50% of the gross floor area of
the residential structure be devoted to the use of the tea room, provided
further that the remaining 50% be devoted to the residential use of the
structure, provided further that no more than one non-illuminated sign, not
exceeding four square feet may be erected on the property;
      (7)   Bed and breakfast establishments, provided that one off-street
parking space per guest room rented out is provided in addition to the required
spaces for the residential use, provided further that no more than one non-
illuminated sign, not exceeding four square feet, and not including the words
“hotel” or “motel” may be erected on the property; and
      (8)   Public utility substations.
(Ord. passed 7-23-2002; Ord. 17-09-02, passed 9-26-2017)
§ 152.024 R-1C SINGLE-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT.
   The purpose of the R-1C Single-Family Residential District is to provide for
detached single-family dwellings with related uses on medium sized lots. The R-
1C District is intended to be a transitional area between more intensive uses
and less intensive single-family residential uses.
   (A)   Permissive uses:
      (1)   Single-family dwelling;
      (2)   Public park or playground;
      (3)   Church;
      (4)   Public school, elementary and high, or private school having a
curriculum equivalent to a public elementary or public high school and having
no rooms regularly used for housing or sleeping purposes;
      (5)   Golf course except miniature course or driving range;
      (6)   Large-scale residential development; and
      (7)   Community living facility dwelling, Category I.
   (B)   Conditional uses:
      (1)   Public building erected by any governmental agency;
      (2)   Hospital, nursing home and educational, philanthropic or religious
institution on site of not less than five acres, provided further that the
building shall be set back from all required yard lines an additional foot for
each foot of building height;
      (3)   Nursery, pre-kindergarten, kindergarten, play, special and other
private school or day care center;
      (4)   Greenhouse or nursery;
      (5)   Antique stores when located in a residential structure which is
operator-occupied, where OPERATOR shall mean the owner of the establishment or
the owner’s agent, provided that not more than 50% of the gross floor area of
the residential structure be devoted to the use of the antique store, provided
further that the remaining 50% be devoted to the residential use of the
structure, provided further that no more than one non-illuminated sign, not
exceeding four square feet may be erected on the property;
      (6)   Tea rooms when located in a residential structure which is
operator-occupied, where OPERATOR shall mean the owner of the establishment or
the owner’s agent, provided that not more than 50% of the gross floor area of
the residential structure be devoted to the use of the tea room, provided
further that the remaining 50% be devoted to the residential use of the
structure, provided further that no more than one non-illuminated sign, not
exceeding four square feet may be erected on the property;
      (7)   Bed and breakfast establishments, provided that one off-street
parking space per guest room rented out is provided in addition to the required
spaces for the residential use, provided further that no more than one non-
illuminated sign, not exceeding four square feet, and not including the words
“hotel” or “motel” may be erected on the property; and
      (8)   Public utility substations.
(Ord. passed 7-23-2002; Ord. 17-09-02, passed 9-26-2017)
§ 152.025 R-2 TWO-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT.
   The purpose of the R-2 Two-Family Residential District is to provide for
attached single-family dwellings (common lot line homes) and two with related
and accessory uses. These areas may include limited detached single-family uses
and may serve as a transitional area between more intensive residential or
commercial uses and less intensive single-family residential uses.
   (A)   Permissive uses:
      (1)   Single-family dwelling;
      (2)   Duplex;
      (3)   Common lot line dwelling;
      (4)   Community Living Facility Dwelling, Category I;
      (5)   Community Living Facility Dwelling, Category II;
      (6)   Public park or playground;
      (7)   Church;
      (8)   Public school, elementary and high, or private school having a
curriculum equivalent to a public elementary or public high school and having
no rooms regularly used for housing or sleeping purposes;
      (9)   Golf course; and
      (10)   Large-scale residential development.
   (B)   Conditional uses:
      (1)   Public building erected by any governmental agency;
      (2)   Hospital, nursing home and educational, philanthropic or religious
institution on site of not less than five acres, provided not more than 50% of
the site area may be occupied by buildings, and provided further that the
building shall be set back from all required yard lines an additional foot for
each foot of building height;
      (3)   Nursery, pre-kindergarten, kindergarten, play, special and other
private school or day care center;
      (4)   Greenhouse or nursery;
      (5)   Antique stores when located in a residential structure which is
operator-occupied, where OPERATOR shall mean the owner of the establishment or
the owner’s agent, provided that not more than 50% of the gross floor area of
the residential structure be devoted to the use of the antique store, provided
further that the remaining 50% be devoted to the residential use of the
structure, provided further that no more than one non-illuminated sign, not
exceeding four square feet may be erected on the property;
      (6)   Tea rooms when located in a residential structure which is
operator-occupied, where OPERATOR shall mean the owner of the establishment or
the owner’s agent, provided that not more than 50% of the gross floor area of
the residential structure be devoted to the use of the tea room, provided
further that the remaining 50% be devoted to the residential use of the
structure, provided further that no more than one non-illuminated sign, not
exceeding four square feet may be erected on the property;
      (7)   Bed and breakfast establishments, provided that one off-street
parking space per guest room rented out is provided in addition to the required
spaces for the residential use, provided further that no more than one non-
illuminated sign, not exceeding four square feet, and not including the words
“hotel” or “motel” may be erected on the property; and
      (8)   Public utility substations.
(Ord. passed 7-23-2002; Ord. 17-09-02, passed 9-26-2017)
§ 152.026 R-3A MULTIPLE-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT.
   The purpose of the R-3A Multiple-Family Residential District is to provide
for low density multiple-family dwellings along with related residential uses.
The R-3A District may serve as
transitional uses between commercial and less intensive residential uses.
   (A)   Permissive uses:
      (1)   Duplex;
      (2)   Common lot line dwelling;
      (3)   Multiple-family dwelling, meeting the standards set forth in §
152.055;
      (4)   Townhouse, meeting the standards set forth in §
152.055;
      (5)   Row house dwelling;
      (6)   Public park or playground; and
      (7)   Church.
   (B)   Conditional uses:
      (1)   Multiple-family dwelling, which does not meet standards set forth
in §
152.055;
      (2)   Townhouse, which does not meet standards set forth in §
152.055;
      (3)   Public utility substations; and
      (4)   Community living facility dwelling, Category I.
   (C)   Accessory uses, see §
152.046 for additional regulations related to accessory uses:
      (1)   A noncommercial greenhouse that does not exceed in floor area 25%
of the ground floor area of the main building;
      (2)   A private garage or carport with a floor area of no more than 300
square feet per dwelling unit with a floor area not to exceed 550 square feet.
An additional floor area of 200 square feet may be provided for each 3,000
square feet of lot area by which the lot exceeds 6,000 square feet, provided
that no garage shall exceed 2,000 square feet nor house more than ten
automobiles;
      (3)   Home occupation;
      (4)   Stormwater detention basins or rain gardens;
      (5)   Vegetable or flower garden;
      (6)   Private driveways;
      (7)   Shared use or common use club house, tennis court, swimming pool,
garden house, gazebo, pergola, ornamental gate, flagpole, barbecue oven,
playground, dog run, fireplace, storage shed and similar shared uses
customarily accessory to multiple-family residential uses;
      (8)   Any single accessory building shall not exceed a floor area of
2,000 square feet or have a ground floor square foot area of more than 75% of
the GSF of the smallest main structure, whichever is less;
      (9)   Any single accessory building shall not exceed a height of 20 feet
or 75% of the shortest main structure, whichever is less;
      (10)   Off-street parking spaces when in conformance with the provisions
of this chapter; and
      (11)   Shared or common use solid waste containers when located outside
of an established front yard setback and when located not less than five feet
away from a side or rear lot line and when fenced from visibility from property
lines and right-of-way lines. Individual use solid waste containers of less
than 100 gallons are exempt from screening requirements.
(Ord. passed 7-23-2002; Ord. 17-09-02, passed 9-26-2017; Ord. 20-07-05, passed
7-28-2020; Ord. 20-12-01, passed 12-15-2020)
§ 152.027 R-3B MULTIPLE-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT.
   The purpose of the R-3B Multiple-Family Residential District is to provide
for low density multiple-family dwellings along with related residential uses.
The R-3B District may serve as transitional uses between commercial and less
intensive residential uses.
   (A)   Permissive uses:
      (1)   Multiple-family dwelling, meeting the standards set forth in §
152.055;
      (2)   Townhouse, meeting the standards set forth in §
152.055;
      (3)   Row house dwelling;
      (4)   Community living facility dwelling, Category I;
      (5)   Public park or playground; and
      (6)   Church.
   (B)   Conditional uses:
      (1)   Multiple-family dwelling, which does not meet standards set forth
in §
152.055;
      (2)   Townhouse, which does not meet standards set forth in §
152.055;
      (3)   Public building erected by any governmental agency;
      (4)   Community living facility dwelling, Category II;
      (5)   Community living facility dwelling, Category Ill;
      (6)   Public utility substations; and
      (7)   Large scale residential development.
   (C)   Accessory uses, see §
152.046 for additional regulations related to accessory uses:
      (1)   A noncommercial greenhouse that does not exceed in floor area 25%
of the ground floor area of the main building;
      (2)   A private garage or carport with a floor area of no more than 300
square feet per dwelling unit with a floor area not to exceed 550 square feet.
An additional floor area of 200 square feet may be provided for each 3,000
square feet of lot area by which the lot exceeds 6,000 square feet, provided
that no garage shall exceed 2,000 square feet nor house more than ten
automobiles;
      (3)   Home occupation;
      (4)   Stormwater detention basins or rain gardens;
      (5)   Vegetable or flower garden;
      (6)   Private driveways;
      (7)   Shared use or common use club house, tennis court, swimming pool,
garden house, gazebo, pergola, ornamental gate, flagpole, barbecue oven,
playground, dog run, fireplace, storage shed and similar shared uses
customarily accessory to multiple-family residential uses;
      (8)   Any single accessory building shall not exceed a floor area of
2,000 square feet or have a ground floor square foot area of more than 75% of
the GSF of the smallest main structure, whichever is less;
      (9)   Any single accessory building shall not exceed a height of 20 feet
or 75% of the shortest main structure, whichever is less;
      (10)   Off-street parking spaces when in conformance with the provisions
of this chapter; and
      (11)   Shared solid waste containers when located outside of an
established front yard setback and when located not less than five feet away
from a side or rear lot line and when fenced from visibility from property
lines and right-of-way lines. Individual use solid waste containers of less
than 100 gallons are exempt from screening requirements.
(Ord. 20-12-01, passed 12-15-2020)
§ 152.028 R-3C MULTIPLE-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT.
   The purpose of the R-3C Multiple-Family Residential District is to provide
for multiple-family dwellings along with related residential uses. The R-3C
District may serve as transitional uses between commercial or industrial uses
and other lower density multi-family uses.
   (A)   Permissive uses:
      (1)   Multiple-family dwelling, meeting the standards set forth in §
152.055;
      (2)   Townhouse, meeting the standards set forth in §
152.055;
      (3)   Row house dwelling;
      (4)   Community living facility dwelling, Category I;
      (5)   Community living facility dwelling, Category II;
      (6)   Community living facility dwelling, Category Ill;
      (7)   Public park or playground;
      (8)   Church; and
      (9)   Large scale residential development.
   (B)   Conditional uses:
      (1)   Multiple-family dwelling, which does not meet standards set forth
in §
152.055;
      (2)   Townhouse, which does not meet standards set forth in §
152.055;
      (3)   Nursing, rest or convalescent home;
      (4)   Public building erected by any governmental agency;
      (5)   Religious, educational and eleemosynary institution of a
philanthropic nature;
      (6)   Private club or lodge, excepting when the chief activity of which
is service customarily carried on as a business;
      (7)   Mobile home or trailer court;
      (8)   Nursery, pre-kindergarten, kindergarten, play, special and other
private school or day care center;
      (9)   Public utility substations;
      (10)   Assisted living retirement community; and
      (11)   Public school, elementary and high, or private school having a
curriculum equivalent to a public elementary or public high school and having
no rooms regularly used for housing or sleeping purposes.
   (C)   Accessory uses, see §
152.046 for additional regulations related to accessory uses:
      (1)   A noncommercial greenhouse that does not exceed in floor area 25%
of the ground floor area of the main building;
      (2)   A private garage or carport with a floor area of no more than 300
square feet per dwelling unit;
      (3)   Home occupation;
      (4)   Stormwater detention basins;
      (5)   Vegetable or flower garden;
      (6)   Private driveways;
      (7)   Shared use or common use club house, tennis court, swimming pool,
garden house, gazebo, pergola, ornamental gate, flagpole, barbecue oven,
playground, dog run, fireplace, storage shed and similar shared uses
customarily accessory to multiple-family residential uses;
      (8)   Any single accessory building shall not exceed 50% of the gross
square footage of any primary structure on the same lot;
      (9)   Off-street parking spaces when in conformance with the provisions
of this chapter; and
      (10)   Shared solid waste containers when located outside of an
established front yard setback and when located not less than five feet away
from a side or rear lot line and when fenced from visibility from property
lines and right-of-way lines. Individual use solid waste containers of less
than 100 gallons are exempt from screening requirements.
(Ord. 20-12-01, passed 12-15-2020)
§ 152.029 R-3G MULTIPLE-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT.
   The purpose of the R-3G Multiple-Family Residential District is to provide
for multiple-family dwellings and buildings where all units have some ground
floor living space and individual ground floor access with the perceptive
"private" yet limited adjacent outdoor space and mostly common outdoor area and
shared amenities. The R-3G District may serve as transitional uses between
single-family residential uses and neighborhood or light commercial use areas.
Units could be platted for individual ownership.
   (A)   Permissive uses:
      (1)   Duplex;
      (2)   Common lot line dwelling;
      (3)   Multiple-family dwelling, meeting the standards set forth in §
152.055;
      (4)   Townhouse, meeting the standards set forth in §
152.055;
      (5)   Row house dwelling; and
      (6)   Large scale residential development.
   (B)   Conditional uses:
      (1)   Multiple-family dwelling, which does not meet standards set forth
in §
152.055;
      (2)   Townhouse, which does not meet standards set forth in §
152.055;
      (3)   Nursing, rest or convalescent home;
      (4)   Public building erected by any governmental agency;
      (5)   Religious, educational and eleemosynary institution of a
philanthropic nature;
      (6)   Private club or lodge, excepting when the chief activity of which
is service customarily carried on as a business;
      (7)   Mobile home or trailer court;
      (8)   Nursery, pre-kindergarten, kindergarten, play, special and other
private school or day care center;
      (9)   Public utility substations; and
      (10)   Assisted living retirement community.
   (C)   Accessory uses, see §
152.046 for additional regulations related to accessory uses:
      (1)   A noncommercial greenhouse that does not exceed in floor area 25%
of the ground floor area of the main building;
      (2)   A private garage or carport with a floor area of no more than 300
square feet per dwelling unit with a floor area not to exceed 550 square feet.
An additional floor area of 200 square feet may be provided for each 3,000
square feet of lot area by which the lot exceeds 6,000 square feet, provided
that no garage shall exceed 2,000 square feet nor house more than ten
automobiles;
      (3)   Home occupation;
      (4)   Stormwater detention basins or rain gardens;
      (5)   Vegetable or flower garden;
      (6)   Private driveways;
      (7)   Shared use or common use club house, tennis court, swimming pool,
garden house, gazebo, pergola, ornamental gate, flagpole, barbecue oven,
playground, dog run, fireplace, storage shed and similar shared uses
customarily accessory to multiple-family residential uses;
      (8)   Any single accessory building shall not exceed a height of 20 feet
or 75% of the shortest main structure, whichever is less;
      (9)   Off-street parking spaces when in conformance with the provisions
of this chapter; and
      (10)   Solid waste containers when located outside of an established
front yard setback and when located not less than five feet away from a side or
rear lot line and when fenced from visibility from property lines and right-of-
way lines.
(Ord. 20-12-01, passed 12-15-2020)
§ 152.030 C-1 NEIGHBORHOOD COMMERCIAL DISTRICT.
   The purpose of the C-1 Neighborhood Commercial District is to provide for
the development of convenience shopping and personal service needs of
surrounding residential neighborhoods. The C-1 District is intended as a low
intensity commercial district to allow freestanding office buildings uses, and
retail/office uses, and accommodate mixed use development.
   (A)   Permissive uses:
      (1)   Community Living Facility Dwelling, Category I;
      (2)   Community Living Facility Dwelling, Category II;
      (3)   Community Living Facility Dwelling, Category III;
      (4)   Public park or playground;
      (5)   Church;
      (6)   Public school, elementary and high, or private school having a
curriculum equivalent to a public elementary or public high school and having
no rooms regularly used for housing or sleeping purposes;
      (7)   Golf course;
      (8)   Bank or financial institution;
      (9)   Dressmaking, tailoring, shoe repairing, repair of household
appliances and bicycles, catering, and other uses of a similar character;
      (10)   Mortuary or funeral home;
      (11)   Office or office buildings;
      (12)   Personal service uses including barber shop, beauty parlor,
photographic or art studio, newspaper, florist, laundry service, animal
grooming and other uses of a similar character;
      (13)   General merchandise retail store, in connection with which there
shall be no slaughtering of animals or poultry, nor commercial fish cleaning
and processing on the premises;
      (14)   Restaurants, cafeterias, bars and taverns, donut/bakery shop and
other uses of a similar character, not including drive-in or drive-through
establishments;
      (15)   Convenience store;
      (16)   Property rental or real estate agency;
      (17)   Computer and personal electronics sales and repair;
      (18)   Private indoor recreational or fitness facility;
      (19)   Specialty retail store, such as apparel, jewelry, book, shoe,
stationary, antique and other similar stores;
      (20)   Assisted living retirement community;
      (21)   Dwelling, when located with any permissive use of the C-
1 district;
      (22)   Chiropractic, eye, or dental clinic;
      (23)   Nursery, pre-kindergarten, kindergarten, play, special and other
private school or day care center;
      (24)   Animal clinic.
   (B)   Conditional uses:
      (1)   Dwelling, when located with any approved conditional use of the C-
1 district;
      (2)   Automobile service station or gas station;
      (3)   General service and repair establishments, including dyeing or
cleaning works, plumbing and heating, printing, painting, upholstering or
appliance repair;
      (4)   Motel and hotel;
      (5)   Medical clinic;
      (6)   Private club or lodge;
      (7)   Public utility substation;
      (8)   Mixed-use;
      (9)   Drive-through or drive-in facility, see standards in §
152.053;
      (10)    Automobile/boat/RV/motorcycle/ vehicle sales building/lot;
      (11)   Garden store;
      (12)   Shopping center;
      (13)   Micro-brewery;
      (14)   Theater, not including drive-in theater;
      (15)   Automobile parking lot, storage lot or parking garage;
      (16)   Campgrounds;
      (17)   Public building erected by any governmental agency;
      (18)   Dwelling, when located with any approved conditional use within
the C-1 district;
      (19)   Animal hospital.
(Ord. passed 7-23-2002; Ord. 12-01-01, passed 1-24-2012; Ord. 17-09-02, passed
9-26-2017; Ord. 17-11-06, passed 11-28-2017)
§ 152.031 C-2 GENERAL COMMERCIAL DISTRICT.
   The purpose of the C-2 General Commercial District is to provide for a wide
range of retail, service, mixed, office and commercial uses. The C-2 District
is intended as a moderate intensity commercial district for uses serving a
community wide trade area.
   (A)   Permissive uses:
      (1)   Assisted living retirement community;
      (2)   Public park or playground;
      (3)   Church;
      (4)   Public school, elementary and high, or private school having a
curriculum equivalent to a public elementary or public high school and having
no rooms regularly used for housing or sleeping purposes;
      (5)   Golf course;
      (6)   Bank or financial institution;
      (7)   Dressmaking, tailoring, shoe repairing, repair of household
appliances and bicycles, catering, and other uses of a similar character;
      (8)   Mortuary or funeral home;
      (9)   Office or office buildings;
      (10)   Personal service uses including barber shop, beauty parlor,
photographic or art studio, newspaper, florist, laundry service, animal
grooming and other uses of a similar character;
      (11)   Nursery, pre-kindergarten, kindergarten, play, special and other
private school or day care center;
      (12)   General merchandise retail store, in connection with which there
shall be no slaughtering of animals or poultry, nor commercial fish cleaning
and processing on the premises;
      (13)   Restaurants, cafeterias, bars and taverns, donut/bakery shop and
other uses of a similar character;
      (14)   Computer and personal electronics sales and repair;
      (15)   Private indoor recreational or fitness facility;
      (16)   Specialty retail store, such as apparel, jewelry, book, shoe,
stationary, antique and other similar stores;
      (17)   Automobile service station or gas station;
      (18)   Bowling alley or billiard parlor;
      (19)   Business, commercial or trade school;
      (20)   Dancing or music academy;
      (21)   Display and salesroom;
      (22)   Hotel or motel;
      (23)   Laboratory, research, experimental or testing;
      (24)   Automobile repair shop;
      (25)   Radio or television broadcasting station or studio;
      (26)   Property rental or real estate agency;
      (27)   Animal clinic or animal hospital;
      (28)   Used or new car, trailer or boat sales or storage lot;
      (29)   Dyeing, cleaning, laundry, printing, painting, plumbing, tin-
smithing, tire sales and service, upholstering and other general service or
repair establishment of similar character. Not more than 10% of the lot or
tract occupied by the establishment shall be used for the open and unenclosed
storage of materials or equipment;
      (30)   Grocery store;
      (31)   Packaged food storage and/or distribution center;
      (32)   Drive-through or drive-in facility, see standards in §
152.053;
      (33)   Animal boarding;
      (34)   Automobile/vehicle sales building/lot;
      (35)   Medical, chiropractic, eye, or dental clinic;
      (36)   Check-cashing or short term loan service;
      (37)   Heating and air conditioning sales and service;
      (38)   Theater, not including drive-in theater;
      (39)   Private club or lodge;
      (40)   Car wash;
      (41)   Convenience store with or without gasoline sales;
      (42)   Automobile parking lot, storage lot or parking garage;
   (B)   Conditional uses:
      (1)   Farm implements, sale and repair;
      (2)   Farm store or feed store, including accessory storage of liquid or
solid fertilizer;
      (3)   Drive-in theater;
      (4)   Lumberyard and building materials storage or sales;
      (5)   Bakery for off-site sales;
      (6)   Bottling works;
      (7)   Wholesale equipment or warehouse in a completely enclosed building;
      (8)   Taxi or bus terminal;
      (9)   Greenhouse incidental to retail sale;
      (10)   Public utility substation;
      (11)   Shopping center;
      (12)   Mixed-use;
      (13)   Self-service storage or mini-warehouse facility;
      (14)   Towing service;
      (15)   Woodworking shop;
      (16)   Animal daycare;
      (17)   Hospital;
      (18)   Travel plaza or truck stop;
      (19)   Mobile or modular home sales lot;
      (20)   Landscaping contractor/business;
      (21)   Commercial outdoor recreation;
      (22)   Micro-brewery;
      (23)   Dwelling, when located with any use of the C-2 District.
(Ord. passed 7-23-2002; Ord. 12-01-01, passed 1-24-2012; Ord. 17-09-02, passed
9-26-2017; Ord. 17-11-06, passed 11-28-2017)
§ 152.032 C-3 PLANNED COMMERCIAL DISTRICT.
   The purpose of the C-3 Planned Commercial District is to provide for a wide
range of retail, service, office and commercial uses in a planned development
setting. The C-3 District is intended to promote creative and quality
developments while allowing for a mix of uses not normally considered
acceptable without site specific restrictions. The C-3 District is intended as
a moderate intensity commercial District for uses serving a community wide
trade area.
   (A)   Planned Commercial developments are subject to review and approval of
the following criteria:
      (1)   The commercial development may, upon approval by the Village,
consist of any of the permissive or conditional uses of the C-1 or C-2 zoning
districts. Minimum lot area, yard, height and accessory uses shall be
determined by the requirements and procedures set out below, which shall
prevail over conflicting requirements of this chapter or the Subdivision
Ordinance;
      (2)   Before the land is used or any building erected or used for any of
the above purposes, a preliminary plan and a final plan shall be approved by
the Board of Trustees for all contiguous property within this district in any
one location. The review process for the preliminary and final plan shall
follow all applicable procedures, standards and requirements of the Village
Subdivision and Development Ordinances as determined by the Plan and Zoning
Commission;
      (3)   The development plans shall be prepared by and have the seal of an
architect and/or engineer duly registered to practice in this state. No
building permit shall be issued until a final plat of the proposed development
is approved and recorded;
      (4)   The Plan and Zoning Commission shall review the conformity of the
proposed development with the standards of the official Village plans and
recognized principles of civic design, land use planning and landscape
architecture. The Commission may impose conditions regarding the layout,
circulation and performance of the proposed development and may require that
appropriate deed restrictions be filed enforceable by the Village. A plat of
development shall be recorded regardless of whether a subdivision is proposed
and the plat shall show building lines, common land, streets, easements and
other applicable features required by the ordinance regulating the subdivision
of land;
      (5)   The Commission may hold one or more public hearings on the
development plans. The recommendations of the Commission shall be forwarded to
the Board of Trustees who shall approve or disapprove the action of the
Commission with or without modification and after public hearing. After
approval by the Board and after any required restrictions are in effect, the
Building Inspector may issue permits enabling the approved final development
plan to be carried out;
      (6)   From time to time the proponents may make minor changes in the
approved final plan so long as the changes have been approved by the Plan and
Zoning Commission or upon denial of approval by the Plan and Zoning Commission,
with the approval of the Board of Trustees. What constitutes a "minor" change
will be determined at the sole discretion of the Plan and Zoning Commission. No
building permit or occupancy permits shall be issued for any building or use
that is not in accordance with an approved final plan; and
      (7)   The final plan may be used as the plan required to obtain an
occupancy or building permit, except that it shall also show the use or types
of uses to be accommodated in each building or portion thereof in addition to
the other requirements of the Village Subdivision or Development Ordinances.
   (B)   Planned development fee. The applicant must pay a fee, as determined
from time to time by resolution of the Village Board of Trustees, prior to any
hearing for the requirements of a Planned Development.
(Ord. passed 7-23-2002; Ord. 17-09-02, passed 9-26-2017)
§ 152.033 C-4 PLANNED MIXED USE DISTRICT.
   The purpose of the C-4 Planned Mixed Use District is to provide for a wide
range of residential, retail, service, office and commercial uses in a planned
development setting. The C-4 District is intended to promote creative and
quality developments while allowing for a mix of uses not normally considered
acceptable without site specific restrictions. The C-4 District is intended as
a moderate intensity District for uses serving a community wide trade area.
   (A)   Planned Mixed Use developments are subject to review and approval of
the following criteria:
      (1)   Any proposed commercial areas must follow the requirements as set
forth in §
152.032 C-3 Planned Commercial District.
      (2)   Any proposed residential areas must follow the requirements as set
forth in §
152.045 Large Scale Residential Developments, with the exception of the minimum
development area, §
152.045 (A)(1).
      (3)   Planned development fee. The applicant must pay a fee, as
determined from time to time by resolution of the Village Board of Trustees,
prior to any hearing for the requirements of a planned development.
(Ord. 17-09-02, passed 9-26-2017; Ord. 20-12- 01, passed 12-15-2020)
§ 152.034 I-1 PLANNED INDUSTRIAL DISTRICT.
   The purpose of the I-1 Planned Industrial District is to provide a mix of
commercial and light industrial uses in a planned campus setting. Typical uses
include large scale businesses, low impact manufacturing, distribution centers
and other similar uses in a business park setting. The following are
conditional uses:
   (A)   A building or premises may be used for any type of business,
administration or industrial use that is free from obnoxious or offensive
noise, odor, dust, gas, smoke or vibration, and which is part of a unified site
design on a tract of land comprising ten acres or more;
   (B)   The Industrial Development may, upon approval by the village, consist
of any of the permissive or conditional uses of the I-2 Zoning District.
Minimum lot area, yard, height and accessory uses shall be determined by the
requirements and procedures set out below, which shall prevail over conflicting
requirements of this chapter or the Subdivision Ordinance;
   (C)   Before the land is used or any building erected or used for any of the
above purposes, a preliminary plan and a final plan shall be approved by the
Board of Trustees for all contiguous property within this District in any one
location. The review process for the preliminary and final plan shall follow
all applicable procedures, standards and requirements of the Village
Subdivision and Development Ordinances as determined by the Plan and Zoning
Commission;
   (D)   The development plans shall be prepared by and have the seal of an
architect and/or engineer duly registered to practice in this state. No
building permit shall be issued until a final plat of the proposed development
is approved and recorded;
   (E)   The Plan and Zoning Commission shall review the conformity of the
proposed development with the standards of the official village plan and
recognized principles of civic design, land use planning, and landscape
architecture. The Commission may impose conditions regarding the layout,
circulation and performance of the proposed development and may require that
appropriate deed restrictions be filed enforceable by the village. A plat of
development shall be recorded regardless of whether a subdivision is proposed
and the plat shall show building lines, common land, streets, easements and
other applicable features required by the ordinance regulating the subdivision
of land;
   (F)   The Commission may hold one or more public hearings on the development
plans. The recommendations of the Commission shall be forwarded to the Board of
Trustees who shall approve or disapprove the action of the Commission with or
without modification and after public hearing. After approval by the Board and
after any required restrictions are in effect, the Building Inspector may issue
permits enabling the approved final development plan to be carried out;
   (F)   From time to time the proponents may make minor changes in the
approved final plan so long as the changes have been approved by the Plan and
Zoning Commission or, upon denial of approval by the Plan and Zoning
Commission, with the approval of the Board of Trustees. What constitutes a
“minor” change will be determined at the sole discretion of the Plan and Zoning
Commission. No building or occupancy permits shall be issued for any building
or use that is not in accordance with an approved final plan; and
   (G)   The final plans may be used as the plan required to obtain an
occupancy or building permit, except that it shall also show the use or type of
uses to be accommodated in each building or portion thereof in addition to the
other requirements of the Village Subdivision or Development Ordinances.
(Ord. passed 7-23-2002; Ord. 17-09-02, passed 9-26-2017)
§ 152.035 I-2 INDUSTRIAL DISTRICT.
   The purpose of the I-2 Industrial District is to provide for the development
of a mix of higher intensity commercial and moderate intensity industrial uses.
These uses may produce significant off-site impacts. It is intended that other
districts serve as transitional areas between this district and residential
uses.
   (A)   Permissive uses:
      (1)   Assisted living retirement community;
      (2)   Public park or playground;
      (3)   Church;
      (4)   Public school, elementary and high, or private school having a
curriculum equivalent to a public elementary or public high school and having
no rooms regularly used for housing or sleeping purposes;
      (5)   Dressmaking, tailoring, shoe repairing, repair of household
appliances and bicycles, catering, and other uses of a similar character;
      (6)   Mortuary or funeral home;
      (7)   Office or office buildings;
      (8)   Private school;
      (9)   General merchandise retail store;
      (10)   Private indoor recreational or fitness facility;
      (11)   Automobile service station or gas station;
      (12)   Bowling alley or billiard parlor;
      (13)   Business, commercial or trade school;
      (14)   Dancing or music academy;
      (15)   Display and salesroom;
      (16)   Frozen food locker;
      (17)   Hotel or motel;
      (18)   Laboratory, research, experimental or testing;
      (19)   Distribution or warehousing operations;
      (20)   Automobile repair shop;
      (21)   Radio or television broadcasting station or studio;
      (22)   Animal clinic or animal hospital;
      (23)   Animal boarding or animal daycare;
      (24)   Used or new vehicle, trailer or boat sales or storage;
      (25)   Packaged food storage and/or distribution center;
      (26)   Heating and air conditioning sales and service;
      (27)   Theater;
      (28)   Car wash;
      (29)   Convenience store with or without gasoline sales;
      (30)   Automobile parking lot, storage lot or parking garage;
      (31)   Automobile repair garages, but no auto junk yards;
      (32)   Farm machinery and equipment sales and repair;
      (33)   General service and repair establishments including dyeing and
cleaning works or laundry, plumbing and heating, printing, painting,
upholstering, tinsmithing or appliance repair shop;
      (34)   Manufacture or assembly of medical and dental equipment, drafting,
optical and musical instruments, watches, clocks, toys, games and electrical or
electronic apparatus;
      (35)   Manufacture or assembly of boats, bolts, nuts, screws, and rivets,
ornamental iron products, firearms, electrical appliances, tools, dyes,
machinery and hardware products;
      (36)   Manufacture or storage of food products including beverage
blending or bottling, bakery products, candy manufacture, fruit and vegetable
processing and canning, packing and processing of meat and poultry products,
but not slaughtering of poultry or animals;
      (37)   Manufacture of rugs, mattresses, pillows, quilts, millinery,
hosiery, clothing and fabrics and printing and finishing of textiles and fibers
into fabric goods;
      (38)   Manufacture of boxes, crates, furniture, baskets, veneer and other
wood products of a similar nature;
      (39)   Generally those manufacturing uses similar to those listed in §
152.035(A) which do not create any more danger to health and safety in
surrounding areas, and which do not create any more offensive noise, vibration,
smoke, dust, lint, odors, heat or glare than that which is generally associated
with the industries of the type specifically permitted;
      (40)   Commercial outdoor recreation, general;
      (41)   Communication tower;
      (42)   Travel plaza or truck stop.
   (B)   Conditional uses:
      (1)   Automobile wrecking and storage;
      (2)   Salvage or junk yard;
      (3)   Fertilizer manufacture (from organic matter);
      (4)   Petroleum products terminal;
      (5)   Wholesale storage of gasoline;
      (6)   Public utilities substation;
      (7)   Commercial outdoor recreation, concentrated;
      (8)   Self-service storage or mini-warehouse facility;
      (9)   Mixed use;
      (10)   Kennel.
(Ord. passed 7-23-2002; Ord. 12-01-01, passed 1-24-2012; Ord. 17-09-02, passed
9-26-2017; Ord. 17-11-06, passed 11-28-2017; Ord. 20-12- 01, passed 12-15-2020)
§ 152.036 FP FOREST PRESERVE DISTRICT.
   The purpose of the FP Forest Preserve District is to accommodate the
Champaign County Forest Preserve District lands annexed to the Village of
Mahomet so as to not apply restrictions beyond those as unincorporated
territory.
   The following are permissive uses:
   (A)   There shall be no restrictions upon the use of any property within
this district; and
   (B)   There shall be no restrictions upon the type of buildings constructed
within this district.
(Ord. passed 7-23-2002; Ord. 17-09-02, passed 9-26-2017)
OTHER USE REGULATIONS
§ 152.045 LARGE SCALE RESIDENTIAL DEVELOPMENTS.
   (A)   Generally. Large-scale residential developments, where permitted, are
subjected to the following conditions.
      (1)   The development shall have a minimum area of five acres.
      (2)   The housing may consist of a single, two or multiple dwellings, or
any combination thereof. Minimum lot area, yard, height and accessory uses
shall be determined by the requirements and procedure set out below, which
shall prevail over conflicting requirements of this chapter or the ordinance
governing the subdivision of land.
      (3)   The final development plan shall follow all applicable procedures,
standards, and requirements of the ordinance governing the subdivision of land.
The final development plan shall be prepared by and have the seal of an
architect or engineer duly registered to practice in this state. No building
permit shall be issued until a final plat of the proposed development is
approved and recorded.
      (4)   The Plan and Zoning Commission shall review the conformity of the
proposed development with the standards of the official village plan and
recognized principles of civic design, land use planning, and landscape
architecture. The minimum yard and maximum height requirements of the district
in which the development is located shall not apply except that minimum yards
shall be provided around the boundaries of the area being developed. The
Commission may impose conditions regarding the layout, circulation and
performance of the proposed development and may require that appropriate deed
restrictions be filed enforceable by the village for a period of 20 years from
date of filing. A plat of development shall be recorded regardless of whether a
subdivision is proposed and the plat shall show building lines, common land,
streets, easements and other applicable features required by the ordinance
regulating the subdivision of land.
      (5)   The number of dwelling units permitted shall be determined by
dividing the net development area by the minimum lot area per family required
by the district or districts in which the area is located. Net development area
shall be determined by subtracting the area set aside for churches, schools or
other nonresidential uses from the gross development area and deducting 20% of
the remainder for streets, regardless of the amount of land actually required
for streets. The area of land set aside for common open space or recreational
use shall be included in determining the number of dwelling units permitted.
      (6)   The Commission may hold one or more public hearings on a final
development plan. The recommendations of the Commission shall be forwarded to
the Board of Trustees who shall approve or disapprove the action of the
Commission with or without modification and after public hearing. After
approval by the Board and after any required restrictions are in effect, the
Building Inspector may issue permits enabling the approved final development
plan to be carried out.
   (B)   Development agreement fee. Whenever a developer desires to enter into
a development agreement with the village for the construction of utilities or
to address other requirements of this chapter, the developer shall be required
to pay a fee of $5,000 plus $300 per acre for each acre over five acres to the
village prior to any study or negotiation of the development agreement. This
fee may be refunded to the developer upon the completion of the construction of
the utilities and/or final platting of the development, but only if completed
within two years from the date of payment of the fee to the village. The
payment of this fee shall be in addition to any other fees required by this or
any other ordinance. The amount of the fee may be amended from time to time by
the resolution of the Board of Trustees of the village.
(Ord. passed 7-23-2002)
§ 152.046 ACCESSORY BUILDINGS AND USES.
    Accessory buildings and uses are permitted when in accordance with the
following.
   (A)   In the R-1A, R-1B, R-1C and R-2 Districts, accessory buildings and
uses are limited to:
      (1)   A non-commercial greenhouse that does not exceed in floor area 25%
of the ground floor area of the main building or 750 square feet, whichever is
less;
      (2)   A private garage with a floor area not to exceed 550 square feet.
An additional floor area of 200 square feet may be provided for each 3,000
square feet or lot area by which the lot exceeds 6,000 square feet, provided
that no garage shall exceed a floor area of 1,000 square feet nor house more
than five automobiles;
      (3)   Carports with a floor area not to exceed 500 square feet;
      (4)   Home occupation;
      (5)   Fallout or storm shelters;
      (6)   Vegetable or flower garden;
      (7)   Tennis courts, swimming pool, garden house, pergola, gazebo,
ornamental gate, barbecue oven, television antennas, children's playhouse,
doghouse, fireplace, lawn furniture, storage shed, flag poles and similar uses
customarily accessory to residential uses;
      (8)   Private driveways;
      (9)   Any single accessory building shall not exceed a floor area of
1,000 square feet in the R-1A, R-1B and R-2 Districts or 750 square feet in the
R-1C District;
      (10)   Any single accessory building shall not exceed 20 feet in height;
      (11)   The total floor area of all accessory buildings shall not exceed
1,000 square feet for lots with an area of less than 15,000 square feet. One
accessory building of less than 120 square feet, which complies with location
and height requirements, is permitted and is exempt from this total floor area
requirement;
      (12)   The total floor area of all accessory buildings for lots with an
area of more than 15,000 square feet may be increased by 400 square feet for
each 3,000 square feet of lot area by which the lot exceeds 15,000 square feet;
and
      (13)   A single chicken (hen) coop and associated run, as permitted in §
152.056.
   (B)   In the AG and AC zoning districts, accessory buildings and uses are
limited to:
      (1)   Barns for the housing of livestock;
      (2)   An enclosed storage building for large mechanical equipment
necessary for the maintenance of the land;
      (3)   Wayside stands not exceeding 400 square feet in floor area for the
sale of agricultural products grown on the same property;
      (4)   Grain bins, fuel tanks, grain drying equipment, grain distribution
elevators and other similar grain handling facilities related to traditional
farming operations;
      (5)   Human-made lakes and ponds located not less than 25 feet away from
any lot line; and
      (6)   All accessory buildings and uses permitted as listed above in the
R-1A, R-1B and R-2 zoning districts, however, the accessory building size
limitations shall not apply.
   (C)   Accessory uses allowed in multiple-family residential zoning
districts: R- 3A: See §
152.026(C), R-3B: See §
152.027(C), R-3C: See §
152.028(C), R-3G: See §
152.026(C).
   (D)   In the Commercial and Industrial Districts accessory buildings and
uses are limited to:
      (1)   Parking lots and garages;
      (2)   Accessory use not to exceed 40% of the floor area of the main
building for incidental storage or light industrial activity;
      (3)   Fire escapes, balconies, chimneys, flag poles and other similar
uses customarily accessory to commercial or industrial uses;
      (4)   Accessory uses and buildings which are customarily incidental to
the principal use of the premises;
      (5)   If an accessory building or structure is not attached to the main
building, it shall be located
not less than 40 feet from a front lot line and shall be located entirely
within the buildable area of the lot;
      (6)   Private driveways;
      (7)   Advertising signs which are consistent with the requirements
elsewhere in this chapter;
      (8)   Stormwater detention basins;
      (9)   Off-street loading spaces;
      (10)   Storage tanks for liquids and granular materials;
      (11)   Heating, ventilation and air conditioning equipment located at
least five feet away from a side or rear lot line;
      (12)   The total floor area of accessory buildings shall not exceed 25%
of the floor area of the main building;
      (13)   Human-made lakes and ponds located not less than 25 feet away from
any lot line;
      (14)   Exterior storage of materials, products or equipment in the I-
2 District, provided that the storage shall not exceed 20% of the area of the
lot;
      (15)   Outdoor processing equipment in the Industrial Districts; and
      (16)   An animal run, when accessory to a permitted or approved animal
boarding or animal daycare facility, shall be subject to the following minimum
provisions:
         (a)   An animal run may be located o a lot with a minimum area of one
acre;
         (b)   The total area of any animal run(s) shall not exceed 4% of the
lot area;
         (c)   Animals shall be permitted inside an animal run only while
directly supervised by the operator or staff;
         (d)   Animals shall be permitted in an animal run only between the
hours of 8:00 a.m. and 9:00 p.m.;
         (e)   Animal runs shall be surrounded by an eight-foot tall opaque
fence and must provide landscape screening around the exterior perimeter of the
fence;
         (f)   Animal runs shall be located a minimum of 75 feet from any
adjacent residentially used or zoned property;
         (g)   Animal runs shall not be located in any established front yard.
   (E)   There shall be the following additional regulations.
      (1)   A building or use that is accessory to a permitted use may be
erected or established as an accessory building or use only if:
         (a)   It is located on the same zoning lot as the principal use and
where the principal use is either permitted by right or authorized by a
conditional use permit;
         (b)   It is compatible in character and extent with the principal
structure and use and the district in which it is located;
         (c)   It is customarily incidental to the principal structure and use;
and
         (d)   It complies with the other applicable regulations of this
chapter.
      (2)   No accessory building shall be constructed upon a lot until the
construction of the main building has actually commenced, and no accessory
building shall be used unless the main building on the lot is also being used.
However, nothing shall prevent the use of a temporary construction shed or road
wagon for the storage of tools, materials and equipment by a contractor or
owner during building construction.
      (3)   No accessory building may be erected in front of a main building
unless the accessory building is attached to the main building by a common
wall.
      (4)   Accessory buildings may not be used for dwelling purposes.
      (5)   No storage of volatile liquids, flammable gases, hazardous
materials or explosives shall be permitted in any residential district, except
as might be kept for normal household use in typical household quantities.
      (6)   Solid waste containers in Commercial and Industrial Districts shall
not be located within an established front yard setback and shall be located
not less than five feet away from a side or rear lot line and shall be fenced
from visibility from property lines and right-of- way lines.
      (7)   The height of accessory buildings or structures shall not exceed
100 feet in the Commercial and Industrial Districts.
   (F)   In residential zoning districts the following lot coverage
restrictions shall apply:
      (1)   Maximum lot coverage in the R-1A District shall be 25%;
      (2)   Maximum lot coverage in the R-1B District shall be 30%;
      (3)   Maximum lot coverage in the R-1C District shall be 35%; and
      (4)   Maximum lot coverage in the R-2 District shall be 40%.
   (G)   Residential swimming pools.
      (1)   Permit. A permit is required for any residential swimming pool, as
defined in this ordinance.
      (2)   Maintenance. See
Chapter 93 Public Nuisances.
      (3)   Lighting. Illumination of pools shall be limited to underwater
lighting.
      (4)   Pool enclosure.
         (a)   For the protection of the general public, any swimming pool, as
defined in these regulations, shall be completely enclosed by a fence not less
than 42 inches in height above grade level. All pool fencing and gates must be
maintained in good working order.
         (b)   Above-ground pools with a wall height of 42 inches above grade
or greater shall be exempt from fencing requirements.
         (c)   Fence gate(s) shall be of a self-closing and self-latching type
capable of keeping such gate securely closed at all times. The gate must
positively close and latch when released from an open position of six (6)
inches from the gate post.
         (d)   A permit is required for pool enclosure fencing. No existing
pool enclosure shall be removed, replaced or changed in a manner that reduces
its effectiveness as a safety barrier.
      (5)   Ladders. Any ladder used to access a residential swimming pool
which is exempt from fencing requirements, must be removed or secured to
prohibit access to the pool when the pool is not in use.
      (6)   Location. No pool shall be located in any public utility or
drainage easement.
(Ord. passed 7-23-2002; Ord. 17-09-02, 9-26-2017; Ord. 17-11-06, passed 11-28-
2017; Ord. 20-09-03, passed 9-22-2020; Ord. 20-12-01, passed 12-15-2020)
§ 152.047 MOBILE HOMES.
   (A)   All inhabited mobile homes shall be located in a mobile home court
which has received a conditional use permit and which conforms with the
requirement of the following paragraph. No mobile home outside of an approved
mobile home court shall be connected to utilities except those mobile homes
being offered for sale and not inhabited.
   (B)   Mobile home courts shall meet the following minimum standards.
      (1)   Each lot provided for the occupancy of a single mobile home unit
shall have an area of not less than 3,500 square feet and a width of not less
than 40 feet, and no court shall be permitted an average density of mobile home
lots of more than eight per acre, and each mobile home court shall provide an
area of not less than ten acres.
      (2)   All mobile home courts, shall provide lots sufficient in size that
no mobile home or any structure, addition or appurtenance thereto is located
less than ten feet from the nearest adjacent lot boundary.
      (3)   Space between mobile homes may be used for the parking of motor
vehicles if the space is clearly designated and the vehicle is parked at least
ten feet from the nearest adjacent lot boundary.
      (4)   Each mobile home site shall abut or face a clear, unoccupied space,
driveway, roadway or street of not less than 20 feet in width, which shall have
an unobstructed access to a public highway, street or alley.
      (5)   The mobile home court shall be surrounded by a landscaped strip of
open space 50 feet wide along the street frontage of a major street and 25 feet
wide along all other lot lines or street frontage.
(Ord. passed 7-23-2002)
§ 152.048 ROW HOUSES.
   Special regulations regarding row houses shall be as follows.
   (A)   In districts where row house buildings are permitted, and row houses
are to be constructed each on its own lot and shall be subject to the minimum
requirements specified in this section.
   (B)   Minimum lot area for a row house lot shall be not less than 3,000
square feet.
   (C)   Minimum frontage of a row house lot on a public street shall be not
less than 20 feet on a standard lot and not less than 45 feet on each frontage
of a corner lot.
   (D)   No side yard shall be required along any side lot line which is common
to two attached row houses, whether they be on interior or exterior row house
lots. Side yards not common to that of any other attached row house must
conform to setbacks as required by §
152.090.
   (E)   Front yard and rear yard requirements as established in §
152.090 shall be provided for all row house dwellings.
   (F)   A minimum lot width of 20 feet shall be provided for all interior and
exterior row house lots.
   (G)   Row houses shall be developed on subdivided lots with no more than six
units per building; nor shall the building exceed 120 feet in width.
   (H)   The maximum lot coverage for row house lot including driveways shall
be 50%.
   (I)   Exterior treatment of attached row houses shall be integrated.
Exterior of buildings shall be maintained in a uniform similar exterior
treatment and finish.
   (J)   An unobstructed easement shaII be provided across the side and rear
eight feet of each exterior row house lot (triplex), when adjacent to an
interior row house lot, for ingress and egress of adjacent interior row house
lot owners for maintenance purposes. The access easement shall be unobstructed
and physically passable at all times. This easement shall be incorporated into
each deed transferring title to the property.
   (K)   A party wall agreement shall be included in the subdivision covenants
for each row house lot setting forth provisions for repair of common walls,
repair of common utility service connections, reconstruction of the common
building in the event of damage or destruction of one or all of the dwelling
units and common maintenance and repair of joint facilities.
   (L)   Common walls and floor ceiling assemblies shall conform to Section 302
FIRE-RESISTANT CONSTRUCTION of the 2015 International Residential Code and
amendments as outlined in Title 16 of these municipal codes.
(Ord. passed 7-23-2002; Ord. 20-12-01, passed 12-15-2020)
§ 152.049 UTILITIES.
   (A)   Specific area, height and yard regulations for certain public and
quasi-public utility uses, including public utility substations and
communications towers, may be established by the Village Plan and Zoning
Commission and Board of Trustees on a case-by-case basis through the
conditional use process.
   (B)   These regulations shall supersede those in §
152.090.
   (C)   These regulations shall be set forth with consideration of
circumstances unique to the utility uses, including the following.
      (1)   Required lot areas may be minimal due to the typically small size
of utility substation buildings and equipment enclosures. A lot size of 4,000
square feet is a suggested minimum.
      (2)   Required lot widths may also be minimal due to the small size of
buildings and enclosures. A lot width of 40 feet is a suggested minimum.
      (3)   Lot frontage on a public street may not be necessary since utility
substations and communications towers are generally only visited for routine
maintenance purposes. In those cases, access may be provided by easement across
adjacent lands.
      (4)   In cases where a lot is replatted for utility use, yard setbacks
may be measured from the exterior lot lines of the larger lot. Setbacks may be
reduced so long as minimum setbacks along public streets are maintained,
visibility along all roadways is maintained, and minimum side yard separation
is maintained from other existing or potential structures. Setback requirements
may be increased for yards adjacent to residential zoning or uses.
      (5)   Heights for communications towers may be allowable up to 200 feet,
so long as associated distances from residentially zoned or used properties are
maintained, and appropriate permits from federal and state agencies are
obtained.
      (6)   Site fencing may be required.
      (7)   Site landscaping and buffering from adjacent uses may be required.
      (8)   Minimum distances from residentially zoned or used properties may
be required for communications towers.
      (9)   Other conditions may be imposed consistent with the findings
required in §
152.120.
(Ord. passed 7-23-2002)
§ 152.050 OTHER REGULATIONS
   Other special regulations shall be as follows.
   (A)   Visibility at intersections. On a corner lot, nothing shall be
constructed, placed planted or allowed to grow in a manner so as to materially
impede vision between two feet and seven feet above the mean grade of the lot
within a visibility triangle. Further, no person shall permit the continuance
of a visibility obstruction within the visibility triangle, as determined by
the Zoning Administrator or his or her agent in accordance with this chapter,
on any village right-of-way and adjacent to any property owned or controlled by
the person after having received notice to remove the obstruction pursuant to
this chapter. Any visibility obstruction within the visibility triangle, as
determined by the Zoning Administrator or his or her agent in accordance with
this chapter, shall be removed at the direction of the Zoning Administrator or
his or her agent within ten days of having received notice to remove the
obstruction pursuant to this chapter.
   (B)   Outdoor lighting requirements. All outdoor lighting installed upon
private property for commercial, industrial and multi-family uses shall be
fully shielded and constructed so that light rays emitted by the fixture are
projected below the horizontal plain passing through the lowest point on the
fixture from which light is emitted. All outdoor lighting shall be designed and
installed so as to minimize uplight, spill-light and glare. The fixture shall
be designed and installed so that no light source is visible at a point two
feet or higher above ground level at the property line. Illumination beyond the
property line shall not exceed 0.50 foot candles at a point five feet above
ground level.
   (C)   Combination and division of zoning lots. Zoning lots shall be subject
to the following requirements.
      (1)   Two or more lots may be combined to create a single zoning lot.
Those lots shall be under the same ownership at the time of zoning approval for
construction of any structure on the zoning lot. Zoning lots shall be located
entirely within one zoning district. Upon construction of a structure or other
improvements, the zoning lot shall be considered one lot for development review
and zoning purposes.
      (2)   Creation of a zoning lot shall require imposition of deed
restrictions, approved by the village, which irrevocably combine the lots into
a single, larger tract or parcel.
      (3)   Once created, no zoning lot shall thereafter be divided into two or
more zoning lots and no portion of any improved zoning lot shall be sold
separately from the remainder of the zoning lot, unless permission to do so has
been expressly granted by Board of Trustees of the village.
   (D)   Fences, hedges or walls. A permit is required prior to the
installation of fencing.
      (1)   Fences, hedges or walls not more than four feet in height may
project into or enclose any front yard between the right-of-way line and the
established front yard setback line. Corner lots are considered to have two
front yards for the purposes of these fencing regulations. Fences that project
into or enclose any front yard must not be more than 50% opaque.
      (2)   On a corner lot, the visibility triangle requirements set forth in
§
152.050(A) shall also be applicable.
      (3)   Fences or walls may project into or enclose side or rear yards
provided the fences and walls do not exceed a height of six feet in residential
districts and eight feet in commercial or industrial districts.
      (4)   Fences or walls may be allowed to exceed the height requirements in
§
152.050(D) along interstate or railroad right-of-way, with approval of the
Village Planner, provided the fence or wall does not exceed a height of eight
feet.
      (5)   Fences that project into any required yard must be constructed so
that the finished side of the fence faces neighboring properties.
      (6)   Electrical fences, barbed wire, and spikes are prohibited in all
residential districts.
      (7)   Lots with an approved access approach that is interior to a
subdivision and has an additional frontage on an exterior street, the exterior
street frontage shall be considered a rear yard for the purposes of these
fencing regulations.
(Ord. passed 7-23-2002; Ord. 17-09-02, passed 9-26-2017)
§ 152.051 HOME OCCUPATIONS.
   Regulations regarding home occupations shall be as follows.
   (A)   The occupation or activity shall be clearly incidental and secondary
to the use of the premises as a dwelling or residence.
   (B)   The activities related to the business are carried on principally
within a main building by a member of a family residing on the premises.
   (C)   There shall be no advertising other than an identification sign of not
more than one square foot in area, and no other display or storage of materials
or external identification of the home occupation.
   (D)   The use shall not alter or change the exterior character or appearance
of the main building.
   (E)   There shall be no exterior storage of materials or equipment and no
exterior indication of the home occupation.
   (F)   No more than two persons outside the family shall be employed either
on- or off-site.
   (G)   No equipment shall be used which creates offensive noise, vibration,
smoke, dust, odors, heat or glare.
   (H)   No extraordinary or unusual traffic shall be generated by the home
occupation beyond the traffic normally expected in a residential neighborhood.
   (I)   Adequate off-street parking shall be provided for the residential use,
each employee, and at least one customer.
   (J)   A home occupation shall include, but not be limited to, the following:
      (1)   Art studio;
      (2)   Dressmaking;
      (3)   Professional office of a physician, dentist, optometrist, lawyer,
engineer, architect, accountant, salesperson, real estate agent, insurance
agent or other similar occupation;
      (4)   Teaching, or tutoring, including musical instruction limited to not
more than two pupils at a time;
      (5)   Day care home; or
      (6)   Hair dresser or barber.
   (K)   No item or article is offered for sale except the finished articles as
may be produced in the household by members of the immediate family or items
and articles as which are pre-packaged products for personal use.
   (L)   There shall be no more than one home occupation, as defined herein,
per dwelling unit.
   (M)   The total floor area devoted to the use shall not exceed 40% of the
gross floor area of the dwelling unit, and not more than 50% of the gross floor
area of any story shall be devoted to the accessory use.
   (N)   The home occupation shall not be conducted in a manner which would
cause the premises to differ from its residential character.
   (O)   The storage of merchandise, supplies or products for off-premises
sales is permitted. For the purpose of this section, any products shipped or
delivered to the ultimate consumer of the goods or merchandise shall be
considered off-premises sales.
   (P)   There shall be not more than five clients or customers on the premises
during any period of 60 consecutive minutes, and not more than 16 customers in
any given 24-hour period.
(Ord. passed 7-23-2002)
§ 152.052 ASSISTED LIVING RETIREMENT COMMUNITIES.
   Special regulations regarding assisted living retirement communities shall
be as follows.
   (A)   Assisted living retirement communities shall contain not less than two
acres located within a planned cohesive tract, and shall include multiple-
family type structures to not less than 20 individuals, 80% of which shall be
60 years of age or older.
   (B)   Multiple-family type structures containing residential units may be
provided on a rental basis or on a condominium ownership basis. Each
residential until shall have not more than three bedrooms.
   (C)   The side yard setback shall be not less than eight feet.
   (D)   Maximum allowable density shall be 15 residential dwelling units per
acre.
   (E)   Parking spaces shall be provided at a rate of one space per bed or two
spaces per dwelling unit, as applicable. Parking spaces shall not be located in
the required front or side yards.
   (F)   Not less than 10% of the site shall be open space.
   (G)   Minimum spacing between buildings shall be 15 feet.
   (H)   All buildings shall be provided with appropriate fire escape
provisions, consistent with the requirements of the International Building
Code, latest edition.
   (I)   A site plan shall be provided for the entire complex, at a scale not
greater than one inch equals
100 feet. The site plan shall provide appropriate information concerning
existing conditions and proposed facilities, sufficient to confirm compliance
with applicable village ordinance.
   (J)   Assisted living services provided may include assistance with daily
living activities such as dressing, grooming, bathing and the like. Services
provided may include: common dining areas, social and recreational features,
special safety and convenience features designed for the needs of the elderly,
and the provision of social services such as meal services, transportation,
housekeeping and organized social activities.
   (K)   The facility shall provide primarily non-medical resident services on
a 24-hour a day basis to 20 or more individuals in need of personal assistance
essential for sustaining the activities of daily life.
   (L)   Accessory uses shall not include retail or wholesale outlet, or
distribution of goods or merchandise. Common dining rooms and clubhouse type
areas shall not be available for rental by nonresidents of the complex.
   (M)   The site shall be provided with landscaping, site lighting and an
internal system of pedestrian pathways. The site shall be provided with
adequate, safe and convenient vehicular access. Adequate utilities shall be
provided to the site.
   (N)   No portion of the site shall be further than 250 feet from a fire
hydrant. Buildings containing 20 or more residential units shall be provided
with appropriate fire alarm/fire suppression systems.
(Ord. passed 7-23-2002)
§ 152.053 STANDARDS FOR DRIVE-THROUGH USES.
   A specific land parcel, to be developed with such uses as a drive-through
financial institution, drive-through car wash, drive-through restaurant, or
similar use that requires a continuous flow of one-way traffic, which has
frontage with less than two access drives per frontage, may require one-way
traffic around the site, provided one access drive is for entrance only and one
access drive is for exit only. These exceptions will apply unless otherwise
prohibited by a subdivision plat.
   (A)   Order boxes and drive-through stacking lanes are prohibited in the
required front yard, provided that if the property has more than one frontage
on public right of way, the prohibition shall apply only to the required front
yard along the street with the higher traffic volume or road classification.
   (B)   No drive-up window or order box shall be located on the front facade
of the building, provided that if the property has more than one frontage on
public right of way, the prohibition shall only apply to the facade facing the
street with the higher traffic volume or road classification.
   (C)   Drive-through facilities shall provide a stacking lane for the
stacking of automobiles waiting to drive through the facility. The space
directly adjacent to the drive-up window is considered a stacking space. Each
stacking space for automobiles shall be nine feet in width and 20 feet in
length. Such stacking lanes shall not include any portion of any access aisles
or driveway for off-street parking lots and shall not encroach in any required
front yard except as allowed in §
152.053(A)(1).
   (D)   Drive-through restaurants shall provide a minimum of eight stacking
spaces in the required stacking lane per pick-up window.
   (E)   All other drive-through uses, including but not limited to, car
washes, dry cleaners, financial institutions, and automatic teller machines,
shall provide a minimum of four stacking spaces per drive-up window.
   (F)   This requirement shall not be applied to service/gas stations, except
to those which have drive-through car washes. Only the car wash portion of the
use shall be subject to the stacking requirement.
   (G)   The Village Planner and Village Engineer may reduce the required
number of stacking spaces by up to two spaces.
   (H)   Drive-through facilities shall submit a site plan for review and
approval by the village.
   (I)   The Village Planner and Village Engineer may authorize deviations from
these requirements provided there are unique site conditions and the proposed
design will not affect safe vehicular movement on and off the site.
(Ord. 17-09-02, passed 9-26-2017)
§ 152.054 ANIMAL USE REQUIREMENTS.
   Any building or portion of a building used for animal boarding, animal
daycare, or other animal containment uses relating to an approved commercial
establishment shall be subject to the following requirements:
   (A)   The Village Planner may require soundproofing when sound produced by
the establishment is clearly audible beyond the boundary line of the property.
   (B)   The animals and facility must be kept free of odors or stench which is
offensive to a person of ordinary sensibility detectable beyond the boundary
line of the property.
(Ord. 17-11-06, passed 11-28-2017)
§ 152.055 STANDARDS FOR MULTIPLE- FAMILY RESIDENTIAL DEVELOPMENT.
   Any multiple-family residential dwelling development on a property of 20,000
square feet or larger and/or which contains any principle building with more
than four dwelling units must comply with the following standards and all other
applicable standards in this chapter, unless the use is approved by issuance of
a conditional use permit in which alternative standards are determined.
Multiple-family residential dwelling developments that exceeds 16 dwelling
units must obtain a conditional use permit to establish the use.
   (A)   Development standards:
      (1)   Maximum building height: 2 stories and 30 feet.
      (2)   Minimum building setback: Front 25 feet, side 25 feet, and rear 25
feet.
      (3)   HVAC equipment: No HVAC equipment shall be visible from adjacent
property lines including surrounding rights-of-way. Landscaping or fence
screening may be provided but only when approved by the Village Planner.
      (4)   Dumpsters shall be screened via a privacy fence.
   (B)   Perimeter landscaping requirements:
      (1)   Minimum landscaping: One shade tree and three shrubs must be
planted and maintained within the building setback for every 40 linear feet
along the length of the property lines.
   (C)   Conditional use permit.
      (1)   Guidelines. In making a legislative determination to issue a
conditional use permit for a multiple-family residential dwelling development,
the following guidelines may be considered:
         (a)   The availability of permanent open spaces, including public
parks, golf courses, schools and similar such uses in proximity to the subject
property.
         (b)   The availability of permanent open spaces and recreational
facilities located on the site.
         (c)   The relationship of the site to all aspects of the village
transportation system, including sidewalks, bike paths and streets.
         (d)   The extent to which the multiple-family residential use of the
site will promote balanced growth in the community, provide an opportunity for
equal housing opportunities, provide a variety of housing types and meet a need
for the type(s) of housing proposed.
         (e)   The suitability of the site plan presented for the proposed
multiple-family residential use.
      (2)   Site plan. An application for a conditional use permit to establish
a multiple-family residential use shall be accompanied by a site plan which
shall be reviewed and approved by the Board of Trustees.
(Ord. 20-07-05, passed 7-28-2020; Ord. 20-12- 01, passed 12-15-2020)
§ 152.056 CHICKENS (HENS ONLY).
   Any residential property used to raise chickens shall be subject to the
following requirements:
   (A)   No person shall possess a chicken unless a license has been issued as
set forth in this section.
   (B)   The number of chickens allowed shall be a maximum of six hens per
permitted property.
   (C)   Roosters are prohibited within the village limits.
   (D)   Coops and associated runs are considered an accessory structure as
defined in §
152.046 and must meet all standards outlined therein.
   (E)   Permit required. Construction for all coops and runs require a
building permit.
   (F)   Care. Care for hens shall follow the following provisions:
      (1)   A coop and run must be provided.
      (2)   No hen shall be permitted to run at large. Hens shall be kept in a
designated coop or run. Hens may be allowed to exercise in a rear yard with a
six foot or higher fence with supervision.
         (a)   If the coop and run are not within a fenced yard, hens must be
kept within the coop and run at all times.
         (b)   All fencing must meet the standards outlined in §
152.050(D).
      (3)   Feed must be stored in a fully enclosed, rodent-proof container.
   (G)   Housing. Housing for hens shall follow the following provisions:
      (1)   Location. Coops and runs shall be located only in the rear yard of
a primary residential structure.
      (2)   Setbacks. Coops and runs shall be located at least ten feet from
the property line and at least 20 feet from any neighboring dwelling.
      (3)   Height. Maximum height for a chicken coop shall be ten feet.
      (4)   Design. The coop must be built to provide ventilation, shade,
protection from precipitation, protection from cold weather and to be secure
from predators, wild birds and rodents.
         (a)   Openings in windows and doors must be covered by wire mesh or
screens to deter predators.
         (b)   Access doors must be sized and placed for ease of cleaning.
         (c)   The enclosed run must be attached to the coop or must surround
the coop. The sides of the run must be made of fencing or wire mesh that
discourages predators.
         (d)   The run must be enclosed on all sides, including the top or roof
plane.
      (5)   Size. The coop shall provide a minimum of five square feet of floor
area per hen. The run shall provide a minimum of ten square feet of floor area
per hen.
      (6)   Maintenance. The coop and run shall be kept in a clean, dry and
sanitary condition at all times. Manure, uneaten and discarded feed, feathers
and other waste must be removed regularly and at a minimum of once per week.
         (a)   Odors from hens, manure or related substances shall not be
detectable from property lines.
         (b)   Manure must be stored and disposed of. Manure may be composted.
All manure not composted must be removed from property regularly and at a
minimum of once per week.
         (c)   Waste from hens shall not be burned.
   (H)   License. Licenses will only be granted to persons who reside on and
own parcels with established single-family and two-family dwellings. No person
shall establish a coop without first obtaining a license from the village.
Licenses shall be issued when all conditions outlined in this section are met.
      (1)   The village may deny a license to any person who:
         (a)   Owes money to the village; or
         (b)   Has, in the last five years prior to application for a license
under this section been convicted or pled guilty to any violation of the
Village Code regarding animals, noise, property maintenance or zoning.
      (2)   All licenses pursuant to this section shall be valid for up to one
year from the date of issuance and may be automatically renewed on May 1
annually if the licensee has been in compliance during the previous year. If
the licensee is found to be in violation of the standards outlined in this
section, the license will be allowed to expire at the end of the period. A new
license will only be issued after the coop and run have been inspected and
determined to meet all requirements outlined herein.
      (3)   If the licensee is found to be in violation of §
92.04, the license will be immediately and permanently revoked.
      (4)   Only one chicken coop license will be issued per zoning lot. A
zoning lot consisting of multiple platted lots shall be considered one lot.
      (5)   Coop licenses are non-transferrable.
      (6)   Fee. The coop license fee shall be set from time to time by
resolution of the Village Board of Trustees. This license shall renew
automatically if the licensee is in compliance with all standards set forth in
this section. No charge is incurred for licenses that renew automatically.
   (I)   Penalties. In addition to the general penalty set forth in §
152.999 and in §
92.99, the owner of any coop is subject to the following additional penalties:
      (1)   A person found to be keeping hens without a coop license will have
seven days from notification to achieve compliance with these standards.
      (2)   A licensee found to be in violation of the standards outlined in
this section will have seven days from notification to achieve compliance. If
compliance is not achieved, the license will be revoked. The licensee may apply
for a new license, subject to site inspection. If the licensee is found to be
in compliance after inspection, a new license may be issued.
      (3)   If the licensee is found to be in violation of these standards
three or more times, the license will be immediately and permanently revoked.
      (4)   Hens, coops and runs not maintained according to this section shall
be deemed a public nuisance.
(Ord. 20-09-03, passed 9-22-2020)
REGULATIONS REGARDING SIGNS
§ 152.065 PURPOSE.
   This subchapter is intended to promote the public health and safety by
reducing the distracting characteristics of signs along public streets and
highways and by prohibiting signs which interfere with public traffic control
devices. This section is also intended to reduce possible confusion, which may
result from the size, height and location of signs. This section shall not
apply to nor regulate signs on active trucks or other motor vehicles.
(Ord. passed 7-23-2002)
§ 152.066 MEASUREMENT STANDARDS AND DEFINITIONS.
   The following standards and definitions shall apply to this section. Means
of measurement are illustrated in the figures in Appendix A to this chapter.
Typical sign types are illustrated in Appendix A.
   (A)   Measurement of sign area. The area of the largest single face of the
sign within the perimeter which forms the outside shape, including any frame
which is an integral part of the display, but excluding the necessary supports,
uprights or solid base upon which the sign may be placed. If the sign consists
of more than one section or modules, all areas will be totaled. Any irregularly
shaped sign’s area shall be computed using the actual sign face surface. Signs
with solid bases must comply with sight visibility requirements.
   (B)   Measurement of freestanding sign height. Freestanding signs shall be
measured from the point where the sign is placed in the ground to the uppermost
extremity of the sign.
   (C)   Measurement of business frontage. Business frontage is the lineal
footage of a lot, facing the public right-of-way, owned or rented by a person,
business or enterprise, and intended for business usage.
   (D)   Definitions. For the purpose of this subchapter, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.
      ABANDONED SIGN. A sign erected on property in conjunction with a
particular use which has been discontinued for a period of 120 days or more, or
a sign the content of which pertains to a time, event or purpose which no
longer applies.
      ADDRESS SIGN. Any sign which sets forth the house or building address.
      AREA OF SIGN. The area of the largest single face of the sign within a
perimeter which forms the outside shape, including any frame which is an
integral part of the display, but excluding the necessary supports, or
uprights, or solid base on which the sign may be placed. If the sign consists
of more than one section or module, all areas will be totaled. Any irregular
shaped sign’s area shall be computed using the actual sign face surface.
      AWNING. A temporary shelter supported entirely from the exterior wall of
a building and composed of non-rigid materials except for the supporting
framework.
      BANNER. Any sign of lightweight fabric or similar material that is
mounted to a pole or a building at one or more edges. National flags, state or
municipal flags, or the official flag of any institution or business shall not
be considered BANNERS.
      BEACON. Any light with one or more beams directed into the atmosphere or
directed at one or more points not on the same lot as the light source; also,
any light with one or more beams that rotate or move.
      BUILDING SIGN. Any sign attached to any part of a building, as contrasted
to a freestanding sign.
      CANOPY. A permanently-roofed shelter covering a sidewalk, driveway or
other similar area, which may be wholly supported by a building or may be
wholly or partially supported by columns, poles or braces extended from the
ground.
      CANOPY SIGN. Any sign that is a part of or attached to an awning, canopy
or other fabric, plastic or structural protective cover over a door, entrance,
window or outdoor service area. A marquee is not a CANOPY.
      CONSTRUCTION SIGN. Any sign announcing the name of architects, engineers,
contractors or other individuals or firms involved with the subdivision of a
property or the construction, alteration or repair of a building (but not
including any product) or announcing the character of the subdivision or
building enterprise or the purpose for which the subdivision or building is
intended.
      DIRECTORY SIGN. Any sign on which the names and locations of occupants or
the use of a building is given. This shall include office buildings and church
directories.
      FEATHER FLAG SIGN. A free standing temporary sign typically constructed
of a single plastic or metal shaft driven in the ground with an attached
pennant that is vertically elongated and attached to the shaft.
      FLAG. Any fabric, banner or bunting containing distinctive colors,
patterns or symbols, used as a symbol of a government, political subdivision or
other public or corporate entity.
      FREESTANDING SIGN. Any sign supported by structures or supports that are
placed on, or anchored in, the ground and that are independent from any
building or other structure.
      FREEWAY-ORIENTED SIGN. Any sign identifying premises where food, lodging
or places of business are located that engage in supplying goods and services
essential to normal operation of motor vehicles, and where the businesses are
directly dependent upon the adjacent freeway for business.
      HOLIDAY SIGNS. Signs or displays which contain or depict a message
pertaining to a national, state, community or religious holiday, and no other
matters.
      IDENTIFICATION SIGN. Any sign which is limited to the name, address and
number of a building, institution or person and to the activity carried on in
the building or institution, or the occupancy of the person.
      INTEGRAL SIGN. Any memorial signs or tablets, names of buildings and date
of erection when cut into any masonry surface or when constructed of bronze or
other incombustible materials mounted on the face of a building.
      MARQUEE. A permanent roof-like structure projecting over an entrance to a
building.
      NONCONFORMING SIGN. A sign erected or displayed prior to the effective
date of this chapter or subsequent amendments thereto which does not conform
with the provisions of this chapter.
      OFF-PREMISES SIGN. Any sign that advertises goods, products, services or
facilities or directs persons to a different location from where the sign is
installed.
      ON-PREMISES SIGN. Any sign identifying or advertising a business, person,
activity, goods, products or services located on the premises where the sign is
installed and maintained.
      OUTDOOR ADVERTISING SIGN (OAS). Any sign which advertises goods, products
or services not necessarily sold on the premises on which the sign is located.
May be one of three main types:
         (a)   Poster panels or bulletins normally mounted on a building wall
or freestanding structure with advertising copy in the form of pasted paper or
other material;
         (b)   Multi-prism signs. Same as above, and alternating advertising
messages on the display area; or
         (c)   Painted bulletins, where the advertiser’s message is painted
directly on the background of a wall-mounted or freestanding display area.
      PENNANT. Any lightweight plastic, fabric or other material suspended from
a rope, wire or string, usually in series, designed to move in the wind.
      PORTABLE SIGN. Any sign not attached to the ground or other permanent
structure designed to be transported, including, but not limited to signs
designed to be transported by means of wheels; sign converted to A- or T-
frames; sandwich board signs; balloons used as signs; and umbrellas used for
advertising.
      PROJECTING SIGNS. Any sign affixed to a building or wall in such a manner
that its leading edge extends more than six inches beyond the surface of the
building or wall.
      REAL ESTATE SIGN. Any sign which is used to offer for sale, lease or rent
the property upon which the sign is placed.
      ROOF SIGN. Any sign erected and constructed wholly on and over the roof
of a building, supported by the roof structure, and extending vertically above
the highest portion of the roof.
      ROOF SIGN, INTEGRAL. Any sign erected or constructed as an integral or
essentially integral part of a normal roof structure of any design, so that no
part of the sign extends vertically above the highest portion of the roof and
so that no part of the sign is separated from the rest of the roof by a space
of more than six inches.
      SHOPPING CENTER SIGN. Any sign which serves as identification for a
recognized and identifiable shopping center complex in the commercial or
industrial zones. May include the center name, graphic logo, names of
individual establishments within the complex and other promotional information.
      SIGN. Any device, fixture, placard or structure that uses any color,
form, graphic, illumination, symbol or writing to advertise, announce the
purpose of, or identify the purpose of a person or entity, or to communicate
information of any kind to the public.
      TEMPORARY SIGN. A sign intended to be erected or displayed for a limited
period of time.
      UNDERGROUND PUBLIC UTILITY WARNING SIGN. Standard types of warning signs
marking the routes of underground public utility pipes, conduits and cables.
      VEHICLE SIGN. Signs attached to or painted on vehicles parked and visible
from the public right-of-way.
      WALL SIGN. Any sign attached parallel to, but within six inches of, a
wall, painted on the wall surface of, or erected and confined within the limits
of an outside wall of any building or structure, which is supported by the wall
or building, and which displays only one sign surface.
      WAYFINDING SIGN. An off-premise sign, erected by a governmental entity,
that is part of a village-sponsored and coordinated program for the purpose of
aiding visitors in navigating within the village and surrounding areas as
designated and recognized by the village's Wayfinding Sign Program. These signs
may include directional indicators to guide visitors to special areas (shopping
areas or business parks), specific locations (including libraries, governmental
centers, and parks), or to major thoroughfares. These signs may be freestanding
or attached, and typically are of a uniform design.
      WINDOW SIGN. Any sign, pictures, symbol or combination, designed to
communicate information about an activity, business, commodity, event, sale or
service, that is placed inside a window or upon the window panes or glass and
is visible from the exterior of the window.
(Ord. passed 7-23-2002; Ord. 17-09-02, passed 9-26-2017; Ord. 22-11-04, passed
11-22-2022)
§ 152.067 PERMITS FOR SIGNS.
   (A)   Requirements. It shall be unlawful for any person to install,
construct, erect, alter, reconstruct or relocate any sign or signs within the
village, without obtaining a valid permit, in writing, from the Village
Administrator or representative, and making payment of the fees required herein
by this section, unless the signs are permitted without a permit by §
152.068. Relocation or reconstruction of signs to conform with the requirements
of this chapter, when the signs existed at the time of enactment of this
chapter, is exempted from the requirement for a permit as described, provided
the signs conform to all requirements of this chapter thereafter. A permit is
required for relocation of nonconforming signs.
   (B)   Application for a regular permit. Application for a sign permit shall
be filed by the owner of the sign or his or her agent, with the Village
Administrator or representative. The application shall contain the following
information:
      (1)   Name, address and telephone number of the owner of the sign, and
agent, if any;
      (2)   Location of building, structure or lot to which or upon which the
sign is to be attached or erected;
      (3)   Position of the sign in relation to nearby building or structures;
      (4)   Two prints or ink drawings of the plans and specifications,
indicating the method of construction and attachment to the building or in the
ground. No prints or ink drawings shall be required for signs, the fair market
value of which is less than $500, and which are erected in compliance with a
standard method, the plans for which are now with the village, or for signs
where drawings are already on file with the Village Administrator.
      (5)   Name of person, firm, corporation or association erecting sign;
      (6)   Evidence of written consent of the owner of the building, structure
or land to which or on which the sign is to be erected;
      (7)   Fee for sign permit will be $25 for signs 50 square feet in size or
under and $50 for larger signs, or as subsequently modified by separate
resolution as adopted from time to time by the Board of Trustees; and
      (8)   Other information as the Village Administrator, or representative
shall require to show full compliance with this and all other laws and
ordinances of the village.
   (C)   Application for a special/temporary permit. Application for a special/
temporary permit shall be filed by the owner of the sign or his or her agent,
with the Village Administrator or representative. The application shall contain
the following information:
      (1)   Name, address and telephone number of the owner of the sign, and
agent, if any;
      (2)   Location of building, structure or lot to which or upon which the
sign is to be attached or erected;
      (3)   Name of person, firm, corporation or association erecting sign;
      (4)   Evidence of written consent of the owner of the buildings,
structure or land to which or on which the sign is to be erected; and
      (5)   Fee for sign permit will be $25 or as subsequently modified by
separate resolution as adopted from time to time by the Board of Trustees.
   (D)   Inspection upon completion. The applicant who has been issued a permit
for construction, installation, erection, relocation or alteration of a sign,
shall, upon completion of the work, notify the Village Administrator or
representative who shall inspect the condition of the sign with respect to its
safety and location, and if he or she finds that the sign with respect to its
safety and location, has been constructed in compliance with the ordinances of
the village, he or she shall then issue the applicant a permit in writing,
authorizing the applicant to operate and maintain the sign.
   (E)   Nullification. If the work authorized under a permit to build has not
been completed within six months after date of its issuance, the permit shall
become void. Permit fees will not be refunded.
   (F)   Revocation.
      (1)   Permits granted under the terms of this chapter are not
transferable.
      (2)   The Village Administrator is hereby authorized and empowered to
revoke any permit issued by the village, if the holder of the permit fails to
comply with any provision of this chapter. Fees will not be refunded.
   (G)   Permit exceptions. The following operations shall not be considered as
creating a sign, and shall not require a sign permit:
      (1)   The changing of the advertising copy or message on an approved
painted or printed sign, or on changeable letter panels or bulletin boards
specifically designed for the use of replaceable copy; and
      (2)   Painting, repainting, cleaning and other normal maintenance and
repair of a sign or sign structure.
   (H)   Issuance of permit. The permit shall be issued by the Village
Administrator or representative within 30 days of application, once all of the
above requirements are met and the appropriate fee is paid.
(Ord. passed 7-23-2002) Penalty, see §
152.999
§ 152.068 SIGNS ALLOWED IN ALL DISTRICTS WITHOUT A PERMIT.
   The following types of signs shall be allowed in all districts:
   (A)   Public signs. Signs of a public, noncommercial nature, including
safety signs, danger signs, trespassing signs, traffic signs, signs indicating
scenic or historical points of interest, memorial plaques and the like, and all
signs erected by or on order of a public officer in the performance of a public
duty;
   (B)   Flags. Flags bearing the official design of a nation, state,
municipality, organization or other public institution. Other non-official
flags shall be not more than 40 square feet in area;
   (C)   Identification signs. Exterior signs which identify the business
owner, manager or resident of a building and set forth the address of the
premises where the sign is located, and which contain no other material; there
may be two signs per premises, each sign not to exceed one square foot in area.
The total height of the sign, if freestanding, shall not exceed five feet;
   (D)   Integral signs. Names of buildings, dates of construction,
commemorative tablets and the like, when carved into stone, concrete or similar
material or made of bronze, aluminum or other permanent type of construction
and made an integral part of the building or structure. Those signs should not
exceed 12 square feet in area;
   (E)   Institutional signs. Any sign or bulletin board setting forth, or
denoting the name of or simple announcement for any public, charitable,
education or religious institution, when located on the premises of the
institution, provided the sign or bulletin board or both shall not exceed a
total of 20 square feet in display surface. If building mounted, these signs
shall be flat wall signs, and shall not project above the roof line or front
facade of the building. If freestanding, the total height shall not exceed six
feet;
   (F)   Private traffic direction signs and related signs. Signs directing
traffic movement onto a premises or within a premises, when the signs are
located on the premises, shall not exceed five square feet in area for each
sign and, if freestanding, shall not exceed eight feet in total height. Those
signs are considered to include parking directions, exit or entrance signs,
drive-up window signs, disabled parking signs, restroom signs and the like.
Horizontal directional signs flush with paved areas are exempt from these
standards;
   (G)   Political campaign signs. Signs or posters announcing the candidates
seeking public political office and/or political issues, and data pertinent
thereto, up to an area of 16 square feet. All signs shall be confined to
private property. Signs or posters that interfere with other permitted signage
or that create a traffic or safety hazard are not allowed;
   (H)   Real estate sale/auction, rental, or construction signs.
      (1)   Signs may be freestanding or wall-mounted only.
      (2)   Signs may not emit direct illumination.
      (3)   Location of signs:
         (a)   Signs shall not be attached to or otherwise placed or affixed on
public property, utility boxes and poles, traffic control poles, or in the
public right-of-way;
         (b)   Signs shall not be placed within the site visibility triangle,
unless the sign placed is two feet or less in height. All improperly placed
signage is subject to immediate removal by village staff;
         (c)   Signs must be located on the property to which it pertains;
         (d)   Signs must maintain a ten foot minimum set back from curb line.
      (4)   Time limit:
         (a)   Signs stating the property has been sold or rented must be
removed within seven days upon the closing of the sale or initiation of the
lease. No directional signs indicating a property has been sold shall be
allowed at any time;
         (b)   Signs pertaining to site construction, alteration or repair
shall be removed within seven days after completion of the work;
         (c)   Signs pertaining to subdivision of property shall be permitted
for up to two years from the date of recording of the final plat;
         (d)   Signs pertaining to a real estate auction must be removed within
24 hours after the event. One off-site directional sign is allowed which
indicates the location of the auction. Signs may be placed up to two weeks
prior to the auction event. Signs may not be located in public right of way or
on public property, and must have permission from any private property owner
for which the off-site sign is located.
      (5)   Maximum number of signs: one sign shall be permitted per frontage.
      (6)   Maximum area of signs:
         (a)   R-1A, R-1B, R-1C, and R-2: six square feet;
         (b)   R-3: ten square feet;
         (c)   AG, AC, FP, C-1: 32 square feet;
         (d)   C-2, C-3, I-2: 50 square feet.
      (7)   Maximum height of signs:
         (a)   RS, R-1, RU and R-2: three feet;
         (b)   R-3: five feet;
         (c)   C-1: eight feet;
         (d)   C-2, C-3, I-1 and I-2: ten feet.
      (8)   Open house signs:
         (a)   Allowed only on the property for which it pertains;
         (b)   May be displayed up to two days in advance of the event;
         (c)   Must be removed immediately after open house hours;
         (d)   Feather flags are allowed on the property for which the open
house is located and may be displayed only during the hours of the open house;
         (e)   Two off-site directional signs are allowed which indicates the
location of the open house. Directional signs are permitted to be placed on
private property from 12:00 noon Friday through 6:00 p.m. Sunday. Whoever is
placing an off-site directional sign must have permission from the private
property owner where the off-site sign is placed.
   (I)   Home occupation signs.
      (1)   Location of sign: signs may either be wall mounted or freestanding
and may not be located in a required front yard or public right of way.
      (2)   Maximum number of signs: one per premises;
      (3)   Maximum area of sign: two square feet.
   (J)   Holiday signs. Either illuminated or unilluminated, and which are
displayed for a period not to exceed 30 days before, and no more than seven
days following the pertinent holiday;
   (K)   Underground public utility warning signs;
   (L)   House or building address. The individual characters of the signs
shall not exceed six inches in height and must be at least two and one-half
inches in height. There shall not be more than one address sign for each
dwelling. Address signs shall face the street to which they apply;
   (M)   Garage sale/estate sale auction signs. 
      (1)   Location of signs:
         (a)   Signs shall not be attached to or otherwise placed or affixed on
public property, utility boxes and poles, traffic control poles, in the public
right-of-way, or within the site visibility triangle. All improperly placed
signage is subject to immediate removal by village staff.
         (b)   One off-site directional sign may be located at the entrance to
the subdivision/neighborhood for which the garage sale is located or one off-
site directional sign may be located at the closest major road intersection
from the garage sale location. The directional sign may not be located in
public right of way or on public property, and must have permission from any
private property owner for which the off-site sign is located.
         (c)   One off-site directional sign may be used to provide direction
within a neighborhood or from the major street intersection.
         (d)   Signs must maintain a minimum ten foot setback from the street
curb.
      (2)   Time limit:
         (a)   No garage sale shall be more than four days in duration and the
collective total of all such sales shall not exceed four events in any calendar
year.
         (b)   Signs pertaining to a garage sale shall not be in place for more
than two days before the event and must be removed immediately following the
closing of the event.
      (3)   Maximum number of signs: three signs shall be permitted per garage
sale event. This includes the total signage provided on-site and any off-site
directional signage.
      (4)   Maximum area of signs: four square feet for on-site signs, two and
one half square feet for off-site directional signage.
   (N)   Wayfinding signs. see village wayfinding sign program.
(Ord. passed 7-23-2002; Ord. 17-09-02, passed 9-26-2017; Ord. 22-11-04, passed
11-22-2022)
§ 152.069 TEMPORARY SIGNS ALLOWED WITH A SPECIAL (TEMPORARY) PERMIT.
   (A)   Eligibility. Temporary signs may only be utilized for established on-
premises commercial and other business activities compliant with zoning and
special events.
   (B)   Number of temporary signs permitted. One sign per business.
   (C)   Banner signs. Banner signs shall be permitted under the following
terms and conditions:
      (1)   Maximum area of sign: 30 square feet;
      (2)   Maximum height of a banner sign:
         (a)   Freestanding sign: five feet;
         (b)   Wall sign: must be contained to the area of the wall for which
the sign is placed;
         (c)   Feather flags: eight feet.
      (3)   Location of signs: a sign shall be placed on private property and
not extend over any public right-of-way or be placed within the visibility
triangle area of a corner lot;
      (4)   Time limit: Banner sign permits shall be allowed for up to 90 days
per calendar year. The village has discretion to extend the permit up to an
additional 90 days when the banner serves as the primary signage for the
business.
   (D)   Portable signs. Portable signs shall be permitted under the following
terms and conditions:
      (1)   Maximum area of sign: 12 square feet;
      (2)   Maximum height of sign: four feet;
      (3)   Signs shall not extend over any public right-of-way or be permitted
to be located within the visibility triangle area of a corner lot;
      (4)   Shall only be displayed during daylight hours when the business to
which the sign relates is open for business, after which time the sign shall be
removed to a location not visible to the public;
   (E)   Lighting. Exterior illumination, interior illumination, flashing
lights or other animation are not permitted on temporary signs unless
specifically allowed elsewhere in these regulations. The sign may be placed to
utilize existing compliant site lighting for sign visibility.
   (F)   Beacon lights. Beacon lights used in connection with a sign or to draw
attention to a community event may be permitted on a limited basis when
associated with an approved special event permit. Beacon lights may only be
used during the hours of the community event. The Village Administrator has
sole discretion on use of beacon lights.
   (G)   Vehicle signs. The use of vehicles or equipment for signs, except
where the primary purpose of the vehicle or equipment is not the display of
signs, may be permitted on a limited basis when approved as part of a special
event. Vehicle signs shall remain in place for no more than 30 days before, and
seven days after the event, and may not exceed 60 square feet in area. The
Village Administrator has sole discretion on use of vehicle signs.
   (H)   Special event sign. Signs advertising a public entertainment or event
of public interest, provided the placement of the signs shall be approved and
the locations designated by the Village Administrator or representative. These
signs shall remain in place for no more than 30 days before, and seven days
after the event, and may not exceed 60 square feet in area. Special event signs
are exempt from eligibility and number of sign restrictions.
   (I)   Pennants, feather flags and other temporary signs. Any temporary sign
not specifically addressed must follow the rules associated with banner signs,
see §
152.069(C).
   (J)   Removal of temporary signs. The village reserves the right to
immediately remove any temporary sign which does not comply with this chapter.
(Ord. passed 7-23-2002; Ord. 22-11-04, passed 11-22-2022)
§ 152.070 PROHIBITED SIGNS.
   The following signs are prohibited by this subchapter:
   (A)   Any sign which, by reason of its size, location, movement, content,
coloring or manner of illumination, constitutes a traffic hazard or is a
detriment to traffic safety by obstructing or detracting from the visibility of
any official traffic control device, by obstructing the vision of drivers at
any intersection, driveway or crosswalk; by imitating or simulating any traffic
control sign or device; or by confusing or misleading traffic;
   (B)   Any sign which contains or is an imitation of an official traffic sign
or signal, except for private traffic direction or traffic control signs
specifically permitted;
   (C)   Any sign, other than a time or temperature sign, which contains
blinking or flashing lights;
   (D)   Any sign which for 30 consecutive days has directed attention to a
product, place, activity, person, institution or business which was formerly
but is no longer in operation or existence on the premises;
   (E)   Any portable or temporary sign or signs of a type not defined in §
152.069, describing commercial or business products, services or entertainment
provided;
   (F)   Illuminated signs which permit light to shine directly upon adjacent
property, or onto a public street right-of-way, the illuminating of which is
either objectionable or constitutes an unreasonable interference with the use
of the adjoining property or the use of an adjoining public street, or which
creates a hazardous traffic condition;
   (G)   Off-site directional signs, other than those signs permitted under §
152.068;
   (H)   Signs shall not extend within or over the public right-of-way. Signs
shall not be located to obstruct views within the visibility triangle of any
street or driveway intersection; and
   (I)   Any off-premises sign.
(Ord. passed 7-23-2002; Ord 17-09-02, passed 9-26-2017)
§ 152.071 RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS.
   (A)   Construction signs. See §
152.068.
   (B)   Subdivision/mobile home park/apartment identity signs. Signs
announcing the name of a subdivision, a mobile home park, apartment or other
residential development shall conform to the following requirements.
      (1)   Maximum number of signs: one sign per street bordering or entering
the subdivision, or two per entrance if symmetrical “gateway” signs are used.
      (2)   Maximum area of sign: 35 square feet (not including structures).
      (3)   Maximum height of sign: ten feet.
   (C)   Real estate sale/auction and rental signs. See §
152.068.
   (D)   Signs for conditional uses. Sign regulations for commercial uses
allowed as conditional uses in the Agricultural (AG), Conservation (AC) and
Residential (R-1A, R-1B, R-1C, R-2 and R-3) Districts shall be set forth in the
specific conditions for the use, but in no case shall exceed those set forth in
§
152.072.
   (E)   Signs for permitted nonresidential uses. Signs for nonresidential uses
permitted in residential zones (e.g., churches, schools and the like) shall be
subject to the sign regulations for the C-1 Zone.
(Ord. passed 7-23-2002; Ord. 17-09-02, passed 9-26-2017)
§ 152.072 COMMERCIAL DISTRICTS.
   (A)   The following types of signs shall be allowed or permitted in the C-1,
C-2 and C-3 Commercial Districts when the advertising on same is for the
business or activity being conducted on the premises, including time and
temperature signs.
   (B)   Outdoor advertising signs (OASs) shall be permitted pursuant to §
152.074 and the table called “outdoor advertising signs”.
   (C)   No business shall be permitted to have more than three permitted signs
which are visible to the public from a public street or from a parking area
serving one business, with the exception of on-premises directional signs.
   (D)   The standards for each type of sign allowed in commercial districts
shall be as follows.
      (1)   On-premises freestanding signs.
         (a)   Maximum number of signs: two signs per business. Each business
is permitted one sign per business frontage (see figures in
Appendix A); except that no freestanding sign is permitted if a projecting or
roof sign exists on the same frontage.
         (b)   Maximum area of sign: 32 square feet in C-1; 50 square feet in
C-2 and C-3.
         (c)   Maximum height of sign: 15 feet in C-1; 20 feet in C-2 and C-3.
         (d)   Unless any freestanding sign has a minimum clearance of eight
feet above ground, the area surrounding the base of any sign shall be
maintained as a green area of not less than 100 square feet and planted in
grass, shrubs or plants.
         (e)   Location of sign: no freestanding signs shall be permitted
within 50 feet of any residential district where the nearest lot contains a
dwelling unit, school, park, church, hospital or nursing home.
      (2)   On-premises wall signs and wall mounted signs.
         (a)   Maximum number of signs: no more than three per wall, but must
meet area limit below.
         (b)   Maximum area of signs: total area of signs on one wall shall not
exceed 10% of that wall’s area and total aggregate area of signs on walls shall
not exceed 150 square feet in C-1, and 175 square feet in C-2 and C-3. However,
for every 100 feet the sign is located away from the right-of-way line of an
adjacent street, the total aggregate sign area may increase by 10% (measured
from the sign to the right-of-way line).
         (c)   Maximum height and location. Signs shall not extend beyond the
top or ends of the wall surface on which they are placed.
      (3)   On-premises projecting signs.
         (a)   Maximum number signs: one sign per business frontage, except
that no projecting sign is permitted if a freestanding or roof sign exists on
the same frontage. Upper level businesses are not allowed projecting signs.
         (b)   Maximum area of signs: 15 square feet in C-1; 20 square feet in
C-2 and C-3.
         (c)   Maximum height of signs: eight feet shall be the minimum
clearance above ground and the sign shall not extend above that portion of the
roof immediately adjacent to the sign.
         (d)   Location of the signs: to be permitted only in the older Main
and Oak Street areas of the village. No sign shall project more than three and
a half feet from the face of the building to which it is attached or extend
over any public right-of-way.
      (4)   On-premises roof signs.
         (a)   Maximum number of signs: one sign per premises, except no roof
sign is permitted if a freestanding sign or projecting sign exists on the same
frontage.
         (b)   Maximum area of signs: 50 square feet in C-2 and C-3 Districts,
not permitted in C-1.
         (c)   Maximum height of signs: nine feet, as measured from that part
of the roof immediately below the sign, but in no case shall the height exceed
the maximum height authorized in the zoning district.
         (d)   Location of signs: sign must be located wholly within the roof
area of structure.
      (5)   Signs attached to or part of canopies, awnings and entrance
structures.
         (a)   Maximum number of signs: one sign per business frontage.
         (b)   Maximum area of signs: 15 square feet in C-1, 20 square feet in
C-2 and C-3, provided, however, that if the sign is the only sign for the
business, then the maximum area for the sign may be increased up to a maximum
area of no more than 30% of the total area of any canopy, awning or entrance
structure if the writing, representation, emblem, or other figure of similar
character constituting the display of the sign is an integral part of any
canopy, awning or entrance structure. Any display shall be deemed an integral
part of the canopy, awning or entrance structure if the display does not
project more than one-half inch from any canopy, awning or entrance structure.
         (c)   Height of signs: eight-foot minimum clearance to ground.
         (d)   Location of signs: no sign may project more than two feet from
any canopy, or awning or other structure.
         (e)   A canopy or awning may extend within the limits of the right-of-
way by a distance not to exceed 12 feet. A canopy or awning may not extend
closer than six inches from the back of the curb or edge of the pavement,
whichever case applies.
      (6)   Real estate sale/auction and rental signs. See §
152.068.
      (7)   Signs directed toward users of interstate highway.
         (a)   Maximum number of signs: one sign per location-eligible
business.
         (b)   Maximum area of signs: 220 square feet per face with a maximum
number of faces being limited to two per sign.
         (c)   Height of signs: not greater than 80 feet, and all signage shall
be positioned on the structure so that the lowest point of any sign face shall
have a height of not less than 50 feet as measured from the ground.
         (d)   Location of signs: signs shall be directed primarily toward the
users of an interstate highway and shall be located within 600 feet of the
right-of-way of the interstate highway and more than 150 feet from any
residential zoning district (in residential use), school, park, church,
hospital or nursing home.
         (e)   Use of signs: signs shall be limited to on-premises uses only.
      (8)   Freestanding shopping center signs.
         (a)   Maximum number of signs: one sign per lot frontage per shopping
center.
         (b)   Maximum area of signs: establishments which are part of a
recognized and identifiable shopping center complex in the commercial districts
may have individual store identification signs on shopping center’s
freestanding sign(s) not to exceed one square foot per lineal foot of
establishment frontage. Shopping center identification signs may not exceed 75
square feet in the C-1 District and 150 square feet in the C-2 and C-
3 Districts.
         (c)   Maximum height of signs: 30 feet to setback line plus one
additional foot per two feet additional setback thereafter; up to 40 feet
maximum.
         (d)   Location of signs: no freestanding signs permitted within 50
feet of any residential district where the nearest lot contains a dwelling
unit, school, park, hospital or nursing home.
      (9)   Construction signs. See §
152.068.
      (10)   Subdivision/commercial development identity sign. Signs announcing
the name of a commercial subdivision or development shall conform to the
following requirements.
         (a)   Maximum number of signs: one sign per street bordering or
entering the subdivision, or two signs if framed as a symmetrical “gateway” to
the subdivision.
         (b)   Maximum area of sign: 75 square feet (not including structures);
and
         (c)   Maximum height of sign: ten feet.
      (11)   Street clock/temperature signs. Any sign which displays the time
or outdoor temperature or both, and which displays no other matter other than
the business name. Allowed in commercial and industrial districts only. See
sign type (freestanding, wall and the like) for regulations.
(Ord. passed 7-23-2002; Ord. 17-09-02, passed 9-26-2017)
§ 152.073 INDUSTRIAL DISTRICTS.
   (A)   The following types of signs shall be allowed or permitted in I-1 and
I-2 Industrial Districts when the advertising on same is for the business or
activity being conducted on the premises, including time and temperature signs.
Outdoor advertising signs (OASs) shall be permitted pursuant to § 152.074 and
the table called “outdoor advertising signs”.
   (B)   No business shall be permitted to have more than three permitted signs
which are visible to the public from a public street or from a parking area
serving one business, with the exception of on-premises directional signs.
   (C)   The standards for each type of sign shall be as follows.
      (1)   On-premises freestanding signs.
         (a)   Maximum number permitted: two signs per business. Each business
is permitted one sign per business frontage (see figures in
Appendix A), except that no freestanding sign is permitted if a projecting or
roof sign exists on the same frontage.
         (b)   Maximum area of sign: 100 square feet.
         (c)   Maximum height of sign: 25 feet.
         (d)   Unless any freestanding sign has a minimum clearance of eight
feet above ground, the area surrounding the base of any sign shall be
maintained as a green area of not less than 100 square feet and planted in
grass, shrubs or plants.
         (e)   Location of sign: no freestanding signs shall be permitted
within 50 feet of any residential district, where the nearest lot contains a
dwelling unit, school, park, hospital or nursing home.
      (2)   On-premises wall signs and wall mounted signs.
         (a)   Maximum number permitted: no more than three per wall, but must
meet area limit below.
         (b)   Maximum area of all wall signs per frontage: 15% of wall area,
not to exceed 200 square feet.
         (c)   Maximum height and location of signs: signs shall not extend
beyond the top or ends of the wall surface on which they are placed.
      (3)   On-premises projecting signs.
         (a)   Maximum number of signs: one sign per business frontage, except
that no projecting sign is permitted if a freestanding or roof sign exists on
the same frontage. Upper level businesses are not allowed projecting signs.
         (b)   Maximum area of signs: 20 square feet.
         (c)   Maximum height of signs: eight feet shall be the minimum
clearance above ground and the sign shall not extend above that portion of the
roof immediately adjacent to the sign.
         (d)   Location: to be permitted only in the older Main and Oak Street
areas of the village. No sign shall project more than three and one-half feet
from the face of the building to which it is attached or extend over any public
right-of-way.
      (4)   On-premises roof signs.
         (a)   Maximum number permitted: one sign per premises, except no roof
sign is permitted if a freestanding sign or projecting sign is on the same
business frontage (see figures in
Appendix A).
         (b)   Maximum area of sign: 50 square feet.
         (c)   Maximum height of signs: nine feet, as measured from that part
of the roof immediately below sign, but in no case shall the height exceed the
maximum height of building authorized in the zoning district.
         (d)   Location of signs: signs must be wholly located within the roof
area of the structure.
      (5)   Signs attached to canopies, awnings and entrance structures.
         (a)   Maximum number permitted: one sign per business frontage (See
figures in
Appendix A).
         (b)   Maximum area of signs: 25 square feet, provided, however, that
if the sign is the only sign for the business, then the maximum area of the
sign may be increased up to a maximum area of no more than 30% of the total
area of any canopy, awning or entrance structure, if the writing,
representation, emblem or other figure of similar character constituting the
display of the sign is an integral part of any canopy, awning or entrance
structure. Any like display shall be deemed an integral part of the canopy,
awning or entrance structure if the display does not project more than one-half
inch from any canopy, awning or entrance structure.
         (c)   Height of signs: eight-foot minimum vertical clearance to
ground.
         (d)   Location of signs: no sign may project more than two feet from
any canopy, awning or other structure.
         (e)   A canopy or awning may extend within the limits of the right-of-
way by a distance not to exceed 12 feet. A canopy or awning may not extend
closer than six inches from the back of the curb or edge of the pavement,
whichever case applies.
      (6)   Real estate sale/auction and rental signs.  See §
152.068.
      (7)   Signs directed toward users of interstate highway.
         (a)   Maximum number of signs: one sign per location-eligible
business.
         (b)   Maximum area of signs: 220 square feet per face with a maximum
number of faces being limited to two per sign.
         (c)   Maximum height of signs: not greater than 80 feet, and all
signage shall be positioned on the structure such that the lowest point of any
sign face shall have a height of not less than 50 feet, as measured from the
ground.
         (d)   Location of signs: signs shall be directed primarily toward the
users of an interstatehighway and shall be located within 600 feet of the
right-of-way of the interstate highway and more than 150 feet from any
residential zoning district (in residential use), school, church, park,
hospital or nursing home.
         (e)   Use of signs: signs shall be limited to on-premises uses only.
      (8)   Freestanding shopping center signs.
         (a)   Maximum number of signs: one sign per lot frontage.
         (b)   Maximum area of signs: establishments which are part of a
recognized and identifiable shopping center complex in the industrial district
may have individual store identification signs on shopping center not to exceed
one square foot per lineal foot of establishment frontage. Shopping center
identification signs may not exceed 150 square feet in the industrial
districts.
         (c)   Maximum height of signs: 30 feet to setback line plus one
additional foot per two feet additional setback thereafter, up to 40 feet
maximum.
         (d)   Location of signs: no freestanding signs permitted within 50
feet of any residential district where the nearest lot contains a dwelling
unit, school, park, hospital or nursing home.
      (9)   Construction signs. See §
152.068.
      (10)   Subdivision/industrial development signs. Signs announcing the
name of an industrial subdivision or development shall conform to the following
requirements.
         (a)   Maximum number of signs: one sign per street bordering or
entering the subdivision, or two signs if framed as a symmetrical “gateway” to
the subdivision.
         (b)   Maximum area of sign: 100 square feet (not including
structures).
         (c)   Maximum height of sign: 20 feet.
      (11)   Street clock/temperature signs. Any sign which displays the time
or outdoor temperature or both, and which displays no other matter other than
the business name. Allowed in commercial and industrial districts only. See
sign type (freestanding, wall and the like) for regulations.
(Ord. passed 7-23-2002; Ord. 17-09-02, passed 9-26-2017)
§ 152.074 OUTDOOR ADVERTISING SIGNS.
   New outdoor advertising signs shall be allowed only along Federal Aid
Primary (FAP) (U.S. Route 150 and Illinois Route 47) or Federal Aid Interstate
(FAI) (Interstate 74) routes, as designated by IDOT, as of January 1, 1998, in
areas zoned commercial, or industrial and within 500 feet of either side of
FAP/FAI routes.
   (A)   Outdoor advertising sign (OAS) facing interstate Highway I-74. If an
outdoor advertising sign (OAS) is directed primarily towards users of a highway
in the National Interstate and Defense Highway system (i.e., Interstate Highway
I-74); within 500 feet of the right-of-way of the highway; and more than 500
feet from any residential district, school, park, church, hospital, nursing
home or other outdoor advertising sign, then the sign may be erected to a
height as to be visible from a distance of one-half mile on the highway or a
maximum height of 45 feet, whichever is less, and the sign may have an area not
greater than 300 square feet. These regulations do not apply to outdoor
advertising signs facing federal aid-primary (FAP) Highways. “Interstate
Highways” and “Federal Aid Primary (FAP) Highways” are as used in the Highway
Advertising Control Act of 1971 (ILCS Ch. 225, Act 440, §§ 1 et seq.) as of
January 1, 1998.
   (B)   Outdoor advertising signs (OAS) facing FAP routes 150 and 47.
      (1)   Maximum number of signs: one wall-type sign per wall provided no
other exterior wall signs are on display. Two freestanding signs per outdoor
advertising sign structure.
      (2)   Maximum area of sign:150 square feet (back-to-back displays shall
be deemed to be a single structure).
      (3)   Maximum height: for wall sign, not to project above roofline or
edges of wall upon which sign is mounted; for freestanding sign, 30 feet in
commercial and industrial districts.
      (4)   Not to be located within 150 feet of any Residential, Conservation,
Forest Preserve or Agriculture Zoning District. Shall not be located within 300
feet of any other freestanding or wall-mounted outdoor advertising sign
structure.
   (C)   Compliance. Compliance with these regulations, or those contained in
the Illinois Highway Advertising Control Act of 1971, as amended (ILCS Ch. 225,
Act 440, §§ 1 et seq.), whichever is stricter, shall be required.
(Ord. passed 7-23-2002)
§ 152.075 NONCONFORMING SIGNS.
   (A)   Nonconforming signs lawfully erected prior to adoption of this chapter
which do not meet the standards of this chapter may be continued if properly
repaired and maintained as provided in this chapter and continue to be in
conformance with other village ordinances.
   (B)   A nonconforming sign may not be:
      (1)   Changed to another nonconforming sign;
      (2)   Structurally altered as to prolong the life of the sign;
      (3)   Expanded;
      (4)   Subsequently re-established or replaced after its having been
removed for 90 days or more;
      (5)   Re-established after damage or destruction, if the estimated
expense of reconstruction exceeds 50% of the appraised replacement cost at the
time of the damage or destruction;
      (6)   Routinely maintained where the cost of the repair or maintenance is
5% of the current replacement costs for any period of 12 months. However,
nothing in this section shall be deemed to prevent the strengthening or
restoring to a safe condition of any sign or part thereof declared to be unsafe
by any official charged with protecting the public safety; or
      (7)   Relocated, unless relocation brings the sign into conformance with
all the requirements of this chapter, except that where a nonconforming sign is
located within a right-of-way taken or acquired by a public body for street
improvement purposes, then the relocation of such a sign is permitted.
   (C)   All permanent nonconforming signs shall be removed or brought into
conformity with this chapter by January 1, 2009 (approximately ten years of the
effective date of the ordinance). The owner of a nonconforming sign may request
approval for continuance as per division (D) below. All existing nonconforming
temporary or portable signs shall be removed within 30 days of adoption of this
chapter.
   (D)   The Zoning Board of Appeals after receiving the recommendation of the
Plan and Zoning Commission shall have the power to grant a variance from the
provisions of division (B) above, so as to permit change, alteration, re-
establishment or more than routine maintenance of a nonconforming sign, where
the change, alteration, re-establishment or maintenance shall not increase the
size of the sign, make it radiate or reflect more light, or otherwise make it
visually more objectionable. No variance granted by the Zoning Board of Appeals
shall in any way postpone the time for removal of the nonconforming sign as
provided in division (C) above beyond the time when the original sign, which
was permitted to be changed, altered, reestablished or maintained hereunder,
would have been required to be removed.
(Ord. passed 7-23-2002)
§ 152.076 EXISTING SIGNS.
   (A)   When a sign becomes unsecured, in danger of falling or otherwise
unsafe, or if any sign shall be unlawfully installed, erected or maintained in
violation of any of the provisions of this chapter, the owners thereof or the
person or firm maintaining the sign shall, upon written notice of the
administrating official, forthwith in the case of immediate danger and in any
case within not more than ten days, make the sign safe, eliminate the dangerous
condition or remove it. If the owner does not improve or remove the sign, then
the village reserves the right to do so and to seek reimbursement from the
owner for related expenses.
   (B)   An abandoned sign, including any support pole, mounting base, mounting
brackets and the like, must be removed by the owner of the property upon which
the sign is located. If the owner does not remove the sign, then the village
reserves the right to do so and to seek reimbursement from the owner for
related expenses.
   (C)   The owner of any sign shall ensure that the sign be kept in good
repair and shall provide that the sign is properly painted or otherwise cleaned
and washed, and that all parts and all supports of the sign be cleaned or
painted, unless the same are galvanized or treated to prevent rust.
(Ord. passed 7-23-2002)
§ 152.077 STANDARDS BY SIGN TYPE.
Subdivision/Mobile Home Park/Apartment and Development Identity Signs
Districts Maximum Number Maximum Area of Maximum Height of Location of Sign
Permitted Permitted      Sign            Sign
Subdivision/Mobile Home Park/Apartment and Development Identity Signs
Districts Maximum Number   Maximum Area of  Maximum Height of Location of Sign
Permitted Permitted        Sign             Sign
R-1A                                                          Signs shall not
R-1B      One sign per     35 square feet                     extend over the
R-2       street bordering (not including   10 feet           public right-of-
R-1C      or entering the  structures)                        way. Signs shall
R-3       subdivision, or                                     not be located to
C-1       two signs if     75 square feet                     obstruct views
C-2       framed as a      (not including   15 feet           within the
C-3       symmetrical      structures)                        visibility
          gateway to the                                      triangle of any
I-1       subdivision,     100 square feet                    street or
          mobile home park (not including   20 feet           driveway
1-2       or apartment     structures)                        intersection
 
Property Sale and Rental Signs
Districts Maximum Number Maximum Area of Maximum Height of
Permitted Permitted (1)  Sign            Freestanding Sign  Location of Sign
                                         (2)
Property Sale and Rental Signs
Districts Maximum Number    Maximum Area of Maximum Height of
Permitted Permitted (1)     Sign            Freestanding Sign Location of Sign
                                            (2)
R1A
R-1B      One per dwelling  6 square feet   5 feet            Locate on the
R-2                                                           property to which
R-1C                                                          it pertains. No
          One per apartment                                   sign shall be
R-3       building or       10 square feet  10 feet           located upon the
          dwelling                                            public right-of-
C-1       One per frontage  32 square feet  15 feet           way. 10-foot
C-2                         50 square feet                    minimum setback
C-3       One per frontage                  20 feet           from curb line
I-1                         50 square feet
1-2
Notes:
(1) An apartment complex, shopping center, highway plaza, or industrial complex
is permitted one sign per frontage, up to 200 feet, and one additional sign for
each 300 feet thereafter.
(2) Wall signs shall not extend beyond the top or ends of the wall surface on
which they are placed.
 
Freestanding Signs (3)
Districts Maximum Number Maximum Area of Maximum Height of Location of Sign
Permitted Permitted      Sign            Sign (4)
Freestanding Signs (3)
Districts Maximum Number    Maximum Area of Maximum Height of Location of Sign
Permitted Permitted         Sign            Sign (4)
                                            15 feet to
                                            setback line and
C-1                         32 square feet  1 foot per 2 feet
          Two signs per                     additional        Signs shall not
          business. Each                    setback, up to 20 extend over the
          business is                       feet maximum      public right-of-
C-2       permitted one                     20 feet to        way. Signs shall
          sign per business                 setback line and  be subject to
          frontage up to                    1 foot per 2 feet sight distance
C-3       300 feet, and one 50 square feet  additional        visibility
          additional sign                   setback, up to 30 requirement. No
          for each 300 feet                 feet maximum      freestanding
          of business                                         signs permitted
I-1       frontage                                            within 50 feet of
          thereafter;                                         any residential
          except that no                    25 feet to        district where
          freestanding sign                 minimum setback   the nearest lot
          is permitted if a                 line and 1 foot   contains a
          projecting or     100 square feet per 2 feet        dwelling unit,
I-2       roof sign exists                  additional        school, park,
          on the same                       setback, up to 35 hospital, church
          frontage                          feet maximum      or nursing home.



Notes:
(3) See “Freeway-Oriented Sign Standards” for freestanding signs that are
directed primarily toward the users of an interstate highway. See “Shopping
Center Signs” for freestanding signs that are advertising a multi-tenant
commercial complex.
(4) Unless any freestanding sign has a minimum clearance of 8 feet above
ground, the area surrounding the base of any such sign shall be maintained as a
green area of not less than 100 square feet and planted in grass, shrubs or
plants.
 
 
Freeway-Oriented Signs
Districts Maximum Number Maximum Area of   Maximum Height    Location of Sign
Permitted Permitted      Sign
C-1       Not permitted  -                 -                 -
C-2
C-3                                                          Limited to on-
                                                             premises uses
                                                             only. Must be
                                           80 feet (all      located within
                                           signage shall be  600 feet of the
                         220 square feet   positioned on the right-of-way of
          One sign per   per face with a   structure such    an Interstate
          location-      maximum number of that the lowest   highway and more
I-1       eligible       faces being       point of any sign than 150 feet
I-2       business       limited to two    face shall be at  from any
                         per sign.         not less than 50  residential
                                           feet above        zoning district
                                           ground)           (in residential
                                                             use), school,
                                                             park, church,
                                                             hospital or
                                                             nursing home.
 
 
Wall Signs and Wall-Mounted Signs
                    Maximum Number     Total Maximum Area   Maximum Height and
Districts Permitted Permitted          of Wall Signs per    Location of Signs
                                       Frontage
                                       10% of wall area,
                                       not to exceed 150
                                       square feet maximum.
                                       For every 100 feet
                                       from the right-of-
C-1                                    way line of an
                                       adjacent street, the
                                       sign area may
                                       increase by 10%
                                       (measured from the
                                       sign to the right-   Signs shall not
                                       of-way line).        extend beyond the
                    No more than three 10% of wall area,    top or ends of the
                    per wall, but must not to exceed 175    wall surface on
                    meet area limits   square feet maximum. which they are
                                       For every 100 feet   placed.
                                       from the right-of-
C-2                                    way line of an
C-3                                    adjacent street, the
                                       sign area may
                                       increase by 10%
                                       (measured from the
                                       sign to the right-
                                       of-way line)
I-1                                    15% of wall area,
I-2                                    not to exceed 200
                                       square feet maximum.
 
 
Projecting Signs
Districts Maximum Number    Maximum Area of Maximum Height
Permitted Permitted         Sign            and Projection of Location of Sign
                                            Sign
C-1                         15 square feet  8-foot minimum
C-2                                         clearance above
C-3       One per business                  ground. No sign
I-1       frontage, except                  shall extend
          that no                           above that
          projecting sign                   portion of the
          is permitted if a                 roof immediately  Not to extend
          freestanding or                   adjacent to the   over any public
          roof sign exists  20 Square Feet  sign. No sign     right-of-way
I-2       on the same                       shall project
          frontage. Upper                   more than 3-1/
          level businesses                  2 feet from the
          are not allowed                   face of the
          projecting signs                  building to which
                                            it is attached
 
 
Roof Signs
Districts Maximum Number    Maximum Area of Maximum Height of Location of Sign
Permitted Permitted         Sign            Sign
C-1       Not permitted     -               -                 -
                                            9 feet, as
                                            measured from
                                            that part of roof
                                            immediately below
C-2                         50 square feet  sign, but in no
C-3                                         case shall the
          One per premises,                 height exceed
          except no roof                    maximum height
          sign is permitted                 authorized in     Sign must be
          if a freestanding                 zoning district   located wholly
          sign or                           9 feet as         within the roof
          projecting sign                   measured from     area of structure
          exists on the                     that part of roof
          same frontage                     immediately below
I-1                         50 square feet  sign, but in no
I-2                                         case shall height
                                            exceed maximum
                                            height authorized
                                            in zoning
                                            district
 
 
Signs Attached to Canopies and Entrance Structures
Districts Maximum Number    Maximum Area of Height of Sign Location of Sign
Permitted Permitted         Sign (5)
C-1                         15 square feet                 No sign may project
C-2                         20 square feet                 more than 2 feet
C-3                                                        from any canopy, or
                                                           other structure. A
                                                           canopy or awning
                                                           may extend within
                                                           the limits of the
                                                           right-of-way by a
          One sign per                      8-foot minimum distance not to
          business frontage                 clearance to   exceed 12 feet. A
I-1                         25 square feet  ground         canopy or awning
I-2                                                        may not extend
                                                           closer than 6
                                                           inches from the
                                                           back of the curb or
                                                           edge of the
                                                           pavement, whichever
                                                           case applies

Notes:
(5) If the sign is the only sign for that business, then the maximum area for
the sign may be increased up to a maximum area of no more than 30% of the
total area of any such canopy, awning or entrance structure if the writing,
representation, emblem or other figure of similar character constituting the
display of the sign is an integral part of any canopy, awning or entrance
structure. Any like display shall be deemed an integral part of the canopy,
awning or entrance structure if the display does not project more than 1/
2 inch from any canopy, awning or entrance structure
 
 
Freestanding Shopping Center Signs
Districts Maximum      Maximum Area                                Individual
Permitted Number       (6)           Maximum Height Location       Business May
          Permitted                                                List (7)
C-1                    75 square
                       feet                         Signs shall
                                                    not extend
                                                    over the
                                     30 feet to     public right-
                                     setback line   of-way. No
                                     plus one       freestanding
                                     additional     signs
          One                        foot per 2     permitted
C-2       freestanding               feet           within 50 feet    Yes
C-3       sign per     150 square    additional     of any
I-1       frontage     feet          setback        residential
I-2                                  thereafter, up district where
                                     to 40 feet     the nearest
                                     maximum.       lot contains a
                                                    dwelling unit,
                                                    school, park,
                                                    hospital or
                                                    nursing home

Notes:
(6) Maximum area refers to combined area of both signs, or of one sign if there
is only one.
(7) Individual businesses establishments may list, but an individual listing
may not exceed 50% of the area of any face of the sign or 1 square foot per
lineal foot of establishment frontage.
 
Outdoor Advertising Signs (OAS)
Districts     Type Maximum Number Maximum Area Maximum Height Location of OAS
Permitted (8)      Permitted      of OAS       of OAS         and Separation
Outdoor Advertising Signs (OAS)
Districts               Maximum       Maximum Area  Maximum       Location of
Permitted  Type         Number        of OAS        Height of OAS OAS and
(8)                     Permitted                                 Separation
                        One per wall                Not to
                        provided no                 project above
                        other                       roofline or
           Wall         exterior wall               edges of wall OAS shall not
                        signs are on                upon which    be located in
                        display                     OAS is        the public
                                                    mounted.      right-of-way
                                                                  and shall not
                                                                  be located to
                                                                  obstruct
                                                                  views within
                                                                  the
                                                                  visibility
                                                                  triangle of
                                      150 square                  any street or
                                      feet/ (300                  driveway
                                      square feet                 intersection.
                                      if directed                 No OAS shall
C-1                                   to                          be permitted
C-2                                   interstate)                 within 150
C-3                                                              feet of any
I-1                                   (back-to-back               Residential,
I-2                                   Displays                    AC, F or AG
                        2 per OAS     shall be                    Zoning
           Freestanding structure     deemed to be  30 feet (10)  District.
                                      a single                    Further, the
                                      structure)(9)               OASs shall
                                                                  not be
                                                                  located
                                                                  within 250
                                                                  feet of any
                                                                  other
                                                                  freestanding
                                                                  or wall
                                                                  mounted OAS
                                                                  (11) (12)
                                                                  (10)
                                                                   




Notes:
(8) Those new OASs shall be allowed only along Federal Aid Primary (FAP) or
Federal Aid Interstate (FAI) routes, as designated by IDOT, as of January 1,
1998, in areas zoned Commercial or Industrial and within 500 feet of either
side of the routes. Interstate 74 is an FAI; Illinois Route 47 and U.S. Route
150 are considered FAPs.
(9) “Back-to-back” shall mean faces erected at a parallel plane separated by no
greater than 3 feet, or faces erected at no greater than a 45 degree angle to
each other.
(10) If an OAS is: directed primarily towards users of a highway in the
National Interstate and Defense Highway System (i.e. Interstate Highway 74);
within 500 feet of the right-of-way of the highway; and more than 500 feet from
any residential district, school, park, hospital, nursing home or other OAS,
then the sign may be erected to a height as to be visible from a distance of 1/
2-mile on the highway or a maximum height of 45 feet, whichever is less, and
the sign may have an area not greater than 300 square feet. These regulations
apply only to OASs facing Interstate Highway 74; they do not apply to OASs
facing Federal Aid-Primary Highways.
(11) For purposes of determining separation measurements, the following shall
apply:
a. Separation measurements between OASs shall be measured along same side of a
street.
b. Measurements from wall OASs shall be made from the closest edge or
projection of the OAS to the structure from which it is being separated.
c. Measurements from freestanding OASs shall be made from the closest ground
projection or support of the structure to the structure from which it is being
separated.
(12) Compliance with these regulations, or those contained in the Illinois
Advertising Control Act of 1971, as amended (ILCS Ch. 225, Act 440, §§ 1 et
seq.), whichever is stricter, shall be required.
 
(Ord. passed 7-23-2002; Ord. 17-09-02, passed 9-26-2017)
§ 152.078 ENFORCEMENT PROCEDURES.
   (A)   The Village Administrator is hereby authorized and directed to
administer and enforce all the provisions of this section.
      (1)   Whenever necessary, the employees of other departments of the
village shall give assistance as is consistent with the usual duties of their
respective departments.
      (2)   Upon presentation of proper credentials, the Village Administrator
or his or her duly authorized representative may enter at reasonable times any
premises when necessary to perform any duty imposed upon him or her by this
section.
   (B)   Whenever it shall appear to the Village Administrator or
representative that any sign has been constructed or erected, or is being
maintained in violation of any of the terms of this chapter, or after a permit
for a sign has been revoked or become void, or that a sign is unsafe or in a
condition as to be a menace to the safety of the public, the Village
Administrator or representative shall issue a notice in writing to the owner or
lessee of the sign, or the owner of the premises upon which the sign is erected
or maintained.
      (1)   The notice shall inform the person of the violation, and shall
direct him or her to make the alteration, repair or removal, if necessary to
secure compliance with this chapter within a reasonable time limit, which shall
not be more than 60 days.
      (2)   Upon failure of the sign owner to comply with the terms of the
notice of violation, the Village Administrator or representative is authorized
and empowered to remove the sign at cost to the owner or lessee, if necessary
to prevent an immediate threat to the safety of the public.
   (C)   A sign shall be removed by the owner or lessee of the premises upon
which the sign is located when the business which the sign advertises is no
longer conducted on the premises. If the owner or lessee fails to remove the
sign, the Village Administrator or representative shall notify the owner or
lessee in writing, and allow 15 days for removal. Upon failure of the owner or
lessee to comply with the notice, the Village Administrator or representative
may remove the sign, at cost to the owner or lessee.
   (D)   Signs may be inspected periodically by the Village Administrator or
representative for compliance with this chapter, and with other ordinances of
the village. All signs and their component parts are to be kept in good repair
and in safe, sanitary condition.
(Ord. passed 7-23-2002)
AREA, HEIGHT AND YARD REGULATIONS
§ 152.090 REQUIREMENTS.
   Except as provided elsewhere in this chapter, the area, height and yard
regulations shall be shown as in the following table:
                                                          Minimum
                                                Minimum   Land Area
                            Minimum Yard Depth/ Lot Width per       Minimum Lot
District Maximum Height (f) Width in Feet       in Feet   Dwelling  Area (d)
                                                (d)       (d) in
                                                          Square
                                                          Feet
         Stories Feet       Front Side Rear
                                                            Minimum
                                                  Minimum   Land Area
         Maximum Height  Minimum Yard Depth/Width Lot Width per       Minimum
District (f)             in Feet                  in Feet   Dwelling  Lot Area
                                                  (d)       (d) in    (d)
                                                            Square
                                                            Feet
         Stories Feet    Front Side     Rear
AG       2.5     35      50    25       50        150       43,560    43,560
AC       2.5     35      50    25       50        150       (c)       43,560
R-1A     2.5     35      30    10       30        100       20,000    20,000
R-1B     2.5     35      25    10       25        80        10,000    10,000
R-1C     2       30      25    7        25        65        8,000     8,000
R-2      2.5     35      25    8        25        65        5,000     10,000
R-3A     2.5(h ) 35(h )  25    8(h)( b) 25(b)     20        4,000     4,000
R-3B     3(h)    45(h )  25    8(h)( b) 25(b)     20        3,500     3,500
R-3C     3(h)    45(h )  25    8(h)( b) 25(b)     20        3,000     3,000
R-3G     3(h)    45(h )  25    7(h)( b) 25(b)     20        3,000     3,000
C-1      2.5     35      25    (a)      25        None      (e)       6,000
C-2      3       45      15    (a)      25        None      (e)       6,000
C-3      3       45      25    25       25        None      (e)       7,000
I-1      3       45      40    25       25        200       (c)       7,000
I-2      3       45      25    (a)      25        None      (c)       7,000
FP       NA      NA      NA    NA       NA        NA        NA        43,560
(a)   None unless adjacent to a residential district in which case a minimum
side yard of ten feet is required.
(b)   See §
152.048 for additional row house development standards.
(c)   Dwellings prohibited.
(d)   See § 152.091(A) for lot area and width exceptions.
(e)   Dwellings prohibited except by conditional use.
(f)   See § 152.091(F) for height exceptions.
(g)   NA means the appropriate requirement is “not applicable”.
(h)   See §
152.055 for additional multiple-family residential development standards.
(i)   Side yard setback requirements do not apply to common lot line dwellings
on a side yard that adjoins another adjacent dwelling.
 
(Ord. passed 7-23-2002; Ord. 17-09-02, passed 9-26-2017; Ord. 20-07-05, passed
7-28-2020; Ord. 20- 12-01, passed 12-15-2020)
§ 152.091 AREA AND HEIGHT MODIFICATIONS.
   The height and area regulations specified in the foregoing are modified as
specified below.
   (A)   Lot area and width. Any lot of record at the time of passage of this
chapter having less area or width than herein required may be used for a
single-family dwelling. In the R-2 and R-3 Zoning Districts, any lot which was
of public record and platted on or before May 8, 1978, on which there is
proposed to be erected a single-family dwelling shall contain an area of not
less than 7,500 square feet. In the R-2 and R-3 Zoning Districts, any lot which
was of public record on or before November 10, 1986 upon which there is
proposed to be erected a single-family, two-family or multiple-family dwelling
shall have a lot width of not less than 65 feet. Minimum lot widths are as
established in the table of area, height and yard regulations in §
152.090. For regularly shaped lots, the lot width shall mean the average
distance between the side lot lines, measured at right angles to the depth of
the lot along the lot frontage. For irregularly shaped or wedge-shaped lots,
the lot width shall be the arc at the points of intersection of the front
setback line with the side lot lines. For irregular shaped or wedge-shaped lots
only, such as along a cul-de-sac, the front yard setback line may be adjusted
to increase the front yard setback through the subdivision plat review process
to meet the minimum lot width requirement, but in no case shall the lot
frontage at the front lot line be less than 40 feet. The minimum lot area
requirements shall be reduced to 5,000 square feet for any lot of record within
a commercial or industrial district and existing on or before January 1, 2002
and which is proposed to be utilized for a permissive or conditional use
consistent with that district as set forth in division (B) below.
   (B)   Front yard. Where 30% or more of a block front is improved with
buildings, then no part of any new building shall project beyond a line joining
the two adjacent corners of the buildings on either side thereof, or where
there is a building on only one side, beyond a line projected from the
corresponding adjacent corner of the building except that no building shall be
required to provide a front yard greater than 50 feet in any event. Where an
official line has been established for the future widening or opening of a
street upon which a lot abuts, then the depth of a front or side yard shall be
measured from the official line.
   (C)   Side yard. The required side yard shall be maintained on each side of
a dwelling, but the side yard may be reduced to 10% of the lot width on lots of
less than 65 feet in width, provided, however, that no side yard shall be less
than five feet.
      (1)   The required side yard on the street side of a corner lot shall be
the same as the required front yard on the street, except that the building
width shall not be reduced to less than 32 feet, and no accessory building
shall project beyond the required front yard on either street.
      (2)   For the purpose of side yard regulations, a two-family dwelling,
group house or multiple dwelling shall be considered as one building occupying
one lot.
   (D)   Rear yard. The required rear yard may be reduced to 20% of the depth
of the lot on any lot not exceeding 125 feet in depth. An accessory building,
including guest quarters, may be built within a required rear yard when located
at least five feet from the rear lot line and when occupying not more than 30%
of the area of the required rear yard. Accessory, open and uncovered swimming
pools, home barbecue grills and home incinerators may occupy a required rear
yard, provided they are not located closer than five feet to the rear lot line
nor closer than two feet to a side lot line.
   (E)   All yards. The ordinary projection of roof over-hangs, cornices and
ornamental features may be permitted but the projections shall not exceed 48
inches into any required yard.
      (1)   Filling station pumps and pump islands may occupy the required
yard, provided, however that they are not less than 15 feet from street lines.
      (2)   One directional or name sign or sign advertising products sold on
the premises may occupy required yards in a district where the sign is
permitted by the use regulations of this chapter, provided the sign is of not
more than 25 square feet in area.
      (3)   Fences, hedges or walls. See §
152.050(D).
      (4)   Where a lot or tract is used for multiple-family, commercial or
industrial purposes, more than one main building may be located on the lot or
tract, but only when the buildings conform to all open space requirements
around the lot for the district in which the lot or tract is located.
      (5)   Required front yards shall be devoted entirely to landscaped area
except for guest parking and the necessary paving of driveways and sidewalks to
reach parking or loading areas in the side or rear yard.
      (6)   Where an official line has been established for the future widening
or opening of a street or major thoroughfare upon which a lot abuts, then the
depth of a front or side yard shall be measured from the official line to the
nearest line of the building.
      (7)   Trailers, including camping and boat trailers, pick-up camper
bodies, and boats shall be stored only in established rear yards.
   (F)   Height.
      (1)   Chimneys, cooling or water towers, elevators, bulkheads, fire
towers, monuments, stacks, stage towers or necessary mechanical apparatuses may
be erected to any height not in conflict with any other ordinance of the
village.
      (2)   Public, semi-public or public service buildings, hospitals,
institutions, churches and schools, when permitted in a district may be erected
to exceed height limits specified for the district, provided all required yards
are increased by one foot for each foot of building height above the specified
height limit.
      (3)   Buildings in the R-3, C and I Districts may be increased in height
one foot for each foot the building is set back from all yard lines up to a
maximum height of 100 feet, provided that the gross floor area provided
exclusive of enclosed garages, does not exceed the number of square feet of
land area of the lot on which the building is placed.
   (G)   Row house building.
      (1)   In districts where row house buildings are permitted and row houses
are to be constructed for sale, each on its own lot, to individual owners, the
row houses shall not be subject to the minimum lot requirements of §
152.090 but instead shall be subject to the minimum requirements specified in
this section.
      (2)   Minimum lot area for a row house lot shall be not less than 5,000
square feet.
      (3)   Minimum frontage of a row house lot on a public street shall be not
less than 30 feet on a standard lot and not less than 50 feet on a corner lot.
      (4)   (a)   No side yard shall be required along any side lot line which
is common to two attached row houses, whether they be on interior or exterior
row house lots.
         (b)   On side yard, conforming to the least width required by §
152.090 shall be required along the side lot lines of an exterior row house lot
where the lot line is not common to that of any other attached row house.
      (5)   Front yard and rear yard requirements as established in §
152.090 shall be provided for all row house dwellings.
      (6)   A minimum lot width of 40 feet shall be provided for all interior
and exterior row house lots.
      (7)   Row houses shall be developed on subdivided lots with no more than
three units per building; nor shall the building exceed 120 feet in length.
      (8)   The maximum lot coverage for row house lot shall be 40% and not
less than 1,800 square feet of open space shall be provided on each row house
lot.
      (9)   Exterior treatment of attached row houses shall be integrated.
Exterior of buildings shall be maintained in their original color and treatment
unless otherwise agreed to in writing by the affected lot owners.
      (10)   (a)   An unobstructed easement shall be provided across the side
and rear eight feet of each exterior row house lot (triplex), when adjacent to
an interior row house lot, for ingress and egress of adjacent interior row
house lot owners for maintenance purposes.
         (b)   The access easement shall be unobstructed and physically
passable at all times. This easement shall be incorporated into each deed
transferring title to the property.
      (11)   A party wall agreement shall be included in the subdivision
covenants for each row house lot setting forth provisions for repair of common
walls, repair of common utility service connections, reconstruction of the
common building in the event of damage or destruction of one or all of the
dwelling units and common maintenance and repair of joint facilities.
      (12)   The coincident property walls (party wall) of each row house shall
be constructed in a manner which complies with the standards for common walls
established by the BOCA Building Code of 1990, in that each common wall shall
have a minimum fire resistance rating of two hours.
(Ord. passed 7-23-2002; Ord. 12-08-02, passed 8-28-2012; Ord. 17-09-02, passed
9-26-2017)
OFF-STREET PARKING
§ 152.105 REQUIREMENTS.
   Off-street parking spaces shall be provided in all districts in accordance
with the following minimum requirements:
   (A)   Single-family and two-family dwellings: one space for each bathroom or
fraction thereof in the dwelling unit but not less than two parking spaces;
   (B)   Multiple dwellings: two spaces for each dwelling unit;
   (C)   Rooming and boardinghouses, sororities and fraternities: one parking
space for each 200 square feet of floor area;
   (D)   Private club or lodge: one parking space for each 400 square feet of
floor area;
   (E)   Church or temple: one parking space for each four seats in the main
auditorium;
   (F)   School: for high schools, colleges and universities, ten spaces per
classroom; for elementary schools, two parking spaces per classroom;
   (G)   Hospital: two parking spaces for each bed;
   (H)   Sanitarium or institutional home: one parking space for each three
beds;
   (I)   Funeral homes: ten parking spaces for each chapel, plus one for each
funeral home vehicle, plus one for each family residing on the premises;
   (J)   Auditorium, theaters and other places of public assembly: one parking
space for each five seats;
   (K)   Community center, library, museum or similar public or semi-public
building: one parking space for each 300 square feet of floor area in the
building;
   (L)   Hotel or motel: five parking spaces plus one space for each sleeping
room or suite;
   (M)   Medical office building: buildings in which 20% or more of the gross
area is occupied by members of the healing profession; one parking space for
each 150 square feet of the gross area used for this purpose;
   (N)   Manufacturing or industrial establishment: two parking spaces for
every three employees on the maximum shift or one space for each 300 square
feet of floor area, whichever is greater, plus space to accommodate all trucks
and other vehicles used in connection therewith;
   (O)   Wholesale, warehouse or similar establishment: one space for each 500
square feet of floor area, with one space for each 1,500 square feet of floor
area to be paved on building construction. When required, area reserved for
future parking will be paved upon receipt or written order from the Village
Administrator or representative; and
   (P)   All nonresidential buildings, except those above specified: one space
for each 300 square feet of floor area.
(Ord. passed 7-23-2002)
§ 152.106 RULES FOR COMPUTING.
   In computing the number of required off-street parking spaces, the following
rules shall apply.
   (A)   FLOOR AREA shall mean the gross floor area of the specified use,
excluding any floor or portion thereof used for parking, as herein defined.
   (B)   Where fractional spaces result, the parking spaces required shall be
the nearest whole number.
   (C)   In the case of mixed uses, the parking spaces required shall equal the
sum of the requirements of the various uses computed separately.
   (D)   Whenever a building or use constructed or established after January 1,
1960, is changed or enlarged in floor area, number of employees, number of
dwelling units, seating capacity or otherwise, parking spaces shall be provided
on the basis of the enlargement or change. Whenever a building or use existing
prior to January 1, 1960, is reconstructed or is enlarged to the extent of 20%
or more in floor area, the building or use in its entirety shall then and
thereafter comply with the parking requirements set forth herein. Any
enlargement or change in use of less than 20% of the gross floor area shall be
provided with parking based on the enlargement or change.
(Ord. passed 7-23-2002)
§ 152.107 LOCATION OF REQUIRED PARKING SPACES.
    All parking spaces required herein shall be located as follows.
   (A)   The parking space required for residential buildings or uses shall be
located on the same lot with the building or use served. The parking spaces
required for any other building or use may be located on an area within 300
feet of the building and two or more owners of buildings may join together in
providing the required parking spaces. Where the required parking spaces are
not located on the same lot with building or use served, the usage of the lot
or tract upon which the parking spaces are provided shall be restricted by an
instrument of record describing the premises for which the parking is provided
and assuring the retention of the parking so long as required by this chapter.
   (B)   Only the minimum required parking spaces for single-family and two-
family residential uses may be located in a front yard when they are part of a
driveway.
   (C)   Parking spaces for multiple-family developments may be located in a
front yard as permitted in §
152.108.
(Ord. passed 7-23-2002; Ord. 20-07-05, passed 7-28-2020)
§ 152.108 MINIMUM IMPROVEMENT AND MAINTENANCE STANDARDS.
   (A)    All open parking areas provided in compliance with this chapter shall
be surfaced with a durable, dust-proof surface consisting of concrete,
bituminous concrete or compacted gravel or crushed stone properly sealed and
surface treated as approved by designated engineering personnel of the village.
   (B)   The parking areas shall be maintained in a usable, dust-proof
condition and graded and drained to dispose of all surface water. Whenever
lighting is provided, it shall be so hooded or shielded as to reflect the light
away from abutting or neighboring property, including public right-of-way.
   (C)   The location of each parking space and the direction of movement along
the access driveways shall be indicated by painting upon the surface of the
lot.
   (D)   A structurally sound wall or other abutment shall be installed and so
placed around each side of the parking lot to ensure that no part of an
automobile either extends over or is capable of accidentally rolling across the
property line of the parking lot.
   (E)   Parking lot setback; landscaping and screening requirements.
      (1)   Minimum parking lot setback: All yards, 10 feet.
      (2)   Interior parking lot landscaping. One standard tree of at least
three inches in diameter shall be planted within the parking lot for each ten
parking spaces. Interior parking lot landscaping must be provided in an island
or peninsula within the parking lot.
      (3)   Perimeter parking lot landscaping/screening. Any parking lot that
contains more than four parking spaces and is located in a residential zoning
district must provide perimeter parking lot landscaping to screen the
visibility of the parking lot from adjacent property lines. Around the
perimeter of the parking area, one tree and three shrubs per 25 linear feet of
the parking area perimeter shall be planted.
(Ord. passed 7-23-2002; Ord. 20-07-05, passed 7-28-2020)
CONDITIONAL USES
§ 152.120 GENERALLY.
   (A)   The President and Board of Trustees of the village shall decide upon
application for conditional use permits specifically listed in the district
regulations of this chapter.
   (B)   Before authorizing the issuance of a conditional use permit, a public
hearing shall be held before the Plan and Zoning Commission, after which a
report and recommendations shall be submitted in writing by the Commission to
the Board of Trustees.
   (C)   The Commission may recommend and the Board, in turn, may impose
conditions that are consistent with development regulations in this chapter or
otherwise vary from the development regulations as will, in the Board’s
judgment, assure the following:
      (1)   The establishment, maintenance or operation of the conditional use
will not be detrimental to or endanger the public health, safety, morals,
comfort or general welfare;
      (2)   The conditional use will not be injurious to the use and enjoyment
of other property in the immediate vicinity for the purposes already permitted
nor substantially diminish and impair property values with the neighborhood;
      (3)   The establishment of the conditional use will not impede the normal
and orderly development and improvement of surrounding property for uses
permitted in the district;
      (4)   Adequate utilities access roads, drainage and/or other necessary
facilities will be provided;
      (5)   Adequate measures will be taken to provide ingress and egress so
designed as to minimize traffic congestion in the public streets; and
      (6)   The conditional use shall in all other respects conform to the
applicable regulations of the district in which it is located and the Board
shall find that there is a public necessity.
(Ord. passed 7-23-2002)
§ 152.121 REQUIREMENTS FOR CONDITIONAL USES.
   (A)   The Plan and Zoning Commission shall make a recommendation to the
Board of Trustees for or against the proposed conditional use, and may also
recommend additional conditions and requirements as are appropriate or
necessary for the protection of public health, safety and welfare and to carry
out the purposes of this chapter, including, but not limited to, the following:
      (1)   Regulate the location, extent and intensity of the uses;
      (2)   Require adherence to an approved site plan;
      (3)   Require landscaping and the screening of those uses by means of
fences, walls or vegetation;
      (4)   Stipulate required minimum lot sizes, minimum yards and maximum
height of buildings and structures;
      (5)   Regulate vehicular access and volume and the design and location of
parking and loading areas and structures;
      (6)   Require conformance to health, safety and sanitation requirements
as necessary;
      (7)   Regulate signs and outdoor lighting; and
      (8)   Any other conditions deemed necessary to effect the purposes of
this chapter.
   (B)   The Board of Trustees may impose any conditions or requirements,
including but not limited to those recommended by the Plan and Zoning
Commission, which it deems appropriate or necessary in order to accomplish the
purposes of this chapter. The Board of Trustees may vary the terms of area,
height, yard and other development regulations for conditional uses to carry
out the purposes of this chapter. A conditional use authorized by the Board of
Trustees shall be subject to all the development regulations applicable to
permitted uses in the district in which it is located, unless other regulations
are specifically stated in the conditional use permit.
(Ord. passed 7-23-2002)
NONCONFORMING USES
§ 152.135 USES OF LAND, NONCONFORMING.
   In any district where open land is being used as a nonconforming use, and
the use is the principal use and not accessory to the main use conducted in a
building the use shall be discontinued not later than two years from the date
of passage of this chapter. During the two-year period, the nonconforming use
shall not be extended or enlarged, either on the same or adjoining property.
Any building incident and subordinate to the use of land, such as a shed, tool
house, storage building, office or trailer, shall be removed at the end of the
two-year period or, if the building is so constructed as to permit the issuance
of a permit for a use not excluded from the district, the building may remain
as a conforming use; thereafter both land and building shall be used only as
conforming uses. If any nonconforming use of land ceases for any reason for a
period of more than 180 consecutive days, any subsequent use of the land shall
conform to the regulations of the district in which the land is located.
(Ord. passed 7-23-2002)
§ 152.136 USE OF BUILDINGS, NONCONFORMING.
   Except as otherwise provided herein, the lawful use of a building existing
at the effective date of this chapter may be continued although the use does
not conform to the provisions hereof. If no structural alterations are made, a
nonconforming use of a building may be changed to another nonconforming use of
the same or of a more restricted classification. Whenever a nonconforming use
has been changed to a more restricted use or to a conforming use, the use shall
not thereafter be changed to a less restricted use. The nonconforming use of a
building may be hereafter extended throughout those parts of a building which
were lawfully and manifestly arranged or designed for the use at the time of
the enactment of this chapter.
(Ord. passed 7-23-2002)
§ 152.137 DISCONTINUANCE OF NONCONFORMING USES.
   No building or portion thereof used in whole or in part for a nonconforming
use which is discontinued or abandoned for a continuous period of six months,
whether or not the equipment or fixtures are removed, shall again be used
except in conformity with the regulations of the district in which it is
located.
(Ord. passed 7-23-2002)
§ 152.138 DESTRUCTION OF A NONCONFORMING USE.
   No building which has been damaged by any cause whatsoever to the extent of
more than 50% of the fair market value of the building immediately prior to
damage shall be restored except in conformity with the regulations of this
chapter, and all rights as a nonconforming use are terminated. If a building is
damaged by less than 50% of the fair market value, it may be repaired or
reconstructed and used as before the time of damage, provided that the repairs
or reconstruction be substantially completed within 12 months of the date of
the damage.
(Ord. passed 7-23-2002)
§ 152.139 NONCONFORMING ADVERTISING SIGNS.
   All advertising signs in violation of the provisions of this chapter shall
be removed and the signs brought into conformity with all requirements of this
chapter herein on or before a date not later than five years from the effective
date of this chapter.
(Ord. passed 7-23-2002)
§ 152.140 MOBILE HOMES OR TRAILERS.
   All mobile homes or trailers located in violation of the provisions of this
chapter shall be removed or brought into conformity with all requirements of
this chapter on or before a date not later than five years from the effective
date of this chapter. When a nonconforming mobile home or trailer shall be
removed from the subject premises and any subsequent use of the land shall be
in conformance with the regulations of the district in which the land is
located.
(Ord. passed 7-23-2002)
§ 152.141 CONDITIONAL USES NOT NONCONFORMING.
   Existing uses eligible for conditional use permits shall not be
nonconforming uses but shall require a conditional use permit for any
alteration, enlargement or extension.
(Ord. passed 7-23-2002)
§ 152.142 INTERMITTENT USE.
   The casual, intermittent, temporary or illegal use of land or buildings
shall not be sufficient to establish the existence of a nonconforming use, and
the existence of a nonconforming use on the part of a lot or tract shall not be
construed to establish a nonconforming use on the entire lot or tract.
(Ord. passed 7-23-2002)
BOARD OF APPEALS
§ 152.155 COMPOSITION.
   A Board of Appeals is hereby created which shall consist of seven members
appointed by the Village Board to serve respectively for the following terms:
one for one year; one for two years; one for three years; one for seven years.
The successor of each member so appointed to serve for a term of five years.
One member of the Board shall be designated by the Village Board as Chairperson
and shall hold office as Chairperson until a successor is appointed. The Board
may select or appoint other officers as it deems necessary.
(Ord. passed 7-23-2002)
§ 152.156 DUTIES.
   (A)   The Board shall meet at the call of the Chairperson and at other times
as it may determine. The Board shall keep minutes of all proceedings including
findings of fact, all of its determinations and decisions, the reasons
therefor, and the vote of each member upon every question, which minutes shall
be immediately filed in the office of the Village Clerk and shall be a public
record.
   (B)   An appeal may be taken to the Board of Appeals by any person, group or
organization, public or private, affected by a decision by the Building
Inspector. The appeal shall be taken within a time as prescribed by the Board
by general rule, by filing with the Building Inspector and with the Board a
notice of appeal specifying the grounds thereof. A fee determined from time to
time by resolution of the Board of Trustees of the village shall accompany all
notices of appeal.
(Ord. passed 7-23-2002)
§ 152.157 POWERS.
   The Board of Appeals shall have all the power and duties prescribed by law
and by this chapter, which are more particularly specified as follows.
   (A)   Interpretation. Upon appeal from a decision by an administrative
official, to decide any question involving the interpretation of any provision
of this chapter, including determination of the exact location of any district
boundary if there is uncertainty with respect thereto.
   (B)   Variances.
      (1)   To vary or adapt the strict application of any of the requirements
of this chapter in the cases of exceptionally irregular, narrow or shallow
lots, other exceptional physical conditions, or other unique circumstances,
whereby the strict application would result in practical difficulty or
unnecessary hardship that would deprive the owner of the reasonable use of the
land or building involved, but in no other case.
      (2)   No variance in the strict application of any provision of this
chapter shall be granted by the Board of Appeals unless it finds:
         (a)   There are special circumstances of conditions, fully described
in the findings, applying to the land or building for which the variance is
sought;
         (b)   The special circumstances or conditions are peculiar to the land
or buildings for which the variance is sought and do not apply generally to
land or buildings in the neighborhood;
         (c)   The circumstances or conditions are such that the strict
application of the provisions of this chapter could deprive the applicant of
the reasonable use of the land and building or presents a significant
particular hardship to reasonable use of the land;
         (d)   For reasons fully set forth in the findings, the granting of the
variance is necessary for the reasonable use of the land or building; or to
overcome the significant hardship to reasonable use of the land or building;
         (e)   The variance as granted by the Board is the minimum variance
that will accomplish this purpose;
         (f)   The granting of the variance will be in harmony with the general
purpose and intent of this zoning ordinance;
         (g)   The granting of the variance will not be injurious to the
neighborhood or otherwise detrimental to the public welfare; and
         (h)   The granting of the variance will not be in conflict with the
Comprehensive Plan.
      (3)   In granting any variance, the Board of Appeals shall prescribe any
conditions that it deems to be necessary or desirable.
(Ord. passed 7-23-2002)
§ 152.158 PROCEDURE.
   (A)   The Board of Appeals shall act in strict accordance with the procedure
specified by law by this chapter. All appeals and application made to the Board
shall be in writing, on forms prescribed by the Board. Every appeal or
application shall refer to the specific provision of the ordinance involved and
shall exactly set forth the interpretation that is claimed, the use for which
the special permit is sought, or the details of the variance sought to be
granted, as the case may be.
   (B)   The Board of Appeals shall fix a reasonable time for the hearing of
the appeal and give due notice thereof to the parties and decide the appeal
within a reasonable time. Hearings on and all proceedings of the Board shall be
in conformity with Chapter 24, Article 73 of the Illinois Revised Statutes. All
hearings shall be open to the public and any party at interest may appear in
person or by agent or attorney.
   (C)   At least ten days before the date of the hearing, the Secretary of the
Board shall transmit to the Plan and Zoning Commission of the village a copy of
the application or appeal, together with a copy of the notice of the aforesaid
hearing shall request that the Plan and Zoning Commission submit to the Board
of Appeals its advisory opinion on the application or appeal, and the Plan and
Zoning Commission a report of the advisory opinion prior to the date of the
hearing. Every decision of the Board of Appeals shall be by resolution, each of
which shall contain a full record of the findings of the Board in the
particular case. Each resolution shall be filed in the office of the Village
Clerk by case number under one or the other of the following headings:
interpretations; variances; together with all documents pertaining thereto. The
Board of Appeals shall notify the Village Board and Plan and Zoning Commission
of each special permit and each variance granted under the provisions of this
chapter.
(Ord. passed 7-23-2002)
ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT
§ 152.170 GENERALLY.
   (A)   It shall be the duty of the Village Administrator or designee to
administer and enforce the regulations contained herein.
   (B)   No building or construction shall be undertaken without first
obtaining a building permit and without applying for a certificate of occupancy
as required by §§
152.171 and
152.172. No land or building shall be used or occupied without first obtaining
a certificate of occupancy. No building permit or certificate of occupancy
shall be granted by the Village Administrator or the person designated by the
Village Board as the Building Inspector for any purpose except in compliance
with the provisions of this chapter.
(Ord. passed 7-23-2002)
§ 152.171 BUILDING PERMITS.
   (A)   Application for a building permit shall be accompanied by a lot plat
in duplicate, drawn to scale, showing the name of the applicant, the actual
dimensions of the lot to be built upon as shown by a survey, the size, shape
and location of the building to be erected, the location of water and sanitary
sewage connections, the provisions for stormwater drainage and other
information as may be necessary for the enforcement of this chapter.
Applications for permits shall be accompanied by the drawings of the proposed
work, drawn to scale, including floor plans, sections and elevations and other
information as may be necessary for the enforcement of this chapter.
   (B)   It shall be the duty of the Building Inspector to examine applications
for permits within a reasonable time after filing. If, after examination, he or
she finds that the proposed work will be in compliance with the laws and
ordinances applicable thereto, he or she shall approve the application. If
examination reveals otherwise, he or she shall reject the application, and so
inform the applicant to the reasons for his or her rejection.
   (C)   One copy of the layout or plot plan shall be returned, when approved
by the Building Inspector, together with the permit to the applicant, upon the
payment of a fee based upon the current schedule as adopted from time to time
by the Board of Trustees of the village. The fee schedule shall be available
for public inspection at the offices of the village during normal working
hours.
   (D)   A building permit under which no work is commenced within six months
after issuance shall expire by limitation. A copy of the building permit shall
be kept on the premises during prosecution of the work and until completion of
same. All construction work shall be completed within one year of issuance of
the permit.
   (E)   The Building Inspector may revoke a permit issued under these
provisions in the case that there has been any false statement or
misrepresentation as to material facts in the application, or if construction
does not proceed in accordance with the building permit provisions.
Continuation of construction activities after revocation of a permit shall be
deemed a violation of this chapter.
   (F)   Construction activities shall fully comply with the building permit
provisions and the approved construction plans. The construction activities
shall not deviate from the approved plans without first obtaining an amendment
to the building permit.
   (G)   Amendments to a plat, building plans, application or other documents
accompanying the building permit may be filed at any time before the completion
of the work for which the permit is sought or issued. The amendments shall be
deemed part of the original building permit application and shall be filed
therewith. Work shall not proceed until a building permit has been issued for
the amended application. In the event that an amendment is made to the
application when construction work is already underway, the applicant shall
cease all construction activities and shall not proceed with the construction
work until a revised building permit has been issued.
   (H)   These activities shall not commence without a building permit:
      (1)   Construct an addition to a structure;
      (2)   Construct, demolish or move a structure;
      (3)   Make a change of use within a structure or on a lot or tract of
land;
      (4)   Install or alter any equipment or structure which is regulated by
this chapter;
      (5)   Alter the location of a lot line which affects an existing
structure or alters the dimensions of an existing lot;
      (6)   Extend, expand, change or re-establish any nonconforming use;
      (7)   Construct or install a sign as regulated by this chapter;
      (8)   Construct a swimming pool as regulated by this chapter;
      (9)   Construct, alter or establish an accessory building or accessory
use as regulated by this chapter; and
      (10)   Construct use alterations to a building or structure.
   (I)   All applications for building permits for commercial and industrial
uses, building involving public assembly and multi-family residential buildings
involving four or more units on the same zoning lot shall include construction
plans for the structure and other facilities to be constructed. The
construction plans shall be sealed by a state licensed architect, or state
structural engineer and/or state professional engineer. The architect and/or
engineer shall provide a statement indicating compliance of the plans with the
State Plumbing Code (latest edition), the current state and federal
requirements for disabled accessibility and other local, state and federal code
requirements and regulations as may be applicable.
   (J)   All applications for building permits shall be accompanied by complete
applications for a driveway permit, a water system connection permit, a
sanitary sewer system connection permit and all other related and associated
permits, which pertain to the proposed development activity. No building permit
shall be issued if any other permit application is incomplete, or if the
application or connection fee associated with the related application has not
been paid in full. Any application for a building permit, which is not
accompanied by all related permit applications and fees shall be deemed
incomplete and shall not be processed by the Building Inspector.
   (K)   If the Building Inspector receives an incomplete application, he or
she shall attempt to contact the applicant and inform the applicant that the
application is incomplete, and give the applicant an opportunity to provide the
missing information, documentation and/or fees. The applicant shall have ten
calendar days thereafter to provide the missing materials. If the application
remains incomplete after ten days, the Building Inspector shall reject the
application, and so inform the applicant.
   (L)   Building permit fees.
Type New Fee
Type                                            New Fee
Residential Building Permit                     $0.09/GSF*
Accessory buildings, garages, or room additions $0.09 GSF or $50 minimum
Driveway and/or approach                        $35
Porch                                           $50
Deck                                            $50
Patio                                           $50
Pool                                            $50
Fence                                           $75
Pool and fence                                  $100
 
*   Gross Square Feet - The sum of all areas of an enclosed building as
measured from the outside faces of its exterior walls. Exclude any areas having
less than a six-foot mean ceiling height and no walkable floor. Round up GSF to
the nearest whole number.
(Ord. passed 7-23-2002; Ord. 15-02-01, passed 3-25-2015; Ord. 18-02-05, passed
2-27-2018)
§ 152.172 CERTIFICATE OF OCCUPANCY.
   (A)   No land shall be occupied or used and no building hereafter erected,
altered or extended shall be used or changed in use until a certificate of
occupancy shall have been issued by the Building Inspector, stating that the
building or proposed use thereof complies with the provisions of all pertinent
village ordinances.
   (B)   No nonconforming use shall be renewed, changed or extended without a
certificate of occupancy having first been issued by the Building Inspector
therefor.
   (C)   All certificates of occupancy shall be applied for coincident with the
application for a building permit. The certificate shall be issued within ten
days after erection or alteration shall have been approved as complying with
the provisions of this chapter.
   (D)   The Building Inspector shall maintain a record of all certificates,
and copies shall be furnished, upon request, to any person having a proprietary
or tenancy interest in the building affected.
   (E)   No permit for excavation for, or the erection or alteration of or
repairs to any building shall be issued until an application has been made for
a certificate of occupancy.
(Ord. passed 7-23-2002)
§ 152.173 AMENDMENT.
   The Village Board may from time to time amend this chapter through the
following procedure.
   (A)   The Plan and Zoning Commission shall hold a public hearing on a
proposed amendment. Notice of the public hearing shall be published in a
newspaper of general circulation in the village at least one time 15 days prior
to the hearing.
   (B)   Following the public hearing, the proposed amendment may be
recommended as presented or in modified form by a majority vote of the entire
Plan and Zoning Commission.
   (C)   Following its adoption of a recommendation, the Plan and Zoning
Commission shall certify the recommended amendment to the Village Board for its
adoption.
   (D)   The Village Board may return the proposed amendment to the Plan and
Zoning Commission for further study or re-certification, or by a majority vote
of the entire membership may by ordinance or resolution adopt the recommended
amendment submitted by the Plan and Zoning Commission. However, nothing in this
chapter shall be construed to limit the Board’s authority to recall the
amending ordinance by a vote of a majority of the Village Board.
   (E)   Following adoption by the Board of Trustees, the adopted amending
ordinance shall be filed in the office of the Village Clerk. The Village Clerk
shall file with the County Recorder a copy of the amending ordinance.
   (F)   In case of written protest against any proposed amendment of the
zoning regulations or districts, signed and acknowledged by the owners of 20%
of the frontage immediately adjoining or across an alley therefrom, or by the
owners of 20% of the frontage directly opposite the frontage proposed to be
altered, is filed with the Village Clerk, the amendments shall not be passed
except by a favorable vote of two-thirds of all of the Village Board.
   (G)   Before any action shall be taken as provided for in this chapter,
(including a request for amendment of this chapter, request for rezoning,
request for site-plan approval, request for a conditional use permit, request
for a variance or any other formal action as provided for in this chapter), the
party proposing or requesting the formal action shall be required to submit a
nonrefundable fee to the village. The payment of this fee shall be in addition
to any of the other fees required by this or any other ordinance. The amount of
the fee may be established and amended from time to time by the resolution of
the Board of Trustees of the village.
(Ord. passed 7-23-2002)
§ 152.174 INTERPRETATION.
   In interpreting and applying the provisions of this chapter, they shall be
held to be the minimum requirements for the promotion of the public safety,
health, convenience, comfort, morals, prosperity and general welfare. It is not
intended by this chapter to interfere with or abrogate or annul any easements,
covenants or other agreements between parties, except that if this chapter
imposes a greater restriction, this chapter shall control.
(Ord. passed 7-23-2002)
§ 152.999 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person violating any of the sign provisions of this chapter shall
become liable to the village for any expense, loss or damage occasioned by the
village by reasons of the violation, including reasonable attorney fees
incurred by the village in the enforcement of this chapter.
   (B)   (1)   Any person, firm or corporation who violates, disobeys, omits,
neglects or refuses to comply with, or who resists the enforcement of any of
the provisions of this chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon
conviction, be fined not more than $100 for each offense. Each day that the
violation continues shall constitute a separate offense.
      (2)   In case any building or structure is erected, converted,
reconstructed, altered, repaired, converted or maintained, or any building,
structure or land is used in violation of this chapter, the appropriate
authorities of the village, in addition to other remedies, may institute
appropriate action or proceedings to prevent the unlawful erection,
construction, reconstruction, alteration, conversion, maintenance or use, or to
correct or abate the violation, or to prevent the occupancy of the building,
structure or land.
(Ord. passed 7-23-2002)
APPENDIX A: SIGN ILLUSTRATIONS
Note: To view Appendix A in PDF, click HERE
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/a9ca1b11a123a719de15c1f9e2aa74391beab565/
IMAGES/0-0-0-1289.jpg]
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/a9ca1b11a123a719de15c1f9e2aa74391beab565/
IMAGES/0-0-0-1291.jpg]
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/a9ca1b11a123a719de15c1f9e2aa74391beab565/
IMAGES/0-0-0-1293.jpg]
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/a9ca1b11a123a719de15c1f9e2aa74391beab565/
IMAGES/0-0-0-1295.jpg]
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/a9ca1b11a123a719de15c1f9e2aa74391beab565/
IMAGES/0-0-0-1297.jpg]
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/a9ca1b11a123a719de15c1f9e2aa74391beab565/
IMAGES/0-0-0-1299.jpg]
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/a9ca1b11a123a719de15c1f9e2aa74391beab565/
IMAGES/0-0-0-1301.jpg]
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/a9ca1b11a123a719de15c1f9e2aa74391beab565/
IMAGES/0-0-0-1303.jpg]
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/a9ca1b11a123a719de15c1f9e2aa74391beab565/
IMAGES/0-0-0-1305.jpg]
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/a9ca1b11a123a719de15c1f9e2aa74391beab565/
IMAGES/0-0-0-1307.jpg]
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/a9ca1b11a123a719de15c1f9e2aa74391beab565/
IMAGES/0-0-0-1309.jpg]
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/a9ca1b11a123a719de15c1f9e2aa74391beab565/
IMAGES/0-0-0-1311.jpg]
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/a9ca1b11a123a719de15c1f9e2aa74391beab565/
IMAGES/0-0-0-1313.jpg]
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/a9ca1b11a123a719de15c1f9e2aa74391beab565/
IMAGES/0-0-0-1315.jpg]
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/a9ca1b11a123a719de15c1f9e2aa74391beab565/
IMAGES/0-0-0-1317.jpg]
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/a9ca1b11a123a719de15c1f9e2aa74391beab565/
IMAGES/0-0-0-1319.jpg]
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/a9ca1b11a123a719de15c1f9e2aa74391beab565/
IMAGES/0-0-0-1321.jpg]
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/a9ca1b11a123a719de15c1f9e2aa74391beab565/
IMAGES/0-0-0-1323.jpg]
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/a9ca1b11a123a719de15c1f9e2aa74391beab565/
IMAGES/0-0-0-1325.jpg]
 
(Ord. passed 7-23-2002)
CHAPTER 153: MINIMUM HOUSING STANDARDS
Section
   
153.01   Responsibility
   
153.02   Sanitation and health requirements
   
153.03   Unfit dwellings
§ 153.01 RESPONSIBILITY.
   No person shall occupy or let to another for occupancy any dwelling for the
purpose of living, sleeping, cooking or eating therein which does not comply
with the requirements of this chapter.
(Ord. passed 9-10-1962) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 153.02 SANITATION AND HEALTH REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   Plumbing. Every dwelling unit shall contain a kitchen sink in good
working condition and shall contain a room or compartment affording privacy
which is equipped with a flush water closet and lavoratory basin in good
working order, and shall contain a room affording privacy which is equipped
with a bathtub or shower in good working order.
   (B)   Water supply. Every dwelling unit shall have a hot water system and be
properly connected to the public water supply when inspected and approved by
the Building Inspector.
   (C)   Sewage disposal.  Every dwelling unit shall, within one year of the
date of laying a lateral sewer main within 300 feet of the dwelling, be
properly connected to the public sanitary sewer system.
   (D)   Heating. Every dwelling shall have a safe and properly operating
heating system capable of raising room temperature in all parts of the dwelling
to 70ºF during the minimum temperature months.
   (E)   Natural light and ventilation. Every habitable room in a dwelling unit
shall have at least one openable window facing directly to outdoor open space,
and the total window area shall be 10% of the floor area of the room. Every
outer door, openable window or other outside opening shall be adequately
screened for protection against flies, mosquitoes or other insects.
   (F)   Artificial lighting and electricity. Every habitable room shall
contain at least one floor or wall-type electric convenience outlet and a
ceiling lighting fixture or two electric convenience outlets; every water
closet compartment, bathroom, hall and utility or service room shall contain at
least one electric light fixture; and every stairway shall be safely lighted in
conformity with the Building Code. All outlets and fixtures shall be connected
to an approved source of electric power and maintained in safe working
condition.
   (G)   Floor area. Every dwelling unit shall contain at least 600 square feet
of habitable floor space.
   (H)   Structural soundness.
      (1)   Every foundation, floor, wall, ceiling and roof shall be
constructed and maintained in a weatherproof and rodent-proof condition and
shall be kept in good repair.
      (2)   Porches and stairs shall be constructed and maintained in safe
condition and good repair, capable of safely supporting their normal load.
   (I)   Trash and rubbish disposal. Every dwelling unit shall be supplied with
adequate facilities for the disposal of rubbish, garbage and waste in a clean
and sanitary manner. The burning of rubbish or garbage in open incinerators is
not permitted.
   (J)   Yards. All yards, vacant lots and other open space around a dwelling
shall be maintained free of trash, high weeds, stagnant water, rubbish and
mechanical equipment, including trucks and automobiles which have fallen into
disuse.
   (K)   Basement occupancy prohibited. No basement or cellar shall be
permitted to be the sole habitable space in a building.
   (L)   Trailer occupancy. No trailer shall be occupied for dwelling purposes
except when located in a trailer camp, approved by the Village Board as
specified in §
152.047.
(Ord. passed 9-10-1962)
§ 153.03 UNFIT DWELLINGS.
   (A)   Any dwelling or dwelling unit which is found to have any of the
following defects shall be condemned as unfit for human habitation and shall so
be designated and placarded by the Building Inspector:
      (1)   One which is so damaged, decayed, dilapidated, unsanitary, unsafe
or vermin infested as to create a serious hazard to the health or safety of the
occupants thereof or of the public;
      (2)   One which lacks illumination, ventilation or sanitation facilities
adequate to protect
the health or safely of the occupants thereof or of the public where the
facilities or protection are not in good working condition; or
      (3)   One which, because of its general location, is unsanitary, unsafe
or otherwise hazardous to the health or safety of the occupants thereof or of
the public.
   (B)   (1)   Any dwelling unit condemned as unfit for human habitation and so
designated and placarded by the Building Inspector shall be vacated within a
reasonable time not to exceed 60 days, as ordered by the Building Inspector. No
such dwelling unit shall again be used for human habitation until the defects
or defects upon which the condemnation and placarding were based have been
eliminated and written approval has been secured from and the placard removed
by the Building Inspector.
      (2)   No persons shall deface or remove the placard from any condemned
dwelling or dwelling unit except as provided in this section.
   (C)   Any person affected by any notice or order relating to the condemning
and placarding of a dwelling or dwelling unit as unfit for human habitation may
request and shall be granted a hearing before the Village Board on the matter
within 15 days after the date of the order and placarding.
   (D)   A dwelling condemned as unfit for human habitation may be ordered
demolished by the Building Inspector if it is determined by the Building
Inspector that the defects in the dwelling cannot be economically remedied. Any
dwelling so demolished shall be razed to ground level and any subsurface area
shall be filled with fill dirt to ground level.
   (E)   Where a dwelling condemned as unfit for human habitation and ordered
demolished is not demolished by the owner within a reasonable time, which
period of time to be not less than 30 days after notice is served on the owner,
the dwelling may be demolished at the expense of the owner according to the
following procedure:
      (1)   In accordance with the provisions of Ill. Rev. Stat. Chapter 24,
Article 23, § 70-2, the corporate authorities shall apply to the Circuit Court
of the county, for an order authorizing the demolition of the dwelling or
building as unfit for human habitation, after at least 30 days’ written notice
has been served on the owner and the owner has failed to comply with the
notice. Service of all notices shall be made on the owner or owners if
possible, but where after diligent search the identity or whereabouts of the
owner or owners of the buildings shall not be ascertainable, notice mailed to
the person or persons in whose name the real estate was last assessed shall
constitute notice under this section.
      (2)   After order of demolition is entered in the circuit court of the
county, the corporate authorities shall then proceed to demolish the building
or dwelling as follows.
         (a)   At least two bids shall be secured upon the cost of demolition
of the building or dwelling and a contract shall be awarded to the lowest
bidder.
         (b)   The payment of the contract shall be from the General Fund of
the village.
         (c)   The cost of demolition of the building shall be recoverable from
the owner or owners of the real estate, and shall be a lien thereon, which lien
shall be subordinated to all prior liens encumbrances; provided, that, within
60 days after the cost and expense is incurred, the municipality, or person
performing the service by authority of the municipality, shall file notice of
the lien in the office of the Recorder of Deeds of the county, which notice to
consist of a sworn statement setting out:
            1.   A description of the real estate sufficient for identification
thereof;
            2.   The amount of money, cost or expense payable for the
demolition; and
            3.   Date or dates when the cost or expense was incurred by the
municipality.
         (d)   Upon the payment of the cost or expense by the owner or owners
interested in the properly after notice of lien has been filed, the lien shall
be released by the municipality or person in whose name the lien has been
filed. The lien may be enforced by proceedings to foreclose as in the case of
mortgages or mechanic’s liens. Suit to foreclose the lien shall be made within
three years after date of filing of notice of the lien.
(Ord. passed 9-10-1962)
CHAPTER 154: SUBDIVISIONS
Section
General Provisions
   
154.001   Purpose of regulations
   
154.002   Objectives of regulations
   
154.003   Relationship to comprehensive plan and other development ordinances
   
154.004   Subdivision control
   
154.005   Interpretation, conflict and severability
   
154.006   Subdivision required
   
154.007   Suitability of land for subdivision
Definitions
   
154.015   General
   
154.016   Definitions
Procedures
   
154.025   Submission phases - major subdivision
   
154.026   Fee schedule
   
154.027   Duties and responsibilities
   
154.028   Zoning
   
154.029   Lot and block standards
   
154.030   Subdivider to provide improvements in accordance with certain
requirements
   
154.031   Submission deadlines
   
154.032   Development agreement
   
154.033   Informal discussion phase
   
154.034   Area general plan phase
   
154.035   Area general plan approval
   
154.036   Preliminary plat phase
   
154.037   Preliminary plat requirements
   
154.038   Preliminary plat approval
   
154.039   Final plat phase
   
154.040   Final plat approval
   
154.041   Recording subdivision documents
   
154.042   Construction plans and specifications
   
154.043   Construction of improvements
   
154.044   Time period for construction
   
154.045   Approval of constructed improvements
   
154.046   Acceptance of improvements by other governmental entity
   
154.047   Subdivision improvement bonds
   
154.048   Minor and rural residential subdivisions
   
154.049   Certificate of exemption
   
154.050   Agricultural subdivision
   
154.051   Re-subdividing and replatting recorded lots and for vacation of plats
   
154.052   Planned unit developments
   
154.053   Mobile home parks
   
154.054   Subdivisions within special flood hazard areas
   
154.055   Access
   
154.056   Easements
   
154.057   Waivers and deferrals
   
154.058   Administrative rules
   
154.059   Infrastructure design manual
   
154.060   Reimbursement for improvements benefitting areas outside of
subdivision pursuant to annexation or development agreement
   
154.061   Inter-agency cooperation
   
154.062   Parks, school sites and other public areas
   
154.063   Stormwater facility maintenance
   
154.064   Traffic impact analyses (TIAs)
   
154.065   Electronic drafting file standards
Infrastructure Design
   
154.080   Location, geometry and design of streets
   
154.081   Storm drainage system
   
154.082   Sanitary sewer system
   
154.083   Water distribution system
   
154.084   Sidewalks and pathways
   
154.085   Electrical and utility service
   
154.086   Right-of-way lighting
   
154.087   Erosion control
   
154.088   Traffic control
   
154.089   On-site wastewater disposal systems
Validity, Violations, Enforcement, Amendment
   
154.115   Validity
   
154.116   Violations
   
154.117   Administrative fine
   
154.118   Stop work order
   
154.119   Penalty
   
154.120   Amendment
   
154.121   Unconstitutionality
   
154.122   Saving clause
   
154.123   Applicability
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 154.001 PURPOSE OF REGULATIONS.
   (A)   These regulations are designed to provide standards and rules related
to the making, reviewing, filing and recording of subdivision and development
plans and plats, and to provide for preliminary and final approval or rejection
of such plans or plats, or portions thereof, by the Village of Mahomet,
Champaign County, Illinois, as set forth in this chapter.
   (B)   Subdivision of land shall mean the division of land as defined in the
Illinois Compiled Statutes and as further defined in this chapter.
   (C)   The purpose of this chapter is to:
      (1)   Preserve, protect and promote the public health, safety, and
welfare;
      (2)   Facilitate the orderly growth and development of the Village in
accordance with the Comprehensive Plan and the Zoning Ordinance;
      (3)   Establish requirements and standards for subdivisions and
procedures for their review and approval;
      (4)   Protect and maintain property values;
      (5)   Control and manage stormwater in conjunction with development
activities;
      (6)   Protect property from damage due to flooding, fire, and pollution;
      (7)   Assure provision of safe vehicular and pedestrian access, clean and
adequate public water, sanitary sewerage and storm water drainage systems, and
other improvements and facilities sufficient to serve the proposed subdivision
and surrounding properties;
      (8)   Establish reasonable design and construction standards for public
and private infrastructure;
      (9)   Assure that utilities and public infrastructure are available and
will have a sufficient capacity to serve the proposed subdivision and the areas
reasonable anticipated to be served or impacted by such facilities;
      (10)   Assure that public infrastructure to be accepted by the Village is
constructed to standards which minimize long-term maintenance costs and the tax
burden to residents of the Village.
      (11)   Provide a pleasant living environment by furthering the orderly
and efficient layout and use of land and by facilitating aesthetic urban
design.
(Ord. 15-12-01, passed 12-15-2015)
§ 154.002 OBJECTIVES OF REGULATIONS.
   Pursuant to the authority conferred by the statues of the State of Illinois,
the objective of these regulations are to provide for the orderly growth, and
harmonious development of the village; to secure adequate traffic circulation
by means of coordinated street systems with relation to major thoroughfares and
street adjoining subdivision, public walkways, public facilities and other land
uses; to achieve individual lots of reasonable utility and livability; to
facilitate adequate provisions for transportation, water supply, storm water
drainage, sanitary sewerage, and health requirements; to establish standards
for the construction of public improvements; to encourage the installation of
street lights; to encourage adequate provisions for recreational areas, open
space, school sites, and other public ways and facilities; to encourage
adequate provisions for the control of soil erosion and sediment during
development and construction; to encourage the installation of underground
utilities; to provide for further subdivision of tracts into smaller or larger
parcels of land, and to provide administrative and review procedures for the
attainment of these objectives.
(Ord. 15-12-01, passed 12-15-2015)
§ 154.003 RELATIONSHIP TO COMPREHENSIVE PLAN AND OTHER DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCES.
   The subdivision ordinance is one of several documents in effect and in force
within the Village that govern the use and development of land. Other
applicable relevant documents include the Comprehensive Plan, which includes
the Major Street Plan and Land Use Plan; the Zoning Ordinance; the Flood Hazard
Area Development Ordinance; the Water Use Ordinance; the Sewer Use Ordinance;
and the Stormwater Management Ordinance. Where and if the provisions of these
documents conflict, the stricter of the regulations shall apply. For contiguous
areas outside of the corporate limits of the Village, the Champaign County
Zoning Ordinance; the Champaign County Special Flood Hazard Area Ordinance; and
the regulations of the Sangamon Valley Public Water District may be applicable.
(Ord. 15-12-01, passed 12-15-2015)
§ 154.004 SUBDIVISION CONTROL.
   (A)   That for the purpose of the present and future development of the
village and for the promotion of public health and safety, morals, comfort and
welfare of persons living within the territory governed, the provisions and
regulations hereinafter contained which shall govern the subdivision and
platting of land lying within the corporate limits of the village as now or
hereafter existing, or within the area of jurisdiction of the village as now or
hereafter established under the provisions of the statutes of the State of
Illinois, are hereby adopted as part of the Official Plan of the Village of
Mahomet.
   (B)   These regulations are further for the purpose of controlling the
future development of the village and for the promotion of the public health
and safety, comfort, morals, and welfare of persons living within the territory
governed by the village. The provisions and regulations in this chapter shall
govern the subdivision and platting of lands and construction of civil
engineering improvements within planned unit developments and condominiums
lying within the corporate limits of the village as now or hereafter existing
and, to the extent that such provisions and regulation may be applicable, shall
also govern the subdivision and platting of lands, and the construction of
civil engineering improvements within planned unit developments, condominiums
or subdivisions lying within contiguous territory which is not more than one
and one-half miles beyond the corporate limits of the Village of Mahomet.
(Ord. 15-12-01, passed 12-15-2015)
§ 154.005 INTERPRETATION, CONFLICT AND SEVERABILITY.
   (A)   Interpretation. The provisions of this chapter shall be held to be the
minimum requirements for the promotion of the public health, safety and general
welfare. These regulations shall be construed broadly to promote the purposes
for which they are adopted. Every portion of this code shall be construed
liberally in favor of the village, and every regulation set forth herein shall
be considered the minimum requirement for the promotion of the public health,
safety and welfare.
   (B)   Disclaimer of liability. Except as may be provided otherwise by
statute or ordinance, no officer, board member, agent or employee of the
village shall render himself personally liable for any damage that may accrue
to persons or property as a result of any act required or permitted in the
discharge of his duties under this code.
   (C)   Conflict.
      (1)   Public provisions. These regulations are not intended to interfere
with, abrogate, or annul any other provision of law except as provided in these
regulations. Where any provision of these regulations imposes restrictions
different from those imposed by any other provision of these regulations or any
other ordinance, rule, or regulation, or other provision of law, the provision
which is more restrictive or which imposes higher standards will control.
      (2)   Private provisions. These regulations are not intended to abrogate
any easement, covenant, or other private agreement or restriction, provided
that where the provisions of these regulations are more restrictive or impose
higher standards or regulations than the easement, covenant or other private
agreement or restriction, the requirements of these regulations shall govern.
   (D)   Severability. If any part or provision of these regulations or the
application of these regulations to any person or circumstances is judged
invalid by an court of competent jurisdiction, the judgment shall be confined
in its operation to the part, provision or application directly involved in the
controversy in which the judgment shall be rendered, and it shall not affect or
impair the validity of the remainder of these regulations.
(Ord. 15-12-01, passed 12-15-2015)
§ 154.006 SUBDIVISION REQUIRED.
   (A)   Subdivision required when land divided. Whenever land is divided
within the corporate limits of the village and within the one and one-half mile
extraterritorial jurisdiction boundary of the village, these regulations apply
for that land, unless another municipality has subdivision approval authority
pursuant to a boundary agreement with the village.
   (B)   Conveyance of large sections prior to development. A single tract of
at least ten acres may be conveyed from a parent parcel of 30 acres or more
without approval of a preliminary or final plat, provided that an area general
plan is approved for the parent tract by the Plan and Zoning Commission and
that the single tract so created is intended for further subdivision as a part
of the overall development plan for the parent tract. Under these circumstances
no further development shall be permitted upon the conveyed tract until it has
complied with the regulations set forth in this chapter.
   (C)   Activity prohibited prior to subdivision approval.
      (1)   No building permit or certificate of occupancy shall be issued for
construction on any parcel or plat which was created by subdivision after
January 1, 1978, and not in conformity with, the provisions of this chapter.
      (2)   No excavation or construction of any public or private improvements
shall take place or be commenced on any subdivided tract except in conformity
with these regulations.
   (D)   Permits withheld. The village shall have the right to refuse to issue
any right-of-way permit, sanitary sewer connection permit, driveway permit,
water connection permit, or building permit for any parcel, tract, or lot that
is in violation of these regulations. The village shall have the right to
request that Champaign County refuse to issue a building permit or zoning use
permit for any parcel, tract, or lot that is in violation of these regulations.
(Ord. 15-12-01, passed 12-15-2015)
§ 154.007 SUITABILITY OF LAND FOR SUBDIVISIONS.
   (A)   Lands subject to flooding and land deemed to be topographically
unsuitable should not be subdivided for residential purposes, nor for such
other uses as may increase danger to health, life or property, or aggravate
erosion or flood hazards. The village belongs to the Federal Flood Insurance
Program and has a map indicating flood prone areas. This map may be obtained
from the Village Clerk.
   (B)   The Village Plan and Zoning Commission shall not approve the
subdivision of land if upon adequate investigation conducted by the Commission
it has been determined by the Commission that in the best interest of the
public the site is not suitable for the subdivision and development of the kind
proposed. In making this evaluation the Village Plan and Zoning Commission
shall make reference to the applicable portions of the Village Comprehensive
Plan, the Village Zoning Ordinance, the Champaign County Zoning Ordinance, the
Champaign County Comprehensive Plan, and other general standards of the
community. The Village Plan and Zoning Commission may further make reference to
investigations of soil suitability or effects on sensitive habitats, the
existence of wetlands, threatened or endangered species, or archaeological
resources, historically significant structures and sites as determined by the
proper authorities.
(Ord. 15-12-01, passed 12-15-2015)
DEFINITIONS
§ 154.015 GENERAL.
   For the purpose of these regulations certain terms are herewith defined.
When not inconsistent with the context, the present tense includes the past and
future; words used with a singular number include the plural number. A word in
the masculine gender shall include the feminine and neuter genders. The word
BUILDING includes structure and shall be construed as if followed by the words
“or portion thereof”. The word SHALL is always mandatory and not merely
permissive. Any term not defined herein shall have the meaning of common or
standard use. Words not defined shall be interpreted in accordance with the
definitions contained in Webster’s New Collegiate Dictionary.
(Ord. 15-12-01, passed 12-15-2015)
§ 154.016 DEFINITIONS.
   Definitions. For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions
shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different
meaning.
   ADMINISTRATIVE REVIEW COMMITTEE. A committee comprised of the President of
the Board of Trustees, the Village Administrator, Village Planner and the
Village Engineer.
   ADMINISTRATIVE RULE. A rule governing the approval of subdivision and
development activities as adopted by the Administrative Rules Committee.
   ADMINISTRATIVE RULES COMMITTEE. A committee comprised of the President of
the Board of Trustees, the Village Administrator, Village Planner, Village
Engineer and the Chair of the Plan and Zoning Commission.
   ALLEY. A public or private thoroughfare which affords only a secondary means
of access to the side or rear of the abutting property.
   AREA GENERAL PLAN. A drawing of a proposed subdivision prepared by the
subdivider, for phased development of a large land holding, or several
properties proposed to be subdivided by sections, meeting the requirements of
these regulations and which is intended to illustrate the basic layout of the
proposed subdivision. As such it allows the general intentions of the overall
development to be proposed and discussed without the need to submit a detailed
proposal.
   BENEFITED PROPERTY. Property which uniquely benefits from the construction
or installation of improvements which are required to be built by an annexation
agreement or subdivision approval, but which property is not part of the
property included in the subdivision which is the subject of the subdivision
approval or is not part of the property which is otherwise subject to the
annexation agreement.
   BLOCK. Property abutting on one side of a street, and lying between the two
nearest intersecting or intercepting street and railroad right-of-way, waterway
or other definite barrier.
   BLOCK FACE. Property having frontage on one side of a street and lying
between the two nearest intersecting streets, or nearest intersecting or
intercepting street and railroad right-of-way, waterway or other barrier.
   BOULEVARD. A street, other than a freeway or an expressway, developed with
two-lane or one-lane, one-way pavements separated by a landscaped island,
median or barrier.
   BUILDING SETBACK LINE. A line within a lot or other parcel of land so
designated on the plat of the proposed subdivision between which and the
adjacent boundary line of the lot, the erection of an enclosed structure or
portion thereof is prohibited. The building setback line shall be parallel with
the adjacent street right-of-way line or side or rear yard line, except as
otherwise approved by the Plan and Zoning Commission.
   BUTT LOTS. Lots in which the rear lot lines abut the side lot lines or rear
lot lines of other lots platted in the same block and not separated therefrom
by an alley or other open space.
   CHANNEL. A natural or artificial watercourse of perceptible extent which
periodically or continuously contains moving water, or which forms a connecting
line between two bodies of water. It has a definite bed and banks which serve
to confine the water.
   COMMONS AREA. A lot or parcel within a development not individually owned or
dedicated for public use which is designated for common use and enjoyment by
the residents of the development.
   COMPREHENSIVE PLAN. An official advisory plan of jurisdiction formally
adopted by The Board of Trustees of the Village of Mahomet, any part of which
may be implemented by ordinance duly enacted by the corporate authorities as
prescribed by the Illinois Municipal Code. The plan shall be on file with the
Village Clerk and with Champaign County Clerk.
   CROSSWALK. A public or private right-of-way for pedestrian access across a
block to be used by pedestrians.
   CUL-DE-SAC. A local dead end street having one open end and being terminated
at the other by a vehicular turn-around.
   CULVERT. A structure designed to carry surface flow of stormwater runoff
from a water course in a closed system under a road, street or pedestrian walk.
   DEDICATION. The deliberate appropriation of land by its owner to set it
apart for any general public uses, reserving to himself no other right other
than such as are compatible with the full exercise and enjoyment of the public
uses to which the property has been devoted.
   DEFERRAL. A type of waiver of subdivision requirements in which construction
of the public infrastructure is delayed until a later date or time.
   DETENTION STORAGE. Temporary detention or storage of stormwater runoff in
storage basins, on rooftops, in parking lots, school yards, parks, open space,
lakes, ponds, or other areas under predetermined and controlled conditions,
with the rate of drainage therefrom regulated by appropriately installed
devices.
   DEVELOP. The act of changing a tract of land after its function has been
altered by man, including, but not limited to, construction of structures on
the land and alterations to the land except that grading that does not alter
the natural flow of stormwater shall not be considered development.
   DEVELOPER. Any person, firm, corporation, or other legal entity whose intent
is to improve land in accordance with the regulations of the Village of
Mahomet. (See OWNER).
   DEVELOPMENT AGREEMENT. A contract or agreement entered into between the
owner of a property and the village, which involves a commitment by the owner
and/or the village to contribute funds, efforts, or other resources towards the
study of the feasibility and/or the actual construction of extensions of
sanitary sewers, water mains, storm sewers, street improvement, or other
infrastructure improvements needed or desired for the development of the
owner’s property. It is generally intended that a development agreement, if
deemed necessary, be entered into during the area general plan stage of the
subdivision approval process.
   DRAINAGE BASIN. An area of land which, because of the nature of the
topography, collects naturally the surface drainage of the surrounding land.
   EASEMENT. The quantity of land set aside or over which a liberty, privilege,
or advantage in land without profit existing distinct from the ownership of the
land is granted to the public or some particular person or part of the public
for limited use for a public or quasi-public purpose.
   ENGINEER. A professional engineer, employed by the developer, registered as
such and licensed to practice in the State of Illinois or qualified to practice
as provided by the Illinois Compiled Statutes.
   ENGINEER, VILLAGE. A professional engineer, registered as such and licensed
to practice in the State of Illinois, and employed by the Board of Trustees of
the Village of Mahomet, to provide technical expertise and counsel concerning
subdivision and zoning matters.
   EXCESS STORMWATER RUNOFF. That portion of stormwater runoff which exceeds
the transportation capacity of storm drains, swales, ditches or natural
drainage channels serving a specific watershed.
   EXTRATERRITORIAL JURISDICTION (ETJ). Means the area where the Village
exhibits control of subdivision activities and is either:
      (1)   Within one and one-half miles of the corporate limits of the
village; or
      (2)   Within the area mutually agreed upon between the village and a
neighboring municipality by written agreement; or
      (3)   The midpoint between the village and another municipality whose
corporate limits are less than three miles from the corporate limits of the
village where no boundary agreement exists between the two municipalities.
   FARMSTEAD. The buildings and adjacent service areas of a farm, including a
single family dwelling, grain storage buildings, livestock barns, machinery
storage buildings, and other similar features.
   FINAL PLAT. Drawing of a subdivision which has been accurately surveyed and
the survey marked on the ground so that streets, alleys, blocks, lots or other
divisions thereof can be identified.
   FLOOD. An overflow of water on lands not normally covered by water, adjacent
to a river, stream, waterway, or lake.
   FLOODPLAIN. The land adjacent to a body of water or watercourse which has
been or may be hereafter covered by floodwater.
   ILLINOIS URBAN MANUAL. This term shall mean “A Technical Manual designed for
Urban Ecosystem Protection and Enhancement”, prepared by the United States
Department of Agriculture (USDA) Natural Resources Conservation Services,
latest edition thereof.
   IMPROVEMENT. Any man made immovable item which becomes part of, placed upon,
or affixed to real estate.
   INDIVIDUAL SEWAGE DISPOSAL SYSTEM. A septic tank, with leaching field, or
approved mechanical sewage treatment device intended for use by a single
parcel.
   INFRASTRUCTURE DESIGN MANUAL. A published set of administrative rules,
guidelines, design requirements, and specifications governing the design and
construction of public and private infrastructure within new subdivisions
developed under the jurisdiction of the village.
   LAND USE PLAN. An official map depicting planned land uses within the one
and one-half mile extraterritorial jurisdiction of the village, adopted as a
portion of the Mahomet Comprehensive Plan, and amended from time to time.
   LARGE SCALE RESIDENTIAL DEVELOPMENT. An area of planned residential
development as set forth within the village Zoning Ordinance.
   LOT. A portion of a subdivision, or other parcel of land intended as a unit
for transfer of ownership or for development.
   LOT, AREA. The horizontal projection (in square feet) of a parcel of land or
a body of water, or combination of both, exclusive of any portions of the
right-of-way of any public or private streets; measurements are to be made by
standard surveying practice methods.
   LOT, CORNER. A parcel of land at the junction of and fronting or abutting on
two or more intersecting streets.
   LOT, DEPTH. The average distance between the front and rear line of a lot
measured in the general direction of its side lot lines.
   LOT, FLAG. An unusually shaped lot in which the buildable portion of the lot
is located away from the adjacent street, with a narrow lot frontage, and with
access via a narrow strip of land between the street and the buildable portion
of the lot.
   LOT, FRONTAGE. That portion of a lot extending along a street right-of-way
line.
   LOT, INTERIOR. A lot other than a corner lot.
   LOT LINE. The real or imaginary line oriented by a monument or other stable
point of reference which indicates the boundary of a lot.
   LOT WIDTH. For regular shaped lots, LOT WIDTH shall mean the average
distance between the side lines of a lot measured at right angles to the depth
of the lot along the lot frontage. For irregularly shaped or wedge shaped lots,
the LOT WIDTH shall be the distance between the side lot lines measured along
the curvature of the arc at the points of intersection of the front setback
line with the side lot lines. Through the subdivision plat review process, the
front yard setback line may be adjusted to increase the front yard setback to
meet the minimum lot width requirement for irregular lots, but in no case shall
the lot frontage at the front lot line be less than 40 feet.
   MAJOR STREET PLAN. An official map depicting the location, alignment,
dimensions, identification and classification of existing and proposed public
street, highways and other thoroughfares within the one and one-half mile
extra-territorial jurisdiction of the village, as adopted as a portion of the
Mahomet Comprehensive Plan, and amended from time to time.
   MAJOR SUBDIVISION. Any subdivision which involves the construction of public
infrastructure as a part of the development process.
   MARGINAL ACCESS STREET (FRONTAGE ROAD). A local street or highway
paralleling, adjacent to and having limited access to a freeway, expressway,
collector highway, area service highway, or land access highway which provides
direct access to abutting property and protection from through traffic.
   METES AND BOUNDS. A description of real property which is not described by
reference to a lot or block shown on a map, but is described by starting at a
known point and describes the lines forming the boundaries of the property or
delineates a fractional portion of a section, lot or area by describing lines
or portions thereof.
   MINOR SUBDIVISION. A subdivision of land into four or fewer lots which do
not require the design or construction of any major public improvements and
which meet all the requirements for a minor subdivision set forth in §
154.048.
   MOBILE HOME PARK. A subdivision or development intended for the installation
solely of mobile homes and/or modular homes.
   MONUMENT. A physical structure which marks the location of a corner or other
survey point as required by provisions contained herein.
   MULTI-USE PATHWAY. A paved or otherwise constructed path appropriate for
pedestrian and bicycle use.
   OWNER. Any person having any legal, equitable or beneficial interest in the
land sought to be subdivided, including the plural as well as the singular, and
firm, association, partnership, private corporation, or combination of any of
them.
   OPEN SPACE. Any parcel or area of land or water essentially unimproved and
set aside, dedicated, designated or reserved for the public or private use or
enjoyment or for the use and enjoyment of owners and occupants of lands
adjoining or neighboring said parcel.
   PARENT TRACT. A parcel of land in which portions are proposed to be conveyed
to another party for development purposes.
   PARKWAY. That portion of a public street right-of-way located between the
outer edge of the street pavement and the street right-of-way line.
   PERFORMANCE GUARANTEE. Any security that may be accepted by the village as a
guarantee that the improvements required as a part of a subdivision or
development approval are satisfactorily completed.
   PERSON. Any agent, individual, firm, association, partnership, corporation,
syndicate or trust.
   PLAN AND ZONING COMMISSION. An advisory body to the Board of Trustees, whose
membership and duties shall be as set forth in the village Zoning Ordinance
adopted by the Board of Trustees.
   PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT. A parcel of land, of a minimum contiguous size as
specified by ordinance initially under single ownership or control, which
contains two or more principal buildings and/or more than one principal use;
planned, developed, and constructed as a unified development.
   PLANNER, VILLAGE. An urban planner employed by the Board of Trustees of the
Village of Mahomet to provide technical expertise and counsel concerning
subdivision and zoning matters.
   PRELIMINARY PLAT. A drawing and supporting data, indicating the proposed
layout of the subdivision in sufficient detail to provide adequate basis for
review by the village, meeting the requirements of these regulations.
   PUBLIC IMPROVEMENTS. Street pavements, public walkways, monuments, water
mains, sanitary and storm sewers, street signs, drainage ditches, culverts,
stormwater detention basins, and appurtenances to the foregoing items and for
use by the public.
   PUBLIC WALKWAY. A right-of-way dedicated for the purpose of pedestrian
access and located so as to connect two or more streets, or a street and a
public land parcel, or any two parcels of public land.
   REDUCED IMPACT DEVELOPMENT. A system of street and drainage design intended
to reduce the volume of and enhance the quality of stormwater runoff.
   REPRODUCIBLE COPY. A print or copy of a plat or drawing on transparent film
or paper of adequate weight to withstand handling.
   RIGHT-OF-WAY. Land owned and occupied or intended to be occupied by a public
body for installation of a street, crosswalk, underground utilities, shade
trees, or other public use.
   SETBACK LINE. See BUILDING SETBACK LINE.
   SIDEWALK. A pedestrian walkway within a public road right-of-way, public
walkway or easement.
   SIGHT TRIANGLE. A triangular shaped portion of land established at street
intersections in which nothing is to be erected, placed, planted, or grown in
such a manner as to limit or obstruct the sight distance of motorists entering
or exiting the intersection.
   SKETCH PLAN. A preliminary drawing indicating the proposed general
development of the area to be subdivided.
   SLOPE. The degree of inclination of a site as a percentage. Synonym for
grade.
   STORM DRAIN. A closed conduit for conveying collected stormwater runoff.
   STORMWATER DRAINAGE SYSTEM. All means, natural or man-made, used for
conducting stormwater to, through or from a drainage area to the point of final
outlet, including but not limited to any of the following: conduits, storm
drains, swales, canals, channels, ditches, streams, culverts, streets and
pumping stations.
   STORMWATER MANAGEMENT ORDINANCE. A separate ordinance of the village
controlling the collection, detention, and conveyance of stormwater, the
requirements of which must be complied with for all subdivisions or land
developments within the one and one-half mile extra-territorial jurisdiction of
the village.
   STORMWATER STORAGE AREA. An area designated to temporarily accumulate excess
stormwater runoff.
   STREET. A right-of-way, whether designated as a street, highway, road, land,
court, thoroughfare, parking, freeway, expressway, boulevard, or avenue, other
than an alley or place, usually affording the principal means of access to
abutting property. A paved surface designed for motor vehicular movement.
   STREET, ARTERIAL. A public thoroughfare with a high degree of traffic
continuity established in the Major Street Plan of the village. Typically
average daily traffic will exceed 4,000 vehicles per day.
   STREET HIERARCHY. The conceptual arrangement of streets based upon function.
A hierarchical approach to street design classifies streets according to
function from high traffic arterial roads down to streets whose function is
residential access. Systemizing street design into road hierarchy promotes,
safety, efficient land use and residential quality.
   STREET LINE. The dividing line between the street or highway right-of-way
and the lot.
   STREET, LOCAL. Minor streets providing direct access to abutting property,
which may be devoted to residential, commercial, or other uses and which
carries traffic having local origins and destinations. Streets in this
classification are not considered part of the major thoroughfare system.
Typically average daily traffic will not exceed 500 vehicles per day.
   STREET, MAJOR COLLECTOR. A street which carries traffic from minor streets
to the arterial street system, including the principal entrance streets of
residence development. Typically average daily traffic will exceed 3,000
vehicles per day.
   STREET, MINOR COLLECTOR. A street which may provide frontage for access to
lots and which carries traffic to and from adjoining local access streets and
the primary circulating streets within a development. Typically average daily
traffic will exceed 1,500 vehicle trips per day.
   STREET, RURAL COLLECTOR. A street which provides local access and carries
through traffic which is located outside the limits of an urbanized area and
which is primarily bordered by agricultural land. Typically average daily
traffic will not exceed 1,000 vehicle trips per day.
   STREET, SUBCOLLECTOR. A street which .provides frontage for access to lots
and carries traffic to and from adjoining residential access streets. Traffic
has origin or destination in the immediate neighborhood. Typically average
daily traffic will exceed 750 vehicle trips per day.
   SUBDIVIDE.
      (1)   The division of a tract of land into two (2) or more parts; or
      (2)   Assembly of multiple parcels of land into fewer parcels; or
      (3)   The development of a lot, parcel, or tract of land as a planned
development pursuant to the village’s Zoning Ordinance; or
      (4)   The creation of any new street, or the creation of a new easement
to access all or part of a tract without legal access to the same public street
across another tract from a public street, whether or not the easement is
dedicated to the public at the time of creation; or
      (5)   The utilization of a lot, parcel, or tract of land for more than
one building unless all buildings on the tract would be permitted under the
village’s Zoning Ordinance as applied to the tract, parcel, or lot regardless
of whether the property is located within the village; or
      (6)   Long-term land lease for a portion of a tract of land for more than
five years.
   SUBDIVIDER. Any person, firm, corporation or other legal entity having legal
title to or proprietary interest in a tract of land that commences proceedings
under this chapter to develop or subdivide that land. See OWNER.
   SUBDIVISION. A division of a lot, tract, or parcel of land into two or more
lots, or other divisions of or assemblages of land, including condominiums and
planned unit developments, unless otherwise permitted by the zoning ordinance,
for the purpose, whether immediate or future, of (1) transfer of ownership, (2)
building development, (3) redevelopment, or (4) lease, including all changes in
street lines. The term SUBDIVISION shall also include all re-subdivision of
land or lots. The following activities do not constitute a SUBDIVISION despite
other language to the contrary:
      (1)   The conveyance or transfer of the legal rights to any existing
building or buildings or part thereof or use rights for use of a single
individual tract as it then exists immediately prior to any sale or lease where
such transfer or lease does not create any additional parcel by exception; or
      (2)   The conveyance or transfer of land for railroad purposes; or
      (3)   The dedication of land for public use to a governmental entity, the
vacation of any land so dedicated, and the taking of property rights through
eminent domain by a governmental entity;
      (4)   The construction of one single-family dwelling or farm related
structures on a single lot or the creation or transfer of a single lot of 20
acres or more for farm and agricultural use, except where such acreage or
structures are at locations of future streets as designated in the official
Comprehensive Plan;
   For the purpose of this chapter, “division of a tract of land” means the
conveyance or partition, whether voluntary or involuntary, of a physical part
of a tract of land from one (1) person or combination of persons to one (1)
other different person or different combination of persons. Conveyance includes
conveyance by long term land lease of more than five years.
   SUBDIVISION, AGRICULTURAL. A subdivision in which all parcels are intended
for Agricultural and non-residential purposes.
   SUBDIVISION DESIGN STANDARD. The officially adopted guides, principles,
specifications and standards for the preparation of subdivision plans and plats
indicating, among other things, the maximum and minimum dimensions of the
various elements set forth in the area general plan, preliminary plat or final
plat.
   SURVEYOR. A professional land surveyor registered as such in the State of
Illinois as provided in the Illinois Compiled Statutes.
   TENTATIVE APPROVAL. An approval without or with recommended alterations
given to a Preliminary Plat by the Plan and Zoning Commission and provides the
necessary authority to proceed with the preparation and presentation of the
final plat and/or construction plans.
   TOPOGRAPHY. The relief features or surface configuration of an area of land.
   TRACT OF LAND. Contiguous land owned entirely by one or more persons with
undivided interests in the entire tract. Each lot in a previously legally
recorded subdivision shall constitute a separate tract of land.
   TRAILER COURT. See MOBILE HOME PARK.
   VICINITY MAP. A drawing located on the Preliminary Plat which sets forth by
dimensions or other means, the relationship of the proposed subdivision or use
to other nearby developments, landmarks, community facilities or services.
   VILLAGE. The Village of Mahomet, Champaign County, Illinois and its staff
and elected officials.
   WAIVER. A modification, relaxation or deferral of the strict terms of the
relevant regulations where the modification will not be contrary to the public
interest and where, owing to conditions peculiar to the property and the result
of the action of the applicant, a literal enforcement of the regulations would
result in unnecessary and undue hardship.
   WAIVER, ADMINISTRATIVE. A waiver granted by village staff without Plan and
Zoning Commission review and Village Board of Trustees approval.
   ZONING ORDINANCE. A separate ordinance of the village pertaining to the use
and disposition of the land with respect to land uses, zoning, lot standards,
and other requirements which must be complied with for all uses of land within
the corporate limits of the village.
(Ord. 15-12-01, passed 12-15-2015)
PROCEDURES
§ 154.025 SUBMISSION PHASES - MAJOR SUBDIVISION.
   Subdivision planning, review and approval shall proceed through the
following sequential phases:
   (A)   Informal discussion phase, pre-application conference;
   (B)   Area general plan review and approval phase;
   (C)   Preliminary plat review and approval phase;
   (D)   Construction plans review and approval phase;
   (E)   Final plat review and approval phase;
   (F)   Recording phase;
   (G)   Construction of public improvements;
   (H)   Acceptance of public improvements.
(Ord. 15-12-01, passed 12-15-2015)
§ 154.026 FEE SCHEDULE.
   Subdivision document review fees shall be established from time to time by
resolution of the Board of Trustees. Document reviews by village staff may not
proceed until the application fee has been paid. No subdivision plat or
document shall be presented for approval until the application fee has been
paid.
(Ord. 15-12-01, passed 12-15-2015)
§ 154.027 DUTIES AND RESPONSIBILITIES.
   The purpose and objectives regarding land subdivision can best be understood
by considering the various duties and responsibilities associated with land
subdividing. The specific duties and responsibilities of the individuals or
groups listed below are clearly identified in these regulations.
   (A)   Subdivider. The subdivider is responsible for initiating discussion
with the village before thoroughly preparing any subdivision plans or plats in
order to become familiar with these regulations and the public policies and
objectives applicable to the territory in which the proposed subdivision lies.
   (B)   Engineer, attorney and surveyor. The engineer, attorney and surveyor
acting on behalf of the subdivider are responsible for preparing the necessary
subdivision plans, surveys, plats, legal documents, owner’s certificate and the
construction drawings and specifications as required by these regulations.
   (C)   Village staff. Village staff is responsible for technical review of
the subdivision documents submitted to verify compliance with Village
requirements, to coordinate the subdivision process with the subdivider and
others, and to provide advice and assistance to the reviewing authority.
   (D)   Plan and Zoning Commission. The Plan and Zoning Commission is
responsible for reviewing documents submitted by subdivider and his
representative so as to determine the suitability of the proposed subdivision
and to provide an advisory recommendation to the Village Board of Trustees.
   (E)   Reviewing authority. The reviewing authority is the Board of Trustees
of the village which is responsible for reviewing the subdivision plan or plat,
or portions thereof, and approving those that fully meet the provisions and
requirements of these regulations.
(Ord. 15-12-01, passed 12-15-2015)
§ 154.028 ZONING.
   (A)   If the proposed subdivision lies within the corporate limits of the
village, the developer must first satisfy the zoning requirements in “Zoning
Ordinance, Village of Mahomet, Illinois”, as adopted and as amended.
   (B)   If the proposed subdivision lies outside the village limits of the
village, but within the extraterritorial jurisdictional area, then the
developer must first satisfy the zoning requirements in “Champaign County
Zoning Ordinance”, or the “Piatt County Zoning Ordinance” as adopted and as
amended.
(Ord. 15-12-01, passed 12-15-2015)
§ 154.029 LOT AND BLOCK STANDARDS.
   (A)   Where possible, side lot lines shall be at right angles to straight
street right-of-way lines or radial on curved street right-of-way lines. Lots
with frontage on two parallel streets shall be avoided except where one street
is an arterial street with no direct access to the lot.
   (B)   All lots shall be provided with a public street frontage of not less
than 30 feet.
   (C)   Lot dimensions and area shall not be less than the requirements set
forth in the applicable zoning ordinance. In subdivisions not provided with
public sanitary sewer and/or public water supply the minimum lot area shall be
increased to not less than 0.95 acre to account for the installation of an on-
site water supply well and/or an on-site wastewater treatment system.
   (D)   Blocks shall not be less than 400 feet nor more than 1,000 feet in
length except as the Plan and Zoning Commission considers necessary to secure
efficient use of land or desired features in street pattern.
   (E)   In blocks 600 feet or more in length, the Plan and Zoning Commission
may require a mid-block public crosswalk between the lots for pedestrian travel
to extend entirely across the block at the location deemed necessary. The
crosswalk shall be constructed of Portland Cement concrete in conformance with
the standards for sidewalks. The concrete shall be a minimum of five feet in
width, and the crosswalk shall be located on a minimum ten foot wide commons
area.
   (F)   Blocks shall be wide enough to allow two tiers of lots, except where
fronting on arterial streets or prevented by topographical conditions or size
of the property, in which case the Village Engineer and Village Planner may
approve a single tier of lots.
   (G)   Land that is underwater or reserved for street improvements shall not
be counted to satisfy the minimum lot size requirements. Every corner and
through lot shall be large enough to permit compliance with the zoning
district’s front setback requirements on every side of the lot that faces a
street. All lot remnants shall be added to adjacent lots to avoid the creation
of unbuildable parcels. All lots shall contain adequate space for required off-
street parking and loading.
(Ord. 15-12-01, passed 12-15-2015)
§ 154.030 SUBDIVIDER TO PROVIDE IMPROVEMENTS IN ACCORDANCE WITH CERTAIN
REQUIREMENTS.
   The subdivider shall provide and install all public and quasi-public
infrastructure improvements, as required by this code. Improvements shall be
provided and installed in accordance with the standards and engineering
requirements established by these regulations as well as any and all standards
and requirements adopted by the village and other local, state and federal
authorities which may have jurisdiction of the area being subdivided.
(Ord. 15-12-01, passed 12-15-2015)
§ 154.031 SUBMISSION DEADLINES.
   Subdivision document submittal deadlines shall be as set forth in
administrative rules. Document reviews by village staff, including scheduling
of document consideration by the Plan and Zoning Commission shall be consistent
with the timetables and deadlines established by said administrative rules.
(Ord. 15-12-01, passed 12-15-2015)
§ 154.032 DEVELOPMENT AGREEMENT.
   (A)   Whenever a developer desires or is required to enter into a
development agreement or amend an existing development agreement with the
village for the construction of utilities or to address other requirements of
this subdivision chapter, the developer shall be required to pay a fee to the
village prior to any study or negotiation of the development agreement by the
village. This fee may be refunded to the developer upon the completion of the
construction of the utilities/or final platting of the development, but only if
completed within two years from the date of the payment of the fee to the
village. The payment of this fee shall be in addition to any other fees
required by this or any other chapter or ordinance. The amount of the fee shall
be set by and may be amended from time to time by resolution of the Board of
Trustees of the village.
   (B)   The village may require the implementation of a development agreement
to address the construction of off-site utilities, cost participation by the
village in the construction of public utilities and streets, or to address
other requirements of this subdivision chapter. If the village will require a
development agreement, village staff shall inform the subdivider of this
requirement during the informal discussion phase or area general plan phase of
the subdivision review process.
(Ord. 15-12-01, passed 12-15-2015)
§ 154.033 INFORMAL DISCUSSION PHASE.
   (A)   Purpose. The purpose of the informal discussion phase, insofar as
possible, is to guide and assist the subdivider in his or her future decisions
with a view to avoiding later difficulties and delays. This is the basic policy
stage, during which the subdivider meets informally with the village staff. In
the course of the discussions the subdivider should make known his or her
tentative plans for subdividing and development, and may exhibit sketch plans
and shall be informed by village staff about specific public policies, village
objections, issues, and concerns which village staff may have for the area in
question. Discussion at this phase shall involve the entire area of ownership
and anticipated development.
   (B)   Submission. A pre-application conference may be requested by all
subdividers prior to initial plat applications. Subdividers may contact the
Village Planner to arrange a pre-application conference. Subdividers should
submit a sketch plan at this stage with material sufficient to identify the
tract and establish the relationship of the proposed development with the
surrounding area. All developers are encouraged to request a pre-application
conference.
   (C)   Pre-application conference required. The subdivider shall schedule a
pre-application conference with the village whenever a development includes 30
or more acres of land, will be developed in two or more phases, will include
extension of off-site utilities, or which involves unusual or unique
circumstances. This determination will be made by the Village Planner.
   (D)   Processing.
      (1)   Upon a request for a pre-application conference, the Village
Planner shall schedule a pre-application conference. All materials will be
considered as submitted for informal discussion. Discussions will involve the
proposals to review compliance with these regulations, determination of the
scope of the proposed subdivision, an outline of the procedures for the
recording of plans, discussion of street and utility layouts, discussion of
zoning issues, and annexation issues.
      (2)   No approvals will result from this conference; however, village
staff may make recommendations on the scope of the initial plat application by
the subdivider, continuity of the proposed street pattern with existing or
proposed streets adjacent to the proposed subdivision, and other factors based
on peculiarities of the area in which the subdivision is proposed.
   (E)   Review. Review of any material submitted by the subdivider during the
informal discussion phase shall be made by village staff. Any sketch plan
submitted shall be studied with regard to the best principles of land
subdividing and development; to lot sizes, and proportions; to existing and
planned land uses; to topography and drainage; to provisions for recreation
areas, public open space, schools, parks and other public facilities; to design
and location of streets; and to conformity with the continuity of existing
street systems, walkways and related matters.
   (F)   Inspection. Village staff may make an inspection of the site to
determine its relationship to and effect upon major thoroughfares, utility
systems, and adjacent land uses (existing and planned) and ascertain the
existence of any unusual problems; and shall determine:
      (1)   The conformity of the proposed development to existing zoning
regulations, official road maps, the Village Comprehensive Plan and municipal
development plans and policies;
      (2)   The effect of the proposed development upon schools, public open
spaces, and other nearby community facilities;
      (3)   The need for preparation and review of an area general plan prior
to consideration of the preliminary plat.
   (G)   Attendance. The pre-application conference shall be attended by the
subdivider, the subdivider’s engineer, the subdivider’s surveyor, the
subdivider’s attorney, the Village Administrator, the Village Planner, the
Village Engineer, and such other village staff as the Village Planner deems
appropriate.
   (H)   The pre-application conference is intended to:
      (1)   Familiarize the subdivider with applicable plans, policies,
requirements, and procedures, including annexation policies;
      (2)   Coordinate separate land developments, particularly street and
drainage plans, so that orderly development is achieved;
      (3)   Identify potential waiver requests in order to expedite platting
and construction;
      (4)   Discuss zoning issues and street and utility layouts for the area
general plan and preliminary plats;
      (5)   Discuss phasing of final plats;
      (6)   Discuss annexation or development agreement terms, if applicable.
(Ord. 15-12-01, passed 12-15-2015)
§ 154.034 AREA GENERAL PLAN PHASE.
   (A)   Purpose. The purpose of the area general plan is to illustrate a basic
layout of a proposed subdivision prior to the preparation of a preliminary
plat.
   (B)   General requirements.
      (1)   An area general plan may be prepared and submitted by the
subdivider, for approval by the Plan and Zoning Commission, prior to the
submission of the initial preliminary plat. The Village Planner shall determine
if any of the following conditions exist to warrant a requirement of
preparation and submission of an area general plan:
         (a)   The parcel initially proposed for platting constitutes a portion
of a larger tract of land owned, or under option to purchase by the subdivider;
         (b)   The parcel initially proposed for platting constitutes a portion
of a larger land area, the development of which will be complicated by unusual
problems of drainage, street layout, or utility service extensions;
         (c)   It is anticipated there will be three or more phases of the
development of the larger tract of land owned or under option for purchase by
the developer.
      (2)   The area general plan shall show property boundaries, land
characteristics including wetlands, drainage patterns, flood prone areas as
identified on flood prone area maps of the Federal Emergency Management Agency,
wooded areas and major topographic features, existing streets, existing
buildings, existing sewer lines, existing water lines and existing pipelines.
Also to be shown on the area general plan are the conceptual layout of proposed
streets, and blocks; phasing strategy; general provisions for proposed sanitary
sewage collection, storm water transportation and storm water detention; public
water supply; proposed location of commercial areas, residential areas, and
parks or other public areas, and the proposed zoning of the development site.
      (3)   The area general plan shall be prepared to a proper scale of one
inch equals 100 feet or larger, and to proper accuracy. Topography shall be
shown with contour intervals not greater than five feet. The area general plan
shall be submitted on sheets not larger than 33 inches by 51 inches. Lettering
size shall not be smaller than one-twelfth of an inch.
   (C)   Procedures for submission. Subdivider shall submit to the Village
Planner:
      (1)   Four full-size copies of the area general plan, an 11 inch by 17
inch reduction of the area general plan, and supportive materials as required
prior to the published submittal schedule for the Plan and Zoning Commission
meeting at which the subdivider wishes the area general plan be considered.
      (2)   One pdf electronic copy of the area general plan and all supportive
materials.
      (3)   The submittal of an area general plan for a subdivision within the
corporate limits of the village or within the one and one-half mile extra-
territorial jurisdiction area of the village shall be accompanied by an area
general plan application fee as determined from time to time by resolution of
the Board of Trustees of the village.
      (4)   A completed area general plan application form with all required
attachments and application fee.
   (D)   Staff review. Village staff shall review the area general plan for
conformity to the requirements of applicable village regulations, consistency
with the Comprehensive Plan, suitability for development, proposed zoning
amendments, and other applicable requirements. Village staff comments will be
forwarded to the subdivider.
   (E)   Resubmission. The subdivider shall address the village staff comments
and make modifications and revisions as deemed appropriate. Subdivider, at his
option, may provide clarifying information and justifications for proposals
that are inconsistent with the ordinance or village staff comments. Four full
size copies, one 11 inch by 17 inch size copy, and a pdf electronic copy of the
area general plan shall then be resubmitted to the Village Planner for review.
(Ord. 15-12-01, passed 12-15-2015)
§ 154.035 AREA GENERAL PLAN APPROVAL.
   (A)   When all the above requirements have been satisfied, the Village
Planner will present the area general plan to the Plan and Zoning Commission at
the next regular meeting. The subdivider or a responsible representative shall
attend this meeting.
   (B)   The Plan and Zoning Commission shall review the area general plan at a
regular meeting for compliance with these regulations and its consistency with
the Mahomet Comprehensive Plan and applicable municipal development plans, or
parts thereof. Commission action shall take the form of approval or denial
within 45 days following the complete submittal of the area general plan and
such action shall be indicated on the area general plan. The Plan and Zoning
Commission shall either:
      (1)   Disapprove the area general plan;
      (2)   Approve the area general plan;
      (3)   Approve the area general plan, subject to minor modifications.
   (C)   If the Plan and Zoning Commission disapproves the area general plan
the reasons for the denial shall be clearly set forth and communicated to the
subdivider by village staff.
   (D)   If the Plan and Zoning Commission approves the area general plan, the
approval certificate on the original area general plan shall be so executed at
that time, indicating approval.
   (E)   If the Plan and Zoning Commission approves the area general plan
subject to minor modifications, the subdivider may make the required changes to
the area general plan within 21days or such other time as may be allowed by the
Village Planner and resubmit the revised document for village staff review. If
all required modifications have been made, the approval certificate on the
original area general plan shall then be executed indicating approval.
   (F)   If the subdivider chooses not to modify the area general plan, or
fails to modify the area general plan within 21 days (or the additional time
allowed), the area general plan shall be considered disapproved. Village staff
shall communicate the reasons for the disapproval to the subdivider.
   (G)   If the Plan and Zoning Commission disapproves the area general plan,
the subdivider may appeal the Commission’s decision to the Village Board of
Trustees. A request for an appeal shall be made in writing to the Village
Planner, and shall be accompanied by the appropriate appeal fee, as set from
time to time by resolution by the Board of Trustees. The Board of Trustees
shall consider the appeal within a reasonable time following submittal of the
application for appeal. The Board of Trustees may uphold or overrule the
decision of the Plan and Zoning Commission for further consideration. The
decision of the Board of Trustees shall set forth the reasons for its
determination.
   (H)   On the area general plan the following certificate shall appear:
AREA GENERAL PLAN APPROVAL
THE AREA GENERAL PLAN ENTITLED  ___  HAS BEEN APPROVED BY THE PLAN AND ZONING
COMMISSION OF THE VILLAGE OF MAHOMET, ILLINOIS THIS  __  DAY OF
                            , 20          .
                                                         
CHAIRPERSON
   (I)   The approval of the area general plan by the Plan and Zoning
Commission of the village shall be in effect for a period of at least five
years from the approval date, but the approval is subject thereafter to
withdrawal by the Village Plan and Zoning Commission upon notice to the
developer after that date.
   (J)   The approval of the area general plan shall confer upon the developer
the right to proceed with the subdivision platting process set forth in this
chapter for the lands depicted on the area general plan.
(Ord. 15-12-01, passed 12-15-2015)
§ 154.036 PRELIMINARY PLAT PHASE.
   (A)   Purpose. The purpose of the preliminary plat phase, insofar as
possible, is to assist the subdivider and the reviewing authorities in
determining whether the proposed subdivision conforms to the standards and
requirements of these regulations and the approved area general plan, and the
pertinent standards and regulations of affected municipal departments. The
preliminary plat phase is intended to establish lot design for the subdivision,
establish utility layout and street and intersection design, and identify
waivers from the subdivision regulations. The preliminary plat phase helps
assure that the final plat design is consistent with the overall plan for the
area. Outside agency review is included at this stage, so that utility and
street issues are addressed early in the development process, and the
subdivider can be assured that factors affecting approval of the final plat
have been considered prior to the final design of the public improvements.
Preliminary plat approval by the Village Board of Trustees shall not qualify
the plat for recording.
   (B)   A preliminary plat shall be required for all subdivisions except as
outlined below. The requirement for a preliminary plat shall not apply under
the following conditions:
      (1)   Where any tract of land within the village limits is to be divided
into less than ten lots of less than five acres each.
      (2)   Where any tract of land within the village limits is the entire
parcel owned by the subdivider and the tract is a portion of an approved area
general plan.
      (3)   Where any tract of land is subdivided under the terms and
requirements of the agricultural subdivision process.
      (4)   where any tract of land is subdivided under the terms and
requirements of the rural residential subdivision process.
      (5)   where any tract of land is subdivided under the terms and
requirements of the minor subdivision process.
      (6)   where any tract of land is subdivided under the terms and
requirements of the certificate of exemption process.
   (C)   When a preliminary plat is not required, no further subdivision of
adjacent land owned by the same beneficial interests shall be considered for
subdivision within five years without full compliance with the requirements for
a preliminary plat.
   (D)   When a preliminary plat is not required, the subdivider may proceed
directly with preparation and submission of a final plat, construction plans,
and other subsidiary documents.
(Ord. 15-12-01, passed 12-15-2015)
§ 154.037 PRELIMINARY PLAT REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   General Information.
      (1)   Information required. The preliminary plat shall be prepared by a
professional engineer and a professional land surveyor and the preliminary plat
is to be reviewed by the Plan and Zoning Commission and approved by the Board
of Trustees before any subdivision development is started. The following
information shall be shown on the preliminary plat:
         (a)   General information.
            1.   Mapped data shall be presented at a scale of one inch to 100
feet or larger, on sheets not larger than 33 inches by 51 inches, with
lettering not smaller than one-tenth of an inch, so that the plat is clearly
legible without magnification.
            2.   The proposed name of the subdivision; landowner’s, engineer’s
and surveyor’s names and addresses.
            3.   The location of the subdivision by township, range and section
for reference; section or quarter section corners shall be indicated.
         (b)   Existing conditions.
            1.   The locations, width, and names of all existing public and/or
private streets, railroads, or other public ways and utility rights-of-way
within and/or adjacent to the tract to within 200 feet of the boundary of the
tract.
            2.   The locations and size of all existing sanitary sewerage,
water mains and appurtenances, storm drainage, known field drainage tile or
other known underground facilities within the tact or near the tract, and any
such known facilities entering or exiting the tract.
            3.   The topography, spot elevations at critical points and contour
intervals of not greater than two feet, regardless of grade, related to
National Geodetic Vertical Datum of 1988 (mean sea level) on the site, within
100 feet of the boundaries of the site, and for additional distance as
necessary to adequately depict drainage conditions.
            4.   The location and identification of all public and quasi-public
areas and civil division lines within and/or adjacent to the tract, to within
200 feet of the boundary of the tract.
            5.   The location and identification of all recorded subdivisions
lying adjacent to, or across a public right-of-way from, the tract.
            6.   The acreage and identification of the drainage basin or basins
that lie upstream from the tract of land that is proposed for subdivision.
            7.   The location and identification of all existing man-made
features such as buildings, high-tension towers, public water and sewer lines,
pipe lines, utility lines, excavations, bridges, railroad tracks, culverts and
related items within and/or adjacent to the tract, to within 100 feet of the
boundary of the tract proposed to be subdivided. The Preliminary Plat shall
note the location of the nearest public sewer and public water lines.
            8.   The location of existing streams, rivers, drains, lakes, ponds
and impoundments within and/or within 100 feet of the tract.
            9.   The land use and existing zoning of the proposed subdivision
and adjacent tracts.
            10.   Boundary line of proposed subdivision indicated by solid
heavy line so designated and the total approximate acreage encompassed thereby.
            11.   Other items required to properly depict the existing
situation.
         (c)   Proposed conditions.
            1.   The locations, width and names of proposed streets and right-
of-way widths, including connections to adjoining public and/or private street
rights-of-way. Refer to the major street plan of the village for the
approximate planned location of required arterial and collector streets.
Collector and sub-collector street locations not specifically depicted upon the
major street plan may be designated by the Plan and Zoning Commission at the
time of review of the preliminary plat or area general plan.
            2.   The locations and widths of walkways and easements including
connection to adjoining public lands and public and/or private walkways and
easements.
            3.   Easements for public utilities, drainage, and maintenance.
            4.   All lots, including the required setback lines and scaled
dimensions of typical lots to the nearest foot. All lots contained on the
proposed plat must be numbered in consecutive order.
            5.   The locations and acreage of any proposed public and/or quasi-
public land within the tract.
            6.   The plan of any proposed water courses or impoundments
including stream relocations, showing normal water levels and direction of
flow.
            7.   The general provisions for water supply, sewage disposal, and
storm water disposal indicated by a general drainage plan of sufficient detail
to show how the water will be moved over the site, and subsurface drainage
including provisions for continual maintenance of natural drainage courses and
field drainage tile systems. Known on-site field drainage tile systems serving
areas off the site shall be located in designated easements.
            8.   If a private on-site wastewater disposal system is proposed
for any lot, an Illinois professional engineer shall certify that the proposed
lots and soil characteristics are adequate for the disposal system. Test data
to support this certification shall also be submitted.
   (B)   Outside agency review.
      (1)   At the time of application the subdivider shall provide evidence of
the mailing of one copy of the preliminary plat to each required agency as set
forth in administrative rules.
      (2)   The prints must be accompanied by a request that written comments
be submitted to the village at the attention of the Village Planner not later
than 21 days thereafter, unless otherwise required by ordinance or law, and
that no comment in the time specified shall be deemed no adverse comment. The
developer shall provide evidence to the village that the prints, along with the
request for written comments, have been mailed to the various locations
identified above.
   (C)   Supporting documents. The following supporting materials and documents
shall accompany an application for approval of a preliminary plat:
      (1)   Soil and Water Conservation District Review. The developer shall
submit a written opinion from the Soil and Water Conservation District
concerning the proposed subdivision to the village. This opinion may be in the
form of a natural resources report. This report will not be required for a
replat subdivision within a previously developed area or if a report has
previously been prepared by the District within the previous ten years for the
subdivision site.
      (2)   Illinois Department of Natural Resources Review. Information
concerning the proposed subdivision shall be submitted by the developer to the
Illinois Department of Natural Resources for endangered species review and
consultation. A copy of the review results shall be submitted to the village at
the time of application. This report shall not be required for replat
subdivisions if a previous report had been submitted for the original
subdivision within the previous five years.
      (3)   Illinois Historic Preservation Agency Review. Information
concerning the proposed subdivision shall be submitted by the developer to the
Illinois Historic Preservation Agency for historic resources review and
consultation. A copy of the completed review results shall be submitted to the
village at the time of application. This report shall not be required for
replat subdivisions if a previous report has been submitted for the original
subdivision within the previous five years.
      (4)   A list of waivers and deferrals being requested, as well as written
justification(s) for these waivers and deferrals.
   (D)   Procedures for submission. Subdividers shall submit to the Village
Planner:
      (1)   Four full size copies of the preliminary plat, one 11 inch by 17
inch reduction of the preliminary plat, and one copy of all supportive
materials as required prior to the published submittal schedule for the Plan
and Zoning Commission meeting at which the subdivider wishes the preliminary
plat to be considered.
      (2)   A pdf electronic copy of the preliminary plat and all supportive
materials.
      (3)   The submittal of a preliminary plat shall be accompanied by a
preliminary plat application fee as determined from time to time by resolution
of the Board of Trustees of the village.
      (4)   Completed preliminary plat application form, including all
attachments thereto.
   (E)   Staff review. Village staff shall review the preliminary plat and
waiver requests for conformity to these regulations and consistency with the
Comprehensive Plan, Zoning Ordinance, building code, and other applicable
village laws and regulations. The Village Engineer shall review the preliminary
plat and waiver requests for conformity to flood control and stormwater
management regulations, conformity with utility design requirements and
generally accepted engineering practices. Staff comments will be forwarded to
the subdivider.
   (F)   Resubmission. The subdivider shall address the village staff comments
and make modifications and revisions as deemed appropriate. Subdivider, at his
option, may provide clarifying information and justifications for proposals
that are inconsistent with the ordinance or village staff comments. Four full
size copies, one 11 inch by 17 inch size copy, and one pdf electronic copy of
the preliminary plat shall then be resubmitted to the Village Planner for
review.
(Ord. 15-12-01, passed 12-15-2015)
§ 154.038 PRELIMINARY PLAT APPROVAL.
   (A)   When all the above requirements have been satisfied, the Village
Planner will present the preliminary plat to the Plan and Zoning Commission at
the next regular meeting. The subdivider or a responsible representative shall
attend this meeting. Village staff shall submit a written report to the Plan
and Zoning Commission which shall include:
      (1)   The subdivider’s request for waivers, and the justification
provided therefor;
      (2)   Background information;
      (3)   Comments and recommendations of the village staff;
      (4)   Comments of outside agencies, and other interested parties;
      (5)   General recommendations, including appropriate conditions to any
waiver request.
   (B)   Procedures for review and approval. The Plan and Zoning Commission
shall examine the Preliminary Plat for compliance with these regulations with
special attention given to the following:
      (1)   Design standards and information requirements as set forth by these
regulations.
      (2)   Streets and thoroughfares as related to neighborhood circulation
and existing and proposed topography.
      (3)   Existing and proposed zoning and existing and planned land use.
      (4)   The Village Comprehensive Plan, including the Land Use Plan and
Major Street Plan.
      (5)   Land required for schools, parks, or other public use.
      (6)   Utility methods and systems, drainage and street improvement.
      (7)   Water courses and floodplain areas.
      (8)   The existence of threatened or endangered species of plants or
animals.
      (9)   The existence of archeological or historic resources.
   (C)   Plan and Zoning Commission action. The Plan and Zoning Commission will
make a recommendation to the Village Board of Trustees within 60 days of the
submittal of a complete application for the preliminary plat. Such time may be
extended by consent of the subdivider. The Plan and Zoning Commission may
request additional information from the subdivider if necessary to evaluate the
plat or waiver requests. The Plan and Zoning Commission shall either:
      (1)   Recommend disapproval of the preliminary plat;
      (2)   Recommend approval of the preliminary plat;
      (3)   Recommend approval of the Preliminary Plat, subject to minor
modifications.
   (D)   If the Plan and Zoning Commission recommends disapproval of the
preliminary plat, the reasons for the recommendation for disapproval shall be
clearly set forth and communicated to the subdivider. Further, the review
certification on the Preliminary Plat shall be executed to indicate a
recommendation for disapproval by the Plan and Zoning Commission.
   (E)   The Plan and Zoning Commission recommendation of disapproval or
approval of the preliminary plat, shall be shown on the preliminary plat. The
approval certificate of the original preliminary plat shall be executed.
   (F)   If the Plan and Zoning Commission recommends approval of the
Preliminary Plat subject to minor modifications, the subdivider may make the
required changes to the preliminary plat within 21 days or such other time as
may be allowed by the Village Planner and resubmit the revised documents to
village staff for review. If all of the required modifications have been made,
the approval certificate of original Preliminary Plat shall then be executed
indicating a recommendation for approval.
   (G)   If the subdivider chooses not to modify the preliminary plat, or fails
to modify the preliminary plat within 21 days (or the additional time allowed),
the preliminary plat shall be considered recommended for disapproval by the
Plan and Zoning Commission. Village staff shall communicate the reasons for the
denial recommendation to the subdivider. Further, the review certification on
the preliminary plat shall indicate a recommendation for disapproval by the
Plan and Zoning Commission.
   (H)   The Village Planner shall then submit the recommendation of the Plan
and Zoning Commission to the Village Board of Trustees for their review,
consideration and approval or disapproval.
   (I)   Village Board of Trustees action. The Board of Trustees shall approve
or disapprove the preliminary plat, including waiver requests at the next
regularly scheduled meeting following the Plan and Zoning Commission’s action
or within 30 days thereafter.
   (J)   Disapproval. If the Board of Trustees disapproves a preliminary plat,
the Village Planner shall notify the subdivider within 14 days of the Board of
Trustee’s action.
   (K)   Approval. The approval of the preliminary plat by the Village Board of
Trustees shall be in effect for a period of one year from the approval date.
The period that approval is in effect may be extended administratively by the
Village Planner if requested by the subdivider for up to two additional one
year periods for preliminary plats involving 15 or more acres of land. If the
final plat and subdivision construction plans and specifications have not been
filed on or before this date, then the preliminary plat approval shall become
null and void. In that event a resubmittal of the preliminary plat for the
development will be required just as if the development were starting anew.
   (L)   Approval of the preliminary plat by the village confers upon the
subdivider the following rights for a period of 12 months from the date of
approval, subject to existing law, ordinances or statutes:
      (1)   The subdivider may submit on or before the Preliminary Plat
expiration date a Final Plat for the whole or part thereof of the area shown on
the preliminary plat for consideration by the village.
      (2)   The subdivider may proceed with preparation of construction plans
and specifications for installation of the physical improvements required for
the subdivision.
   (M)   Approval of the preliminary plat by the Board of Trustees of the
village shall be indicated on the drawings via execution of the approval
certificate.
   (N)   Approval of the preliminary plat thereof does not assure final
acceptance of the streets, other public ways, or other public improvements
intended for dedication nor continuity of current zoning for the tract or its
environs, nor approval of a final plat.
   (O)   On the preliminary plat the following certificate shall appear:
PRELIMINARY PLAT APPROVAL
THIS PRELIMINARY PLAT HAS RECEIVED A RECOMMENDATION FOR DISAPPROVAL /APPROVAL
BY THE PLAN AND ZONING COMMISSION OF THE VILLAGE OF MAHOMET, ILLINOIS, THIS
                DAY OF                       ______________________, 20     .
                                                       
CHAIRPERSON
THIS PRELIMINARY PLAT HAS BEEN APPROVED BY THE BOARD OF TRUSTEES OF THE VILLAGE
OF MAHOMET, ILLINOIS, THIS              DAY OF                                
, 20        .
                                                                           
PRESIDENT, VILLAGE BOARD OF TRUSTEES
                                                                           
VILLAGE CLERK
(Ord. 15-12-01, passed 12-15-2015)
§ 154.039 FINAL PLAT PHASE.
   (A)   Purpose. The purpose of the final plat phase shall be to create and
review the documents needed to formally subdivide the lands of the owner, in
conformance with the standards and requirements of these regulations.
   (B)   Plat requirements.
      (1)   Information required. The final plat shall be prepared by a
professional land surveyor and the final plat is to be reviewed by the Plan and
Zoning Commission and approved by the Board of Trustees before any subdivision
development is started. The final plat shall contain or be accompanied by the
information herein specified and shall comply with the following requirements:
         (a)   General.
            1.   The name of the subdivision.
            2.   The certificate of a registered land surveyor.
            3.   The date of preparation, scale and north arrow. The scale and
size of the plat shall be such that a 50% size photographic reduction will not
impair the details. Plats in several sections are permissible. No sheet larger
than 22 inches by 34 inches shall be submitted. The plat shall be presented at
a scale of one inch to 100 feet or larger. Lettering on the full-size plat
shall be all capitals of not less than one-tenth of an inch in height. The plat
shall be legible without magnification.
            4.   The location and position of the subdivision indicated in each
of the following ways as applicable:
               a.   By quarter section, township, range, meridian, county and
state.
               b.   By distances and bearings from astronomic or assumed north
and angles with reference to a corner or corners established in the United
States Public Land Survey.
               c.   By a written legal description of the exterior boundaries
of the land as surveyed and divided.
               d.   By not less than four references to the Illinois State
Plane Coordinate System, East Zone. References shall generally be located at
exterior points along the subdivision boundary.
               e.    Location of the subdivision relative to village limits.
            5.   The plat shall comply with the current Illinois Compiled
Statutes. The surveyor shall certify that the plat conforms to the current
Illinois Minimum Standards for a boundary survey.
            6.   The following notation shall appear on the face of the plat:
“TO THE BEST OF OUR KNOWLEDGE AND BELIEF, THE SITE DRAINAGE CONDITIONS AND
SURFACE WATER DRAINAGE WILL NOT BE CHANGED BY THIS SUBDIVISION, OR IF SURFACE
WATER DRAINAGE WILL BE CHANGED, REASONABLE PROVISION HAS BEEN MADE FOR
COLLECTION AND DIVERSION OF SUCH WATERS INTO PUBLIC AREAS OR DRAINAGE
FACILITIES WHICH THE SUBDIVIDER HAS THE RIGHT TO USE, AND THAT SUCH SURFACE
WATERS WILL BE PLANNED FOR IN ACCORDANCE WITH GENERALLY ACCEPTED ENGINEERING
PRACTICES SO AS TO REDUCE THE LIKELIHOOD OF DAMAGE TO ADJOINING PROPERTY
BECAUSE OF THE CONSTRUCTION OF THIS SUBDIVISION.”
                                                                          
ENGINEER’S NAME AND LICENSE NUMBER
                            
DATE
                                                                          
OWNER’S SIGNATURE
                            
DATE
            7.   The following notation shall appear on the face of the plat:
   A PORTION OF THE PROPERTY COVERED BY THIS SUBDIVISION IS (IS NOT) LOCATED
WITHIN A FLOOD HAZARD AREA (ZONE A.), AS DETERMINED BY THE FEDERAL EMERGENCY
MANAGEMENT AGENCY (PANEL NUMBER, TITLE, AND DATE OF FEMA STUDY).
            8.   The following notation shall appear on the face of the plat:
   A PORTION OF THIS SUBDIVISION IS (IS NOT) LOCATED WITHIN 500 FEET OF ANY
SURFACE DRAIN OR WATER COURSE SERVING A TRIBUTARY AREA OF 640 ACRES OR MORE.
            9.   The final plat shall be drawn with ink on 20 pound bond or
better paper.
      (2)   Detailed information.
         (a)   Boundary line of proposed subdivision indicated by solid heavy
line and the total acreage encompassed thereby. The plat shall clearly indicate
all streets, alleys, blocks, lots, parcels, easements, and rights-of-way.
Accurate angular and lineal dimensions shall be shown to describe and/or
reproduce any of these features. Survey data shall be sufficient to reproduce
any line or re-establish any monument.
         (b)   Abutting street lines of platted, adjoining subdivisions shown
in their correct location by broken (dashed) lines.
         (c)   The description and location of all subdivision and public land
system survey monuments.
         (d)   A consecutive numbering system for all lots and blocks.
         (e)   Location and names of all existing or prior platted streets or
other public ways, railroads and utility rights-of-way, parks and other public
open spaces, permanent easements or prior platted lots within and adjacent to
the subdivision.
         (f)   A graphic representation of the minimum setback lines on all
lots parcels, and a notation of the distance between such lines and the street
line, or lot line.
         (g)   A graphic representation of the location of the special flood
hazard area (if any).
         (h)   On the final plat, the following certificate shall appear:
FINAL PLAT APPROVAL
THIS FINAL PLAT HAS RECEIVED A RECOMMENDATION FOR (APPROVAL) (DISAPPROVAL) BY
THE PLAN AND ZONING COMMISSION OF MAHOMET, ILLINOIS, THIS             DAY OF
                                  , 20      .
                                                         
CHAIRPERSON
THIS FINAL PLAT HAS RECEIVED APPROVAL BY THE BOARD OF TRUSTEES OF MAHOMET,
ILLINOIS, THIS        DAY OF                            , 20      . THIS PLAT
SHALL BE RECORDED WITH THE RECORDER OF DEEDS FOR CHAMPAIGN COUNTY, ILLINOIS ON
OR BEFORE                , 20      . OTHERWISE THIS PLAT SHALL BECOME NULL AND
VOID.
                                                                    
PRESIDENT, BOARD OF TRUSTEES
                                                                     
VILLAGE CLERK
(SEAL)
   (C)   Surveying requirements. Pipes or other equivalent physical markers
shall be placed at each lot corner. No pipe or rod monument shall be less than
one-half inch in diameter, standard weight water pipe (inside diameter) or
deformed reinforcing rod at least 30 inches long. Iron pipe encased in concrete
at least 4 inches by 4 inches, or equivalent, markers shall be placed at the
beginning and ending of all curves and at all block corners. All monuments
shall be imprinted with the registration number of the surveyor making the
survey and shall be described on the plat.
   (D)   Final plat to include whole tract. Unless a final plat phasing plan is
approved with the preliminary plat or the area general plan, the final plat
must include the entire tract which was contained in the Preliminary Plat.
   (E)   Surveyor’s certificate. The surveyor’s certificate shall be placed on
the face of the final plat and shall include the name, signature, number and
seal of the registered land surveyor; shall be dated; and shall include a legal
description of the tract of land subdivided and further certify that the tract
of land has been surveyed and the monuments set as shown on the attached plat.
   (F)   Supporting documents. The final plat shall be accompanied by:
      (1)   An owner’s certificate with subdivision covenants (document to be
recorded).
         (a)   The owner’s certificate shall acknowledge the final plat along
with all covenants, deeds, restrictions, and agreements which are to be imposed
by the subdivider on future owners of lots within the subdivision.
         (b)   The document shall include a notarized certificate of the owner
of adoption of the plat, dedication of streets and easements, and provisions
for a property owners association (if necessary).
         (c)   See partial form and example covenants provided via
administrative rules.
      (2)   Certificate from the County Clerk that all taxes and special
assessments due on the property to be subdivided have been paid in full
(document to be recorded).
      (3)   Certification from the Village Treasurer that all special
assessments and fees due on the property to be subdivided have been paid in
full (document to be recorded).
      (4)   Certification from the subdivider as to the school district in
which the subdivision is located (document to be recorded).
      (5)   The Surveyor’s Statement to the Recorder of Deeds indicating that
the Village of Mahomet is designated to record the subdivision documents
(document to be recorded).
      (6)   A natural resources report from the Soil and Water Conservation
District if the project involves conversion of rural land to non-agricultural
uses. This report shall not be required when a preliminary plat has been
submitted or for replat subdivisions which have previously undergone grading
and soil disturbance.
      (7)   Illinois Department of Natural Resources review. Information
concerning the proposed subdivision shall be submitted by the developer to the
Illinois Department of Natural Resources for endangered species review and
consultation. A copy of the completed endangered species consultation and
review report shall be submitted to the village at the time of application.
This report shall not be required when a Preliminary Plat was submitted or for
replat subdivisions if a previous report has been submitted for the original
subdivision within the previous five years.
      (8)   Illinois Historic Preservation Agency review. Information
concerning the proposed subdivision shall be submitted by the developer to the
Illinois Historic Preservation Agency for historic resources review and
consultation. A copy of the completed review form prepared by the Illinois
Historic Preservation Agency shall be submitted to the village at the time of
application. This report shall not be required when a preliminary plat was
submitted or for replat subdivisions if a previous report has been submitted
for the original subdivision within the previous five years.
      (9)   Construction plans and specifications. If the project involves
construction activities for installation of public or quasi-public
infrastructure, the subdivider shall submit to the Village Engineer three
copies of the construction plans and specifications for the subdivision not
later than the same date as submission of the final plat. The construction
plans and specifications shall include all information necessary for the
construction of public or quasi-public improvements within the subdivision. See
§
154.042 for more information.
      (10)   Cost estimate. If the project involves construction of public or
quasi-public infrastructure, an engineer’s opinion of estimated costs of
construction of public and quasi-public improvements shall be provided. The
estimated costs shall include estimated quantities of work and unit prices for
various items of work.
      (11)   Stormwater management plan. If the project involves more than one
acre, a stormwater management plan shall be submitted along with necessary
computations, as set forth in the village stormwater management ordinance. The
plan shall demonstrate the suitability of the stormwater detention and
stormwater drainage systems proposed for the development.
      (12)   Floodplain development permit. If the development involves lands
located within a designated floodplain or located within 500 feet of a waterway
with a watershed area of at least one square mile, a floodplain development
permit shall be provided. The floodplain development permit shall:
         (a)   Comply with the requirements of the floodplain development
ordinance.
         (b)   Establish base flood elevations at the development site in
accordance with Federal Emergency Management Agency standards.
         (c)   Determine the limits of the floodway and flood fringe within the
development site.
      (13)   Subsidiary drainage plat. A subsidiary drainage plat shall be
filed in accordance with the following requirements:
         (a)   Show topographically and by profile the elevation of the land,
prior to the commencement of any changes in the elevations, by contours at not
greater than one foot intervals for regular subdivisions and not greater than
two feet for minor and rural residential subdivisions.
         (b)   Provide spot elevations for existing culverts, waterways, and
other critical drainage system components.
         (c)   Show proposed changes in the elevations and the flow of the
surface, from the subdivision using proposed spot elevations, floor elevations,
flow arrows, and proposed surface contours.
         (d)   A subsidiary drainage plat shall not be required whenever a
subdivision involves the re-subdivision of lands originally subdivided within
the past five years for which a Subsidiary Drainage Plat was previously
submitted.
         (e)   Statement to appear on the subsidiary drainage plat:
   “TO THE BEST OF OUR KNOWLEDGE AND BELIEF, THE SITE DRAINAGE CONDITIONS AND
SURFACE WATER DRAINAGE WILL NOT BE CHANGED BY THIS SUBDIVISION, OR IF SURFACE
WATER DRAINAGE WILL BE CHANGED, REASONABLE PROVISION HAS BEEN MADE FOR
COLLECTION AND DIVERSION OF SUCH WATERS INTO PUBLIC AREAS OR DRAINAGE
FACILITIES WHICH THE SUBDIVIDER HAS THE RIGHT TO USE, AND THAT SUCH SURFACE
WATERS WILL BE PLANNED FOR IN ACCORDANCE WITH GENERALLY ACCEPTED ENGINEERING
PRACTICES SO AS TO REDUCE THE LIKELIHOOD OF DAMAGE TO ADJOINING PROPERTY
BECAUSE OF THE CONSTRUCTION OF THIS SUBDIVISION.”
                                                                          
ENGINEER’S NAME AND LICENSE NUMBER
                              
DATE
                                                                          
OWNER’S SIGNATURE
                              
DATE
      (14)   Performance guarantee and surety. The performance bond shall be in
a form as set forth in an administrative rule and as approved by Village
Attorney. The surety shall be of a form as approved by the Village Attorney.
See §
154.047 for additional information.
      (15)   Applications for any required state or federal permits.
      (16)   Documentation of project design when the project involves
construction of public or quasi-public infrastructure.
      (17)   Approval of the final plat by the Illinois Department of
Transportation if the subdivision is located across or adjacent to a state
maintained highway.
      (18)   Approval of the final plat by the County Engineer if the
subdivision is located across or adjacent to a county highway.
      (19)   Approval of the final plat by the Township Road District if the
subdivision involves dedication of new township streets or roadways, unless the
roadways are the subject of an annexation agreement with the village.
      (20)   Approval of the final plat by the Champaign County Planning and
Zoning Department if the subdivision involves lands under the zoning
jurisdiction of Champaign County.
      (21)   In the event a private on-site sewage disposal system is proposed
for each lot, certification by a registered professional engineer indicating
that the proposed land use, the proposed lots and the known soil
characteristics of the site are adequate for such systems.
   (G)   Outside agency review.
      (1)   At the time of application the subdivider shall provide evidence of
mailing of one copy of the final plat to each required agency as set forth in
administrative rules.
      (2)   The prints must be accompanied by a request that written comments
be submitted to the village at the attention of the Village Planner not later
than 21 days thereafter, unless otherwise required by ordinance or law, and
that no comment in the time specified shall be deemed no adverse comment. The
developer shall provide evidence to the village that the prints have been
mailed to all applicable outside agencies.
   (H)   Submittal requirements. At any time within one year after receiving
preliminary plat approval, the subdivider shall submit to the Village Planner:
      (1)   Four full size copies of the final plat, and one copy of all
supportive materials as required prior to the published submittal schedule for
the regular meeting of the Village Plan and Zoning Commission at which the
subdivider wishes the final plat to be considered.
      (2)   One pdf electronic copy of the final plat and all supportive
materials.
      (3)   An 11 inch by 17 inch reduction of the final plat.
      (4)   The submittal of a final plat for a subdivision within the
corporate limits of the village or within the one and one-half mile extra-
territorial jurisdiction area of the village shall be accompanied by a final
plat application fee as determined from time to time by resolution of the Board
of Trustees of the village.
      (5)   A completed final plat application form, including all attachments
thereto.
      (6)   A list of waivers and deferrals being requested and the
justifications for the waiver(s).
   (I)   Staff review. Village staff shall review the final plat, supporting
documents and waiver requests for conformity to these regulations and
consistency with the Comprehensive Plan, Zoning Ordinance, building code, and
other applicable village laws and regulations. The Village Engineer shall
review the final plat and waiver requests for conformity to flood control and
stormwater management regulations, conformity with utility design requirements
and generally accepted engineering practices. Staff comments will be forwarded
to the subdivider.
   (J)   Referral to the City of Champaign. If the proposed subdivision is
within the village’s extraterritorial jurisdiction and also within the area
designated to be annexed to the City of Champaign under the Champaign - Mahomet
Boundary Agreement, the Plat shall be referred to the City of Champaign for
review. Under these conditions no Final Plat shall be approved unless the final
plat for the land proposed to be subdivided has been approved by the City of
Champaign.
   (K)   Resubmission. The subdivider shall address the village staff comments
and make modifications and revisions as deemed appropriate. Subdivider, at his
option, may provide clarifying information and justifications for proposals
that are inconsistent with the ordinance or village staff comments. Four full
size copies, one 11 inch by 17 inch size copy, and one pdf electronic copy of
the revised final plat shall then be resubmitted to the Village Planner for
review. The resubmission shall be accompanied by all appropriate supporting
documents.
(Ord. 15-12-01, passed 12-15-2015)
§ 154.040 FINAL PLAT APPROVAL.
   (A)   When all the above requirements have been satisfied, the Village
Planner will present the final plat to the Plan and Zoning Commission at the
next regular meeting. The subdivider or a responsible representative shall
attend this meeting. Village staff shall submit a written report to the Plan
and Zoning Commission which shall include:
      (1)   The subdivider’s requests for waivers, and the justification
provided therefor;
      (2)   Background information;
      (3)   Comments and recommendations of village staff;
      (4)   Comments of outside agencies, and other interested parties.
      (5)   A general recommendation, including appropriate conditions to any
waiver request.
      (6)   A copy of the application including attachments thereto.
   (B)   Procedures for review and approval. The Plan and Zoning Commission
shall examine the final plat and all supporting documents for compliance with
these regulations with special attention given to the following:
      (1)   Design standards and information requirements as set forth by these
regulations.
      (2)   Streets and thoroughfares as related to neighborhood circulation
and existing and proposed topography.
      (3)   Existing and proposed zoning and land use.
      (4)   Utility methods and systems, drainage and street improvements.
      (5)   Water courses and floodplain areas.
      (6)   The existence of threatened or endangered species of plants or
animals.
      (7)   The existence of archaeological or historic resources.
   (C)   Plan and Zoning Commission action. The Plan and Zoning Commission will
make a recommendation to the Village Board of Trustees within 60 days of the
submittal of a complete application for the final plat. Such time may be
extended by consent of the subdivider. The Plan and Zoning Commission may
request additional information from the subdivider if necessary to evaluate the
Plat or waiver requests. The Plan and Zoning Commission shall either:
      (1)   Recommend disapproval of the final plat;
      (2)   Recommend approval of the final plat;
      (3)   Recommend approval of the final plat, subject to minor
modifications.
   (D)   If the Mahomet Plan and Zoning Commission recommends disapproval of
the final plat, the reason for the disapproval shall be clearly set forth and
communicated to the subdivider. Further, the review certificate on the final
plat shall be executed to indicate disapproval by the Plan and Zoning
Commission.
   (E)   If the Village of Mahomet Plan and Zoning Commission recommends
approval of the final plat, it shall be so indicated on the original of the
final plat and the approval certificate shall be executed at that time. The
Village Planner shall then present the final plat to the Village Board of
Trustees and inform them of the Plan and Zoning Commission’s recommendation. At
the same Village Board of Trustees meeting, the Village Engineer shall present
the construction plans and specifications for the subdivision for
consideration, if such review has not previously occurred.
   (F)   If the Plan and Zoning Commission recommends approval of the final
plat subject to minor modifications, the subdivider may make the required
changes to the final plat within 21 days or such additional time as granted by
the Village Planner and resubmit the revised documents. Village staff shall
review the revised final plat to confirm that all required modifications have
been made. Upon completion of the required modifications, the approval
certificate on the original Final Plat shall be executed indicating approval by
the Plan and Zoning Commission. If the subdivider does not make the required
modifications within 21 days (or such other additional time as allowed), the
final plat shall be considered recommended for disapproval by the Plan and
Zoning Commission and the review certificate on the final plat shall be
executed to indicate a recommendation for disapproval by the Plan and Zoning
Commission.
   (G)   Board of Trustees action. Within 21 days of the Plan and Zoning
Commission’s recommendation, the Village Planner shall transmit the final plat
and supporting materials to the Village Board of Trustees for consideration at
their next regularly scheduled meeting. The Board of Trustees shall accept or
reject the final plat within 30 days thereafter. However, failure to accept or
reject the plat shall not operate as approval of the plat. Only final plats
which have been specifically approved by specific action of the Board of
Trustees shall be approved and eligible for recording.
   (H)   The Village Board of Trustees shall not give final approval to any
proposed subdivision until:
      (1)   The Plan and Zoning Commission has recommended the approval or
disapproval of the final plat;
      (2)   The Village Engineer has recommended approval or disapproval of the
subdivision improvement construction plans and specifications (if any);
      (3)   The subdivider presents his or her performance guarantee in the
amount and in a form in accordance with these regulations and as approved by
the Village Attorney.
      (4)   All statutorily required approvals by other governmental agencies
have been received.
      (5)   All subsidiary and supporting documents have been submitted in
satisfactory form.
   (I)   The Village Board of Trustees, after receiving recommendations from
the Plan and Zoning Commission and village staff shall then consider the Final
Plat of the proposed subdivision. At that time, the Village Board of Trustees
shall approve or disapprove the final plat, and shall clearly state their
reasons for their actions.
   (J)   In the event the Village Board of Trustees disapproves the final plat,
the subdivider shall have 90 days from the date of such disapproval to make the
corrections and resubmit to the Village Board of Trustees; otherwise the prior
recommendation for approval of the Plan and Zoning Commission and/or the
approval of the Construction Plans by the Village Engineer shall become null
and void.
(Ord. 15-12-01, passed 12-15-2015)
§ 154.041 RECORDING SUBDIVISION DOCUMENTS.
   (A)   After approval of the final plat, construction plans and
specifications (if necessary) and receipt and approval of all supporting
documents by the Village Board of Trustees, the final plat may be recorded by
the subdivider with the Recorder of Deeds, Champaign County, Illinois within
one year of the date of approval, otherwise the final plat approval shall
become null and void. Village staff shall retain the originals of the final
plat until such time as recording is completed.
   (B)   Administrative extension of time for recording final plat. The Village
Planner may extend the approval of a final plat, and such Plat may be recorded,
for a period of up to 180 days after the automatic one year period. Such
approval may be given, in the sole discretion of the Village Planner, if such
extension does not negatively impact the construction of infrastructure
necessary for development on neighboring tracts or within the village’s growth
areas, and if it is in the public’s best interest.
   (C)   Recording. Village staff shall accompany the subdivider and shall
record the final plat and required supporting documents with the Recorder of
Deeds, Champaign County, Illinois. The subdivider shall be responsible for
payment of all recording fees.
(Ord. 15-12-01, passed 12-15-2015)
§ 154.042 CONSTRUCTION PLANS AND SPECIFICATIONS.
   (A)   The procedures for submitting the construction plans and
specifications for the subdivision are set forth herein. The village staff
shall not recommend approval of the construction plans and specifications to
the Board of Trustees until all of the information submitted is in accordance
with the standards and procedures herein stated, are consistent with standard
engineering design practice, or are prepared in accordance with applicable
ordinance waivers of requirements.
   (B)   Plans and specifications.
      (1)   The subdivider shall cause construction plans and specifications to
be prepared for all public and quasi-public infrastructure improvements
required or regulated by this chapter. The improvements shall be designed to
conform to the minimum standards set forth in this chapter and shall also
conform to the minimum standards and requirements of other local, state, and
federal authorities which have jurisdiction over the subdivision. construction
plans and specifications shall be prepared under the supervision of an engineer
licensed pursuant to the laws of the State of Illinois and shall bear the
engineer’s seal and signature.
      (2)   The subdivider shall submit construction plans and specifications
to the village for review prior to the commencement of construction of any
improvements required or regulated by this chapter. The Village Engineer shall
review the construction plans and specifications for conformance to this
chapter. The Village Engineer shall endeavor to complete his or her initial
review of the construction plans and specifications within three weeks of
submittal of the Plans and supporting materials.
      (3)   The developer’s engineer shall furnish the village four full size
sets, one 11 inch by 17 inch sized set, and one pdf electronic copy of the
approved construction plans and specifications prior to starting any
construction operations.
   (C)   Procedures for submission. Subdivider shall submit to the village :
      (1)   Four full size copies of the construction plans and specifications
and two copies of all supportive materials as required prior to the published
submittal schedule for the Plan and Zoning Commission meeting at which the
subdivider wishes the final plat be considered.
      (2)   One 11 inch by 17 inch sized set of construction plans.
      (3)   The submittal of the construction plans and specifications for a
subdivision within the corporate limits of the village or within the one and
one-half mile extra-territorial jurisdiction area of the village shall be
accompanied by an application fee as determined from time to time by resolution
of the Village Board of Trustees.
      (4)   A completed application form with required supporting
documentation.
      (5)   Such design computations and analyses and other supporting
documentation as are necessary to demonstrate compliance with the requirements
of this chapter.
   (D)   Staff review. Village staff shall review the construction plans and
specifications for conformity to the requirements of applicable village
regulations, consistency with the Comprehensive Plan, consistency with the
approved preliminary plat, suitability for development, generally accepted good
engineering design practice, and other applicable requirements. Village staff
comments will be forwarded to the subdivider. Due to the complexity of
construction plans and specifications it is anticipated that multiple staff
reviews of revised and re-submitted construction plans and specifications may
be required.
   (E)   Required information. The construction plans and specifications shall
be as follows:
      (1)   The plan sheets shall be 22 inch by 34 inch. The minimum graphic
scale shall be one inch equals 40 feet or other scale approved by the village.
Lettering shall be at least one-tenth inch in height for full size prints. The
construction plans and specifications shall include the following items as
required for the particular development:
         (a)   Cover sheet depicting the project location and the engineer’s
embossed seal and original signature; an index to sheets; the project title;
and the village approval signature block.
         (b)   General notes, legends, benchmarks, and specification sheet(s).
         (c)   Site grading plan sheet(s) showing existing contours and spot
elevations and proposed contours and spot elevations related to National
Geodetic Vertical Datum of 1988, as indicated (mean sea level) with a contour
interval of not greater than one foot.
         (d)   Street plan sheet(s).
         (e)   Intersection detail sheet(s).
         (f)   Street profile sheet(s).
         (g)   Street cross section sheets.
         (h)   Storm drain plan sheet(s).
         (i)   Storm drain profile sheet(s).
         (j)   Sanitary sewer plan sheet(s).
         (k)   Sanitary sewer profile sheet(s).
         (l)   Water distribution plan sheet(s).
         (m)   Water distribution profile sheet(s).
         (n)   Street lighting plan sheet(s).
         (o)   Erosion control plan sheet(s).
         (p)   Traffic control plan sheet(s).
         (q)   Detail sheet(s).
         (r)   Other sheets as needed.
   (F)   Resubmission. The subdivider shall address the village staff comments
and make modifications and revisions as deemed appropriate. Subdivider, at his
option, may provide clarifying information and justifications for proposals
that are inconsistent with the ordinance or village staff comments. Four full
size copies, one 11 inch by 17 inch size copy, and one pdf electronic copy of
the revised construction plans and specifications shall then be resubmitted to
the village for review. The resubmission shall be accompanied by all
appropriate supporting documents.
   (G)   Second staff review. Village staff shall review the resubmitted
construction plans and specifications for conformity to the requirements of
applicable village regulations, consistency with the Comprehensive Plan,
suitability for development, generally accepted good engineering design
practice, and other applicable requirements. Village staff comments will be
forwarded to the subdivider.
   (H)   Second resubmission. The subdivider shall address the village staff
comments and make modifications and revisions as deemed appropriate.
Subdivider, at his option, may provide clarifying information and
justifications for proposals that are inconsistent with the ordinance or
village staff comments. Four full size copies, one 11 inch by 17 inch size
copy, and one pdf electronic copy of the revised construction plans and
specifications shall then be resubmitted to the Village Engineer for review.
The resubmission shall be accompanied by all appropriate supporting documents.
One pdf electronic copy of the construction plans and specifications shall also
be submitted.
   (I)   Third staff review. Village staff shall review the resubmitted
construction plans and specifications for conformity to the requirements of
applicable village regulations, consistency with the Comprehensive Plan,
suitability for development, generally accepted good engineering design
practice, and other applicable requirements. Should these further revised
Construction plans fail to adequately address each and every prior village
staff review comment, the construction plans shall be recommended for
disapproval by the village staff. Further review of the construction plans and
specifications shall be suspended thereafter, until such time as a re-
application for approval is submitted, along with payment of a re-application
fee, as determined from time to time by resolution of the Village Board of
Trustees.
   (J)   Approval:
      (1)   The village shall notify the subdivider of the staff recommendation
for approval or disapproval of the construction plans and specifications.
      (2)   Such notification, specifying reasons for the recommendation for
approval or disapproval, shall be made within approximately ten working days of
the date of second resubmission of construction plans and specifications
required by this section. construction plans and specifications will be
reviewed in the order of submission.
      (3)   The Village Board of Trustees, after receiving recommendations from
Village Staff shall then consider the construction plans and specifications of
the proposed subdivision. At that time, the Village Board of Trustees shall
approve or disapprove the construction plans and specifications, and shall
clearly state their reasons for their actions.
      (4)   Construction of improvements, required or regulated by this
chapter, shall not commence until the Village Engineer and the Village Board of
Trustees has approved, in writing, construction plans and specifications for
the improvements, design data as may be required by these regulations, and the
other supporting documents.
      (5)   In the event the Village Board of Trustees disapproves the
construction plans and specifications, the subdivider has 90) days from the
date of such disapproval to make the corrections and resubmit to the Village
Board of Trustees; otherwise any prior recommendation for approval by the
Village Engineer shall become null and void.
   (K)   The following certificate shall appear of the cover sheet of the
construction plans and specifications for the subdivision:
APPROVAL BY THE VILLAGE OF MAHOMET
THESE CONSTRUCTION PLANS AND SPECIFICATIONS HAVE RECEIVED A RECOMMENDATION FOR
(APPROVAL) (DISAPPROVAL) BY THE VILLAGE ENGINEER.
                                                                           
VILLAGE ENGINEER   DATE
                                                                           
VILLAGE PLANNER   DATE
THESE CONSTRUCTION PLANS AND SPECIFICATIONS HAVE RECEIVED APPROVAL BY THE BOARD
OF TRUSTEES OF THE VILLAGE OF MAHOMET.
                                                                          
PRESIDENT, BOARD OF TRUSTEES
                             
DATE
                                                                          
VILLAGE CLERK
                              
DATE
   (L)   Supporting documents. The construction plans shall be accompanied by:
      (1)   Erosion and sediment control plan. A stormwater pollution
prevention plan as required by the Illinois Environmental Protection Agency
shall be submitted showing measures necessary to meet the objectives of this
ordinance throughout all phases of construction and permanently after
completion of development of the site. All applicable Illinois Environmental
Protection Agency permit application forms shall also be submitted.
      (2)   Stormwater management plan. A stormwater management plan shall be
submitted along with necessary computations, as set forth in the Village
Stormwater Management Ordinance. The plan shall demonstrate the suitability of
the stormwater detention and stormwater drainage systems proposed for the
development.
      (3)   Street pavement design computations for collector and arterial
streets.
      (4)   Applications for any required state or federal permits, including
Illinois Environmental Protection Agency water supply and sanitary sewer
construction permits.
      (5)   Documentation of project design, including all relevant design
computations.
      (6)   Copies of applications for approval of the Construction Plans from
local agencies (if applicable) including:
         (a)   Champaign County (or Piatt County) Engineer (if applicable);
         (b)   The Township Road District Commissioner if the project involves
construction of new township roadways;
         (c)   Sangamon Valley Public Water District (if water or sanitary
sewer service is to be provided by this entity);
         (d)   Any drainage district that the proposed subdivision is located
within.
(Ord. 15-12-01, passed 12-15-2015)
§ 154.043 CONSTRUCTION OF IMPROVEMENTS.
   (A)   Improvements required and/or regulated by this chapter shall be
constructed in accordance with approved construction plans and specifications,
the standards, requirements, and regulations set forth in this chapter, and
other applicable village ordinances.
   (B)   If in the course of construction the subdivider wishes to modify the
size, type, quality, performance, and/or location of any or all of the
improvements required or regulated by these regulations, the subdivider’s
engineer shall submit a request to the Village Engineer for review and approval
of the change prior to proceeding with installation of the modified
improvement. Minor field changes based on field conditions that do not impact
the suitability or performance of the improvements shall not require advance
review and approval of the Village Engineer. Verbal requests shall be followed
by written documentation submitted within two days to the village designated
staff person.
   (C)   It shall be the duty of the subdivider’s engineer to notify the
Village Engineer and Village Planner at least one day in advance of any
starting, suspension, resumption, or completion of each phase of construction
work. This requirement shall not apply to work suspended for less than one week
by reason of adverse weather conditions.
   (D)   The degree of engineering observation during actual construction
operations (as contrasted with preparatory and cleanup operations, for example)
shall be 100% during storm drain, sanitary sewer, water main, force main and
pavement construction. The observation shall be performed by the developer’s
engineer. All construction shall be performed in accordance with the approved
construction plans and specifications, with an observer present as stated
herein, or village staff shall be authorized to stop all construction
operations.
   (E)   Weekly progress reports of construction are required to be sent to the
village designated staff person at the beginning of each week. These may take
the form of email correspondence. The weekly report shall set forth a general
outline of the work completed during the previous week and the anticipated work
to be undertaken during the current week. Minor and major field changes to the
design of the improvements shall be documented.
   (F)   The inspection of the construction work by the developer’s engineer
shall be adequate to assure that all work complies with the approved
construction plans and specifications and the requirements of this chapter.
   (G)   Tests required by this chapter shall be performed solely by an IDOT
qualified independent testing laboratory; the subdivider’s engineer or
qualified personnel employed by the subdivider’s engineer, and shall be
performed at the subdivider’s expense. The subdivider shall direct that the
results of required tests be mailed or delivered to the village designated
staff person within two weeks of completion of the test and that no test result
be withheld from the village.
   (H)   Notice of violations. Village staff may serve a notice of violation
and stop work order upon any person responsible, in whole or part, for the
construction, alteration, repair, maintenance or removal of public improvements
in violation of construction plans and specifications approved pursuant to this
chapter, or otherwise in violation of this chapter. The order may direct the
discontinuance of the illegal action or condition and the abatement of the
violation.
   (I)   Stop work orders. Upon notice from village staff that work on any
public or quasi-public improvement is being prosecuted contrary to the
provisions of the chapter or is be prosecuted in an unsafe or dangerous manner,
the work shall be immediately stopped. Such a notice stopping work (a stop-work
order) shall be in writing and shall be served upon or otherwise given to the
subdivider, the subdivider’s engineer, or to any person in charge of or
performing work on public or quasi-public improvements in the subdivision, or
to an agent of any of the foregoing. Such an order shall state the conditions
under which work may be resumed. No person shall continue any work after having
been served with a stop-work order, except such work as is directed to be
performed to remove a violation or dangerous or unsafe conditions, as provided
in the order.
   (J)   Appeals. The subdivider, subdivider’s engineer, any person in charge
of or performing work on public improvements in the subdivision or any other
interested person may appeal to the Zoning Board of Appeals a decision of
village staff issuing a notice of violation or stop-work order pursuant to this
section. The appeal shall be in writing setting forth the reasons for the
appeal and shall be filed with the Village Clerk within ten days after receipt
of the notice or stop-work order. The Zoning Board of Appeals shall fix a time
and place for hearing the appeal, not more than 30 days following the receipt
of the appeal by the Village Clerk. The filing of an appeal shall not operate
as a stay of notice of violation or stop-work order.
   (K)   Resident observer. 
      (1)   The subdivider’s engineer shall assign qualified personnel to the
subdivision construction activities to observe the work and document the daily
construction activities which occur. The resident observer assigned to a
subdivision shall be experienced in site/civil infrastructure construction and
shall have not less than 12 months of prior experience as a construction
observer. The qualifications and resume of the construction observer assigned
to the particular subdivision shall be provided to the village not less than
ten business days before the start of any on-site construction activities.
Village staff shall review the qualifications of the proposed resident
observer. If village staff determines that the proposed resident observer is
not qualified or not performing, the village shall notify the subdivider and
the subdivider’s engineer that construction activities may not take place until
a qualified resident observer has been assigned to the subdivision.
      (2)   In the event that the resident observer assigned to a subdivision
must be replaced, the replacement individual shall also be pre-qualified in a
like manner before any replacement occurs. Short substitutions of less than one
week due to illness or other similar disruption shall not require
prequalification of the substitute resident observer.
      (3)   Construction work performed without the physical presence on-site
of the assigned resident observer may be rejected by the village as
unsatisfactory.
(Ord. 15-12-01, passed 12-15-2015)
§ 154.044 TIME PERIOD FOR CONSTRUCTION.
   The subdivider shall complete construction of all subdivision improvements
within two years of the date the village approves the construction plans and
specifications for the subdivision. At the subdivider’s request, the Village
Planner may extend the time period in which to complete the construction for an
additional one year if the Village Planner finds that such an extension is
consistent with the public welfare.
(Ord. 15-12-01, passed 12-15-2015)
§ 154.045 APPROVAL OF CONSTRUCTED IMPROVEMENTS.
   (A)   The developer’s engineer shall conduct a “punch list” inspection of
the constructed improvements, and shall identify any incomplete work or
deficiencies in the construction work. The “punch list” inspection shall be
attended by the Village Engineer. A copy of the “punch list” which identifies
incomplete, deficient, or defective work shall be prepared by the developer’s
engineer and provided to the village. Upon completion of the construction work
needed to address and correct “punch list” items, the developer’s engineer
shall notify the Village Engineer and Village Planner that the improvements are
substantially complete, and ready for semi-final inspection by the village. The
notification shall be accompanied by the original “punch list” amended to
denote corrective actions taken, pre-final “record” drawings which depict the
constructed improvements, and by any other testing results and documents
required to verify compliance with chapter requirements during construction.
   (B)   Within a reasonable time frame of receipt of the pre-final record
drawings and the notification of substantial completion, the Village Engineer
shall conduct a semi-final inspection of the constructed improvements. The
developer’s engineer shall attend the semi-final inspection. At that time, the
Village Engineer will identify any additional defects, deficiencies, or
incomplete work. The developer shall correct the additional defects,
deficiencies, or incomplete work identified within a reasonable time
thereafter. Upon notification that all corrective work is complete, the Village
Engineer shall make a final inspection of the constructed improvements and
confirm that all previously identified defects, deficiencies, or incomplete
work has been properly corrected.
   (C)   Before the completed improvements are approved or accepted by the
village, the subdivider’s engineer shall furnish the village a completion
certificate stating that the improvements comply with all the requirements of
the approved construction plans and specifications and are free from all
defects or deficiencies. The form of the engineer’s certificate shall be as set
forth in administrative rules.
   (D)   For purposes of this chapter, a defect in a constructed infrastructure
improvement shall include a failure to properly test and/or document testing of
the constructed improvements. A defect shall also be considered construction of
an infrastructure improvement without on-site presence of a village approved,
qualified resident observer.
   (E)   The engineer who will certify the construction of the improvements
shall not have an ownership interest in the subdivision nor be a regular
employee of the subdivider.
   (F)   Before the completed improvements are approved or accepted by the
village, the subdivider shall furnish the village with documentation certifying
that all contractors, subcontractors, and material suppliers have been paid in
full. The form of the documentation shall be as approved by the Village
Engineer.
   (G)   In the event that the semi-final inspection identifies a significant
number (i.e, more than 20 items or more than 20% of the original punch list
items, whichever is greater) of additional defects, deficiencies, or incomplete
work items, the semi-final inspection shall be repeated to verify completion of
the corrective construction activities. In the event that a second semi-final
inspection is required, the Village Clerk shall bill the subdivider for the
village’s cost for the second inspection and any subsequent inspections
necessitated by the subdivider’s failure to construction improvements in
accordance with approved construction plans and specifications in this chapter.
These costs shall be based on the actual out-of-pocket costs incurred by the
village including staff hourly rates and any consultant fees. The subdivider’s
performance bond and surety shall not be released until the village has been
reimbursed for these costs.
   (H)   After completion of the project and prior to acceptance by the Village
Board of Trustees, the subdivider’s engineer shall furnish the village four
complete full size sets and one half size set of “as-built” plans with each
sheet clearly marked “as-built” and dated in the lower right hand corner. These
plans shall indicate the final locations of all improvements. In addition, an
electronic copy of the “as-built” plans shall be submitted in a format as set
forth in administrative rules.
   (I)   The “as-built” plans shall contain record data concerning the
construction of all public and quasi-public facilities. “As-built” rim
elevations, invert elevations, and gradients shall be provided for all sewers
and drains. The location and invert elevation of all sanitary sewer service
lines shall be provided. Valve boxes shall be located. Operation and
maintenance manuals shall be provided for lift stations or other equipment.
Pavement elevations and gradients shall be shown. Ground surface elevations
along swales and within lots shall be provided. The locations of the
constructed improvements shall be tied to the Illinois State Plane Coordinate
System.
   (J)   Within approximately two weeks of receipt of satisfactory “as-built”
plans, the engineer’s certificate of completion, and all supporting
documentation, the Village Engineer shall submit a recommendation to the
Village Board of Trustees concerning acceptance of the subdivision
improvements. The Board of Trustees shall review the materials and information
submitted within a reasonable time thereafter, and shall conditionally accept
or reject the completed improvements, and shall clearly state the reasons for
their actions.
      (1)   If the improvements are conditionally accepted, the amount of the
surety for the performance bond may be reduced to 20% of the value of the
improvements, and a one year warranty period shall commence.
      (2)   If the improvements are rejected, the Board of Trustees shall
indicate the reasons for the rejection.
      (3)   Use of the improvements by the public or maintenance of the
improvements by any public entity, including but not limited to the village,
the Township Road District, and the Sangamon Valley Public Water District,
shall not constitute acceptance of any or all of the required improvements.
      (4)   The performance bond and surety for improvements that are
constructed for use by another government agency (e.g., Mahomet Township Road
District and Sangamon Valley Public Water District) shall not be released
without concurrence by that agency that the improvements are suitable for their
intended use.
   (K)   Obligation to correct defects for one year. The subdivider shall
maintain all subdivision improvements free from defects for a period of one
year after the date the Village Board of Trustees issues a written notice of
acceptance of all the subdivision improvements. The owner shall promptly
correct any defect of which the owner has notice or which the village
discovers, which defect occurs prior to the release of the performance bond and
surety. The village shall notify the owner of any defects discovered by the
village which occurred during this period and the owner shall promptly remedy
the same.
   (L)   Partial acceptance. If the Village Board of Trustees accepts part but
not all of the subdivision improvements, the part accepted must be maintained
free of defects by the subdivider until the expiration of the maintenance
period for all subdivision improvements.
   (M)   Defects defined and to be repaired. “Free from defects” means that all
subdivision improvements are functioning in accordance with the purpose for
which they were designed and that the improvements have not deteriorated other
than to the extent of normal wear. Non-designed cracks in pavement or sidewalk
shall not be considered normal wear. A defect which may be required to be
repaired is any:
      (1)   Failure of a subdivision improvement to operate in conformance with
this chapter during the maintenance period; or
      (2)   The appearance of any defect in a subdivision improvement which is
discovered during an inspection of the improvement made by village staff within
a reasonable period of time after the owner’s request for the release of the
performance bond and surety or at any time prior to that inspection; or
      (3)   The failure to design and construct a subdivision improvement
required by these regulations and not previously waived, the need for which is
discovered prior to the end of the maintenance period.
   (N)   Project final out. Near the conclusion of the one year warranty period
the Village Engineer shall make such investigations as is deemed appropriate to
determine if the subdivision is free from defects. The following actions shall
then occur:
      (1)   If the subdivision is free from defects the Village Engineer shall
notify the Village Planner and the Village Attorney to release the subdivision
bond and surety to the developer.
      (2)   If any defects are identified, the Village Engineer shall notify
the subdivider of the defect and identify how the defect shall be remedied. The
subdivider shall have 45 days thereafter to remedy the defect.
      (3)   Upon remedy of the defect to the satisfaction of the Village
Engineer, the Village Administrator, the Village Planner and the Village
Attorney shall be notified that the subdivision performance bond and surety may
be released to the developer.
      (4)   If any defects are not remedied within 45 days, the village shall
begin default proceedings against the subdivider, and shall use the proceeds of
the performance bond and surety to correct said default.
   (O)   Maintenance responsibility. The owner/ developer shall be responsible
for all maintenance of all public infrastructure and associated appurtenances
until such time as all of the required subdivision improvements are inspected,
approved, dedicated and officially accepted by the village, via a Village Board
of Trustees resolution.
(Ord. 15-12-01, passed 12-15-2015)
§ 154.046 ACCEPTANCE OF IMPROVEMENTS BY OTHER GOVERNMENTAL ENTITY.
   (A)   When a subdivision final plat involves the dedication of street right-
of-way, sanitary sewer, water main, storm drain, or other public infrastructure
to another governmental agency a certificate of acceptance shall be provided by
that agency to the village. The form of the certificate shall be set forth in
administrative rules.
   (B)   Upon completion of construction of the required physical improvements/
public infrastructure and inspection and approval by the village an authorized
representative of the governmental agency having jurisdiction over the public
infrastructure constructed within a subdivision shall furnish the subdivider
and the village a copy of the completed form of acceptance of public
infrastructure as set forth in administrative rules.
(Ord. 15-12-01, passed 12-15-2015)
§ 154.047 SUBDIVISION IMPROVEMENT BONDS.
   (A)   Subdivision improvement bonds required prior to recording a final
plat. The owner shall execute a performance bond in favor of the village which
guarantees that all subdivision improvements required by these regulations to
be built by owner shall be constructed and maintained as required in these
regulations. The owner shall use the performance bond form approved by the
Village Attorney and contained in these regulations. SUBDIVISION IMPROVEMENT is
any and all improvements required to be constructed by these regulations or
other village ordinance or as a condition of final plat approval of the
subdivision.
   (B)   The subdivider shall also provide the subdivision guarantee (surety)
as specified herein. The form of the guarantee shall be as set forth in an
administrative rule or as approved by the Village Attorney. Should the
developer fail to perform the developer’s obligation to construct and maintain
public improvements as required by this chapter, the village may liquidate any
performance security in the village’s possession and use the proceeds to
construct or maintain the improvements in whole or in part as the village in
its sole discretion deems appropriate.
   (C)   Bond amounts.
      (1)   The amount of the subdivision improvement performance bond shall be
115% of the estimated cost of construction of all subdivision improvements. The
cost estimate shall be prepared by the subdivider’s engineer and must be
approved by the Village Engineer.
      (2)   The amount of the performance guarantee (surety) shall be based on
the estimated value of the remaining improvements to be constructed at the time
of recording of the subdivision final plat, assuring the village adequate
coverage to secure the satisfactory construction, installation, payment of
contractors, and dedication of the uncompleted portions of the required
improvements. The Village Attorney shall approve the performance guarantee only
after a recommendation of approval of the amount of the guarantee is received
from the Village Engineer.
   (D)   Performance guarantee and surety. The performance guarantee (surety)
shall be in a form as set forth via Administrative Rule and as approved by the
Village Attorney. The surety shall be one of the following:
      (1)   Corporate surety bond as approved by Village Attorney.
      (2)   Certificate of deposit as approved by Village Attorney.
      (3)   Cash.
      (4)   Cashier’s check.
      (5)   Irrevocable letter of credit as approved by Village Attorney.
   (E)   Surety amounts. The amount of the performance guarantee shall be 115%
of the estimated value of the cost of the proposed public and quasi-public
improvements if construction work has not commenced. If construction of the
improvements was commenced subsequent to approval of the subdivision, but prior
to the recording of the subdivision documents, the amount of the surety shall
be as follows:
      (1)   If the improvements are 1% to 75% completed, 150% of the estimated
cost of completing the remaining improvements, but in no case shall the surety
be less than 20% of the cost of all of the public and quasi-public
improvements.
      (2)   If the improvements are more than 75% completed, 200% of the
estimated cost of completing the remaining improvements, but in no case shall
be surety be less than 20% of the cost of all of the public and quasi-public
improvements.
   (F)   Surety reductions. The amount of the subdivision performance guarantee
may be reduced once prior to conditional acceptance of all improvements. Upon
substantial completion of major segments of public improvements with
appropriate documentation submitted by the developer’s engineer, and after
initial tentative acceptance of the completed improvements by the Village
Engineer, the amount of the performance guarantee may be reduced to reflect the
segments completed, but in no case shall the remaining surety be less than 20%
of the cost of completing the entire improvements, all upon approval by the
Village Attorney and the Village Engineer. Evidence of payment of contractors,
subcontractors, and material suppliers shall be provided prior to any reduction
in the amount of the surety.
   (G)   Surety amount upon conditional acceptance. Upon conditional acceptance
of all improvements, the owner may request a reduction in the amount of the
surety to 20% of the estimated cost of construction of all the subdivision
improvements.
   (H)   Final release of subdivision improvement performance bond and security
upon acceptance of improvements. Following the one year warranty period and
upon satisfactory completion of all maintenance work to correct defects on
subdivision improvements required by these regulations, upon request of the
owner, the Village Attorney upon direction from the Village Administrator shall
release the subdivision improvement performance bond and its security in its
entirety. The release of any or all of the bond and its security shall be in
writing on forms approved by the Village Attorney.
   (I)   Performance by the village of owner’s obligations. Should the owner
fail to perform the owner’s obligation to construct and correct defects in
public improvements as required by these regulations or fail to pay
contractors, the village may liquidate any performance security in the
village’s possession and use the proceeds to construct or correct the
improvements in whole or in part as the village in its sole discretion deems
appropriate.
   (J)   Owner to pay village’s actual costs of construction or remedying any
defect.
      (1)   Owner to pay all costs if defective. Notwithstanding the amount of
the subdivision improvement performance bond or surety, the owner of the
subdivision shall pay all costs the village actually incurs in design and
construction of improvements or correcting defects in any improvements the
owner is required to install and maintain pursuant to this chapter but which
the owner fails to design, construct or maintain free from defects in
accordance with this chapter. If the amount of money received by the village
from the subdivision improvements performance bond and its security is
insufficient to pay all such costs, the owner shall reimburse the village for
the remainder within 28 days of the village sending the owner a bill for the
balance due.
      (2)   Attorney fees to be paid. Should the village be required to
institute proceedings in court in order to collect any sum due under this
section or to enforce the provisions of the owner’s subdivision improvement
performance bond or to collect on the security pledged in support of said bond,
the village shall be entitled to collect reasonable attorney’s fees that it
incurs from the subdivider.
(Ord. 15-12-01, passed 12-15-2015)
§ 154.048 MINOR AND RURAL RESIDENTIAL SUBDIVISIONS.
   (A)   Purpose. The rural residential and minor subdivision review and
approval process is intended to expedite and to minimize public and private
costs for the review of subdivisions which have little or no required public
improvements, which have little or no existing or future public improvements,
which will not negatively impact surrounding property in a manner significantly
different than if the property had not been subdivided; and thus which do not
require the Plan and Zoning Commission and the Board of Trustees to make policy
decisions.
   (B)   Eligibly criteria minor subdivision. A minor subdivision is a
subdivision of land into four or fewer lots which meets the following
eligibility criteria:
      (1)   Does not require, under these subdivision regulations, the design
or construction of any major public or quasi-public improvements, other than
utility service connections and on-site stormwater drainage and detention;
provided that if all required public improvements are in existence but do not
meet current design standards, the Administrative Review Committee may at their
option, approve a waiver or deferral of the design standards; and further
provided that if public sanitary sewers or water supply are located more than
500 feet away from the proposed subdivision or are located in an area where
extension of the water or sanitary sewer systems is not practical/ feasible,
the Administrative Review Committee may, at their option, approve a waiver or
deferral of the requirement for extension of public sanitary sewers and public
water supply mains to serve the minor subdivision; and,
      (2)   Does not contain any major public stormwater drainage facilities,
provided however that private stormwater drainage and detention facilities
shall be provided via the provisions of the village stormwater management
ordinance.
      (3)   Is in conformity with the village Comprehensive Plan, and Zoning
Ordinance of the village or County of Champaign, whichever is applicable; and
      (4)   Is otherwise in conformity with all applicable laws and
regulations, unless previously waived by the entity with jurisdiction; and
      (5)   Is located within the village or is otherwise the subject of an
annexation agreement or annexation covenant which requires and sets forth the
condition of its future annexation to the village; and
      (6)   Contains lots all of which front on an existing street or roadway,
and not involving extension of any new street, or roadway.
   (C)   Eligibility criteria rural residential subdivision. A rural
residential subdivision is a minor subdivision of land into four or fewer
residential lots which meets the following additional eligibility criteria:
      (1)   Are located more than 500 feet from the nearest sanitary sewers
and/or public water mains.
      (2)   The parent parcel is located more than 500 feet outside of the
village but is the subject of an annexation agreement or annexation covenant
which requires and sets forth the condition of its future annexation to the
village; and
      (3)   Contains lots all of which are intended for single family
residential use and a remainder parent parcel that is agriculturally
productive.
   (D)   Application for minor or rural residential subdivision approval. The
owner shall submit an application for minor or rural residential subdivision
approval to the Village Planner. The application shall be accompanied by all
applicable supporting documents including:
      (1)   The original of a final plat which conforms to the normal final
plat requirements set for in §
154.039 and four full size copies, one 11 inch by 17 inch size copy, and one
pdf electronic copy of the final plat.
      (2)   The original notarized signed owner’s certificate which shall
include any and all covenants affecting the subdivision in the form generally
set forth in §
154.039.
      (3)   The original signed and sealed County Clerk’s certificate that
taxes are paid in accordance with statutory requirements.
      (4)   The original signed and sealed Village Treasurer’s certificate that
village fees are paid in accordance with statutory requirements.
      (5)   The original signed school district statement.
      (6)   The surveyor’s statement to the Recorder of Deeds designating the
Village of Mahomet to record the subdivision documents.
      (7)   A drainage statement signed by the owner and the owner’s engineer
in the form prescribed in §
154.038(J). A complete subsidiary drainage plat will be required. However, the
contour interval may be increased to two feet.
      (8)   A stormwater management plan shall be provided which complies with
the provisions of the village stormwater management ordinance.
      (9)   Evidence indicating that one copy of the final plat has been mailed
to each of the utility companies, and all public or quasi-public agencies
affected by the proposed subdivision. The mailing documents must indicate that
written comments be submitted to the village not later than 21 days thereafter,
and that no comment in the time specified shall be deemed no adverse comment.
      (10)   Four copies of a sketch drawing depicting the location of any
existing buildings, structures or man-made features on the proposed minor
subdivision at a scale not less than one inch equals 100 feet. The sketch
drawing shall be of sufficient detail to verify compliance with applicable
zoning requirements. Lettering shall be not smaller than one-twelfth of an inch
in height, and the drawing shall be readily legible without magnification. The
Subsidiary Drainage Plat may also serve as the site sketch.
      (11)   List of waivers or deferrals requested, if any, along with a
justification for the requests.
      (12)   Approval by any applicable outside agency as set forth in
administrative rules.
      (13)   An application fee in the amount as established from time to time
by resolution of the Board of Trustees.
      (14)   Any other documentation as set forth in §
154.038 that would be applicable to this site.
   (E)   Approval procedure. All required documents must be submitted to the
Village Planner who will distribute the documents to the Administrative Review
Committee. The review and approval decision shall be completed no later than 25
calendar days after submission of a complete application in full satisfaction
of the provisions of division (D) of this section. Unanimous approval must be
given by the Administrative Review Committee. Each member of the Administrative
Review Committee shall sign the plat indicating approval. Failure of any of
these signatures to appear on the face of the plat shall constitute plat
denial. Approval must include affirmative findings that:
      (1)   All major public improvements, with the exception of utility
service connections, exist at the subdivision site, or sufficient evidence has
been presented to grant a waiver, or deferral or required construction or
upgrade of existing or proposed public improvements to serve the site.
      (2)   The proposed development, will not:
         (a)   Impede the future use of the remainder of the property under the
same ownership; or
         (b)   Make any existing or proposed lot or structure non-conforming,
conforming; or
         (c)   Impede access to any remainder or adjoining land; or
         (d)   Conflict with the village Comprehensive Plan; or
         (e)   Violate the village flood hazard area ordinance or the Champaign
County Special Flood Hazard Area Ordinance; or
         (f)   Violate the village zoning ordinance or the Champaign County
Zoning Ordinance, whichever is applicable.
      (3)   All required documents, fees and data have been submitted and are
in proper form and of correct content.
      (4)   A stormwater management plan has been submitted which is in
compliance with the village stormwater management ordinance.
      (5)   All statutorily required approvals from other governmental agencies
have been received, including approval by the Illinois Department of
Transportation if the subdivision is located adjacent to a state maintained
highway.
      (6)   The proposed subdivision meets the criteria established for
designation as a “minor” or “rural residential” subdivision, including
agreement to annex to the village at such time as the property becomes
contiguous to the corporate limits.
      (7)   The subdivider has paid all applicable infrastructure development
fees (if any).
   (F)   Infrastructure development fees.
      (1)   Infrastructure development fees are hereby established in lieu of
the subdivider making roadway improvements, public sanitary sewer improvements,
sidewalk improvements, or public water main improvements. The amount of
infrastructure development fees shall be as established from time to time by
resolution of the Board of Trustees.
      (2)   Fees collected by the village in lieu of construction of public
infrastructure at the time of development shall be placed in an interest
bearing account. Interest earned on such funds shall accrue to the fund. The
funds collected shall only be used to pay for the construction of public
infrastructure at any other locations where fees in lieu of public
infrastructure construction were collected in the past. Fee in lieu of
construction payments shall be made to the village prior to the final plat
being recorded.
   (G)   Notification of applicant. The Administrative Review Committee shall
notify the applicant in writing of the outcome of the review, and furnish the
reasons or evidence for denial or approval of the subdivision to the applicant
and to the Village Board of Trustees.
   (H)   Limitation on minor or rural residential subdivision plat approval.
After approval of the final plat for a minor or rural residential subdivision,
the final plat may be recorded by the subdivider with the Recorder of Deeds,
Champaign County, Illinois within 180 days of the date of approval; otherwise
the subdivision approval shall become void.
   (I)   Sidewalk/pathway waiver.
      (1)   If sidewalks/pathways do not exist within or adjacent to the
proposed minor or rural residential subdivision as required by these
regulations, an administrative waiver from immediate sidewalk/pathway
construction may be requested. The decision to grant the sidewalk/pathway
waiver shall be made by the Administrative Review Committee based on the
following criteria:
         (a)   Lack of sidewalks/pathways in the immediate vicinity;
         (b)   The minor subdivision is located on a street which is in need of
reconstruction;
         (c)   Unique site conditions, such as uneven topography, vegetation,
and the like, make immediate sidewalk construction not feasible;
      (2)   If granted, the sidewalk/pathway waiver within a minor or rural
residential subdivision shall be conditioned upon the owner’s recording a
covenant, approved by the Village Attorney, that states any current or future
owners of the property will not object to any special assessment for sidewalk/
pathway construction, if deemed necessary by the village in the future.
   (J)   Sanitary sewer and water main extensions.
      (1)   If sanitary sewers and public water mains do not exist within 1,000
feet of a rural residential subdivision, the requirement for extension of
sanitary sewers or water mains shall be waived. However, the extension waiver
shall be conditioned upon the owners recording a subdivision covenant, approved
by the Village Attorney, that states that any current or future owners of the
property will not object to any special assessment for sanitary sewer or water
main construction, if deemed necessary by the village in the future.
Alternatively, an infrastructure development fee as established by resolution
of the Board of Trustees may be paid in lieu of a commitment for future
construction.
      (2)   If sanitary sewers and/or public water mains exist within 500 feet
of a rural residential subdivision the Village Administrative Review Committee
shall deny the application for approval of a rural residential subdivision, and
shall require review and approval of the subdivision as a major subdivision.
   (K)   Adjacent substandard roadway improvements. Any applicant developing a
minor or rural residential subdivision bordering one (1) or more roadways or
street pavements is obligated to upgrade and improve the street pavement to
bring it to the minimum standards set forth elsewhere in this chapter.
Developer may, in lieu of construction of isolated street pavement
construction, contribute the equivalent cost via payment of the established
infrastructure development fee.
   (L)   Restriction on frequency of minor subdivision approval. The same
property may not be subdivided by use of the minor subdivision approval process
more frequently than once in any five year period.
   (M)   Appeals of minor and rural residential subdivision decisions. The
applicant may appeal the decision of the Administrative Review Committee to
deny a proposed minor or rural residential subdivision plat to the Village Plan
and Zoning Commission within ten days of the Administrative Review Committee’s
written notification of their decision to deny. Such request for appeal shall
be made in writing to the Village Planner. Following the written request for
appeal, the Village Planner shall schedule the appeal request before the Plan
and Zoning Commission at its next regularly scheduled meeting. The Plan and
Zoning Commission shall recommend to approve or deny the plat, in accordance
with the requirements of these regulations, and shall forward their
recommendation to the Village Board of Trustees for consideration at their next
regularly scheduled meeting. The Board of Trustees shall approve or deny the
plat in accordance with the requirements for a final plat, as set forth
elsewhere in these regulations.
   (N)   Certificate on final plat. The following certificate shall appear on
the final plat:
APPROVED:
APPROVAL OF THIS MINOR SUBDIVISION FINAL PLAT IS HEREBY GRANTED UNDER THE
AUTHORITY OF THE PRESIDENT AND BOARD OF TRUSTEES OF THE VILLAGE OF MAHOMET.
THIS PLAT SHALL BE RECORDED WITH THE RECORDER OF DEEDS OF CHAMPAIGN COUNTY,
ILLINOIS, WITHIN ONE
HUNDRED AND EIGHTY (180) DAYS OF THIS DATE, OTHERWISE THIS PLAT SHALL BECOME
VOID.
                                                              _______
PRESIDENT, BOARD OF TRUSTEES   DATE
                                                              _______
VILLAGE ADMINISTRATOR      DATE
                                                              _______
VILLAGE PLANNER         DATE
                                                              _______
VILLAGE ENGINEER         DATE
(Ord. 15-12-01, passed 12-15-2015)
§ 154.049 CERTIFICATE OF EXEMPTION.
   (A)   Purpose. The certificate of exemption is intended to allow minor
conveyances of property between contiguous land owners through an
administrative review process. This is an administrative procedure; that does
not require review by the Plan and Zoning Commission or Village Board of
Trustees. The proposed exemption is sent for outside agency review, and then it
is administratively approved by village staff.
   (B)   When certificate of exemption may apply. The owner of subdivided land
may apply for a certificate of exemption if:
      (1)   Only two parcels or lots are involved in the transaction;
      (2)   Both resultant parcel(s) or lot(s) must comply with applicable
zoning ordinance requirements;
      (3)   The total number of resulting parcels or lots is not increased from
the number existing prior to the subdivision; and
      (4)   The land division is exempt from the plat requirements of the Plat
Act, ILCS Ch. 765, Act 205, §§ 0.01 et seq.
   (C)   Form of application and required documents. The owner shall submit an
application for a certificate of exemption from the subdivision review process
to the Village Planner. A completed application should include the following
items:
      (1)   Legal description(s) of the proposed lots after the subdivision.
      (2)   Legal description(s) of the existing lots before the subdivision.
      (3)   The current permanent index numbers assigned by the County Assessor
to the existing lot(s).
      (4)   Names and addresses of the property owners (grantor and grantee).
      (5)   One copy of all supporting materials.
      (6)   An application fee as set from time to time by resolution of the
Board of Trustees of Mahomet.
      (7)   Survey plat. A plat of survey prepared by a licensed professional
land surveyor showing the existing and proposed lots. Four full size (22 inch
by 34 inch) copies, one half size (11 inch by 17 inch) copy and one pdf
electronic copy of the proposed plat of survey shall be submitted for review.
The plat shall show:
         (a)   The length of all boundary lines of all adjacent streets, lots,
grounds, easements, rights-of-way and information sufficient to derive the
length of these lines. All dimensions shall be shown to hundredths of a foot,
except in the case of riparian boundaries, which may be described to the
nearest foot. A written legal description of the existing tracts and
identification of the proposed parcel shall be necessary in order for a legal
transaction to take place for the land being conveyed. Parcels shall be
numbered sequentially.
         (b)   The width of all rights-of-way and easements adjacent to,
impacting or serving the tract shall be indicated.
         (c)   The right-of-way of the adjacent roadways shall be indicated.
         (d)   Drawn in ink on 20 pound bond or better paper not larger than 22
inches by 34 inches.
         (e)   The location of the site by distance and bearings from
astronomical or assumed north and angles with reference to corners established
in the United States Public Land Survey.
         (f)   The location of the site indicated by quarter section, township,
range, meridian, county, and state.
         (g)   The description and location of all subdivision and public land
survey system survey monuments.
         (h)   Drawn to scale with north arrow and scale bar; with all capital
lettering not less than one-tenth inch in size.
         (i)   The location of existing buildings.
      (8)   Proposed deeds.
      (9)   Utility approval. All utility companies and public entities with
roads, sewers, drainage facilities or easements within or adjacent to the
proposed area to be platted must approve the configuration of the proposed
subdivision and evidence of their approval must be submitted with the
application for a certificate of exemption.
      (10)   Other such information as the Village Planner may request.
   (D)   Review process.
      (1)   Village staff shall review the application for completeness and
accuracy within approximately ten business days. Any issues or concerns shall
be identified and communicated to the applicant(s) by village staff.
      (2)   By definition, a property intended to receive a certificate of
exemption shall comply with all applicable village zoning ordinance
requirements, unless a variance has been previously granted by the Village of
Mahomet Zoning Board of Appeals.
   (E)   Approval. The Village Planner will approve the certificate of
exemption within approximately ten working days of receipt of a complete
application, documents and subdivision fee. If it is not approved in this time
period, unless the applicant requests that action be delayed, the certificate
of exemption shall be deemed to be disapproved. If not approved, the Village
Planner shall notify the owner in writing within seven days of denial.
   (F)   Issuance of certificate. When the Village Planner finds the
certificate of exemption meets the criteria for approval, then the Village
Administrator and President of the Board of Trustees shall approve the
certificate of exemption on behalf of the village. Their signatures on the
certificate of exemption shall be evidence of its approval.
   (G)   Time limitation. If the certificate of exemption has not been recorded
with the Champaign County Recorder’s Office within 90 days of approval, it
shall be null and void.
   (H)   Restriction on recording. The certificate of exemption shall not be
recorded except contemporaneously with the plat of survey of the properties and
with the deeds indicating the transfer of the parts of the existing lot(s) as
approved by the village.
   (I)   Certificate of approval. A certificate of approval, in a form as set
forth by administrative rule, shall be recorded contemporaneously with the plat
of survey.
(Ord. 15-12-01, passed 12-15-2015)
§ 154.050 AGRICULTURAL SUBDIVISION.
   (A)   Purpose. The agricultural subdivision review and approval process is
intended to expedite and to minimize public and private costs for the review of
subdivisions which have no required public improvements, which have little or
no existing public improvements, which will not negatively impact surrounding
property in a manner significantly different that if the property had not been
subdivided, which are used exclusively for agricultural purposes only, and thus
which do not require the Plan and Zoning Commission and the Board of Trustees
to make policy decisions.
   (B)   Introduction. The agricultural subdivision is used when large parcels
of land are being conveyed in rural areas for agricultural uses. This is an
administrative procedure; it does not require review by the Plan and Zoning
Commission or Village Board of Trustees. The proposed agricultural subdivision
is sent for outside agency review, and it is administratively approved.
   (C)   Eligibility. In agricultural subdivisions all proposed parcels shall
meet the following requirements:
      (1)   All parcels shall be only in agricultural uses, including pasture,
woodland, and farmstead and shall be accordingly zoned.
      (2)   Non-farmstead parcels shall be not less than 500 feet in width.
      (3)   Non-farmstead parcels shall not be less than 20 acres in area.
      (4)   Farmstead parcels shall be not less than ten acres in area and not
less than 300 feet in width.
      (5)   No more than six parcels are created.
      (6)   Parcels must have frontage on a public roadway. Parcels whose only
access to a public street is via an easement shall not be allowed.
   (D)   Form of application and required documents. The owner shall submit an
application for a agricultural subdivision to the Village Planner on forms
provided by the village. A completed application should include the following
items:
      (1)   Names, signatures and addresses of the property owner(s), developer
or subdivider, engineer and/or land surveyor, and developer’s attorney.
      (2)   Four full size, one 11 inch by 17 inch Plat, and one pdf electronic
copy of the Plat of Survey prepared by an Illinois Licensed Land Surveyor. The
plat shall show:
         (a)   The length of all boundary lines of all adjacent streets, lots,
grounds, easements, rights-of-way and information sufficient to derive the
length of these lines. All dimensions shall be shown to hundredths of a foot,
except in the case of riparian boundaries, which may be described to the
nearest foot. A metes and bounds written description of the existing tracts and
identification of the proposed parcels shall be necessary in order for a legal
transaction to take place for the land being conveyed. Parcels shall be
numbered sequentially.
         (b)   The width of all rights-of-way and easements adjacent to,
impacting or serving the tract shall be indicated.
         (c)   The right-of-way of the adjacent township roadways shall be
indicated. The minimum right-of-way width shall be 50 feet (25 foot half
width).
         (d)   Drawn in ink on a 20 pound bond paper or better not larger than
22 inches by 34 inches.
         (e)   Provide a written legal description of the exterior boundaries
of the land as surveyed and divided.
         (f)   The location of the site by distance and bearings from
astronomical or assumed north and angles with reference to corners established
in the United States Public Land Survey.
         (g)   The location of the site indicated by quarter section, township,
range, meridian, county, and state.
         (h)   The description and location of all subdivision and public land
survey system survey monuments.
         (i)   Drawn to scale with north arrow and scale bar, with all capital
lettering not less than one-tenth inch in size.
      (3)   An application fee in the amount established from time to time by
resolution of the Board of Trustees.
      (4)   An electronic pdf copy of the plat and all supporting materials.
      (5)   One copy of all supporting materials.
      (6)   The original notarized signed owner’s certificate which shall
include any and all required covenants and public street right-of-way
dedications affecting the subdivision in the form set forth from time to time
via administrative rule.
      (7)   A drainage statement signed by the owner and the owner’s engineer
in the form prescribed in an administrative rule. A complete subsidiary
drainage plat will not be required.
      (8)   Evidence indicating that one copy of the plat of survey has been
mailed to each of the utility companies, and all public or quasi-public
agencies affected by the proposed subdivision. The mailing documents must
indicate that written comments be submitted to the village not later than 21
days thereafter, and that no comment in the time specified shall be deemed no
adverse comment.
   (E)   Approval procedure. All required documents must be submitted to the
Village Planner who will distribute the documents to the Administrative Review
Committee. The review and approval decision shall be completed no later than 14
calendar days after submission of a complete application in full satisfaction
of the provisions of these regulations. Unanimous approval must be given by the
Administrative Review Committee. Each member of the Administrative Review
Committee shall sign the certificate of approval. Failure of any of these
signatures to appear of the face of the certificate shall constitute denial of
the application. Approval must include affirmative findings that the proposed
subdivision is eligible for approval as an agricultural subdivision. If not
approved, the Village Planner shall notify the owner in writing within seven
days of denial.
   (F)   Limitation on agricultural subdivision approval. After approval of the
documents for a agricultural subdivision, the plat may be recorded by the
subdivider with the Recorder of Deeds, Champaign County, Illinois, within 90
days of the date of approval, otherwise the subdivision approval shall become
null and void.
   (G)   Restriction on recording. The agricultural subdivision plat of survey
shall not be recorded except contemporaneously with the owner’s certificate and
other documents associated with the subdivision.
   (H)   Appeals of agricultural subdivision decisions. The applicant may
appeal the decision of the Administrative Review Committee to deny approval of
a proposed agricultural subdivision plat to the Village Plan and Zoning
Commission within ten days of the Administrative Review Committee’s written
notification of their decision to deny. Such request for appeal shall be made
in writing to the Village Planner. Following the written request for appeal,
the Village Planner shall schedule the appeal request before the Plan and
Zoning Commission at its next regularly scheduled meeting. The Plan and
Commission shall recommend to approve or deny the plat, in accordance with the
requirements of this ordinance, and shall forward their recommendations to the
Village Board of Trustees for consideration at their next regularly scheduled
meeting. The Board of Trustees shall approve or deny the subdivision in
accordance with the requirements for an agricultural subdivision, as set forth
elsewhere in this chapter.
   (I)   Certificate of approval. A certificate of approval, in a form as set
forth by administrative rule, shall be recorded contemporaneously with the plat
of survey.
(Ord. 15-12-01, passed 12-15-2015)
§ 154.051 RE-SUBDIVIDING AND REPLATTING RECORDED LOTS AND FOR VACATION OF
PLATS.
   All regulations, procedures and standards made applicable herein to original
subdividing shall also apply to the re-subdividing and replatting of a plat or
parts thereof, as provided by these regulations.
   (A)   Procedure for re-subdivision. For any change of an approved or
recorded subdivision plat, if the change affects any street layout shown on the
Plat, or area reserved thereon for public use, or if it affects any map or plan
legally reached prior to the adoption of any regulations controlling
subdivision, such parcel shall be approved by the Plan and Zoning Commission
and Village Board of Trustees by the same procedure, rules and regulations as
for review and approval of a subdivision, or if the subdivision is classified
as a minor subdivision, under the procedures as set forth for review and
approval of a minor subdivision or if the subdivision meets the criteria for a
certificate of exception, such regulations and procedures shall apply.
   (B)   Procedure for subdivisions where future re-subdivision is indicated.
Whenever a parcel of land is subdivided and the subdivision plat shows one or
more lots containing more than one acre of land and there are indications that
the lots will eventually be re-subdivided into smaller building sites, the Plan
and Zoning Commission and Village Board of Trustees may require that such
parcel of land allow for the future opening of streets and the ultimate
extension of adjacent streets. Easements providing for the future opening and
extension of such streets may be made a requirement of the plat.
   (C)   Vacation of plats.
      (1)   Any plat or any part of any plat may be vacated by the owner of the
premises, at any time before the sale of any lot therein, by written
instrument, to which a copy of such plat shall be attached, declaring the same
to be vacated.
      (2)   Such an instrument shall be approved by the Board of Trustees in a
like manner as plats of subdivisions. The governing body may reject any such
instrument which abridges or destroys any public rights in any of its public
uses, improvements, streets or alleys.
      (3)   Such an instrument shall be executed, acknowledged or approved, and
recorded and filed, in like manner as plats of subdivision; and being duly
recorded or filed shall operate to destroy the force and effect of the
recording of the plat so vacated, and to divest all public rights in the
streets, alley, and public grounds, and all dedications laid out or described
in such plat.
      (4)   When lots have been sold, the plat may be vacated in the manner
herein provided the vacation is approved by all the owners of lots in the plat
joining in the execution of such in writing.
(Ord. 15-12-01, passed 12-15-2015)
§ 154.052 PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENTS.
   (A)   Planned unit developments shall follow all applicable procedures of a
regular subdivision.
      (1)   Planned unit developments within the village shall follow all
applicable procedures, standards, and requirements for the subdivision of land
as set forth in this chapter, and shall comply with the regulations concerning
large scale developments, as set forth in the village zoning ordinance.
      (2)   Before any person may undertake any construction, alteration or
erection of any civil engineering facilities, infrastructure or improvements as
part of a planned unit development within the village’s one and one-half mile
extra-territorial area, of which the County of Champaign must give zoning
approval, that person shall first obtain approval of the village as to the
matters set forth in this chapter.
   (B)   Application requirements for planned unit development within the
village extra-territorial region.
      (1)   The developer shall submit four copies of the planned unit
development plan that the applicant has filed with the County of Champaign
accompanied by an application fee as determined from time to time by resolution
of the Village Board of Trustees.
      (2)   The development plan must include all of the following information:
         (a)   Name, location of address, owner and designer of the proposed
development in the form of drawings or written statements; and
         (b)   A legal description of the site proposed for development; and
         (c)   A general area plan drawing reflecting the intended use, future
public streets and private drive locations, and adjacent areas when the
proposed planned unit development is intend to represent a single phase of a
longer range development; and
         (d)   Location of all property lines, existing streets, easements,
utilities, and any other significant physical features; and
         (e)   Date, north arrow, and graphic scale (note less than one inch
equal 100 feet) all on drawings submitted; and
         (f)   All drawings shall be submitted on sheets no larger than 33
inches by 51 inches, with lettering that is in all capitals of not less than
one-tenth of an inch in height. All drawings shall be readily legible without
magnification.
         (g)   Present and proposed zoning (if applicable); and
         (h)   Indication and location of existing conditions on the tract
including:
            1.   Contour lines at a minimum of one foot intervals;
            2.    Watercourses and existing drainage facilities;
            3.   Wooded areas and isolated trees of 6 inches or more in
diameter;
            4.   Existing structures with an indication of those that will be
removed and those that will be retained as a part of the development; and
         (i)   Indication of the area surrounding the tract with respect to
land use, peculiar physical conditions, public facilities and existing zoning;
and
         (j)   A site plan indicating, among other things, the general location
of the following:
            1.   All buildings, structures and other improvements;
            2.   Common open spaces;
            3.   Off-street parking facilities and number of spaces to be
provided;
            4.   Sidewalks;
            5.   Illuminated areas;
            6.   Use of open spaces being provided;
            7.   Screening or buffering of the tract perimeters;
            8.   Indication as to which streets will be public and which drives
will be private;
            9.   All utilities including storm drainage, sanitary sewers, and
water service;
            10.   All intended easements.
            11.   Such other documents explaining unusual circumstances as the
Plan and Zoning Commission may require; and
         (k)   Quantitative data indicating the following:
            1.   Total number of dwelling units;
            2.   Proposed lot coverage of buildings and structures (percent of
total);
            3.    Approximate gross and net residential densities (excluding
all streets and roadways);
            4.   Such other calculations as the Plan and Zoning Commission may
require including, but not limited to information relating to traffic
generation impact and stormwater run-off; and
         (l)   A development schedule indicating the following:
            1.   The approximate date when construction of the project can be
expected to begin;
            2.   The stages in which the project will be built and the
approximate dates when construction of each stage can be expected to begin;
            3.   The approximate dates when the development of each of the
stages in the development will be completed;
            4.   The area and location of common open space that will be
provided at each stage; and
         (m)   A statement as to the applicant’s intention of selling or
leasing all or a portion of the planned unit development after the project is
developed. If applicable, the conditions of sale and maintenance of such
developed properties shall be stipulated. Any covenants, deed restrictions or
other similar agreements between the applicant and future owners shall be
presented.
   (C)   Public hearing.
      (1)   Upon receipt of the planned unit development application, the
Village Planner shall set a public hearing date in accordance with the Plan and
Zoning Commission’s usual procedures for considering a conditional use. Within
30 days after the public hearing the Plan and Zoning Commission shall recommend
approval or disapproval or, at the request of the developer, continued
discussion pertinent to the development plan. The Plan and Zoning Commission
shall consider the proposed planned unit development in accordance with:
         (a)   The definition and goals as indicated herein.
         (b)   The minimum requirements as set forth herein.
         (c)   Compliance with the Mahomet Comprehensive Plan, including the
Land Use Plan and Major Street Plan.
      (2)   The Plan and Zoning Commission shall send its recommendation to the
Board of Trustees. Approval of the planned unit development by the Board of
Trustees shall constitute approval of matters governed by this subchapter.
   (D)   Standards and requirements. Unless the Plan and Zoning Commission
expressly recommends waivers thereof, the following shall be the standards for
a planned unit development reviewed under this subchapter:
      (1)   Fire and emergency access. Provisions for fire and emergency access
shall be subject to applicable codes and be reviewed and commented on by the
fire chief; and
      (2)   Street construction. Street construction, whether such be public or
private streets, shall be made in conformance with the chapter, minimum
pavement widths for private drives shall be 12 feet for the first lane of
traffic in each direction and 12 feet for each additional lane; and
      (3)   Exterior lighting facilities. Exterior lighting facilities within
the developed site shall be of such quality to promote safety and convenience,
and shall conform to the national electrical code and the requirements of this
chapter; and
      (4)   Sanitary sewers. Sanitary sewers shall conform to the Standard
Specifications for Water and Sewer Main Construction in Illinois and the
requirements of this chapter; and
      (5)   Storm drainage. Storm drainage shall be of urban design with storm
sewers and street inlets; shall conform to the Standard Specifications for
Water and Sewer Main Construction in Illinois; shall conform to the village
stormwater management ordinance, as amended; and shall conform to this chapter;
and
      (6)   Water supply. Public water supply shall be provided. All water
mains shall conform to the Standard Specifications for Water and Sewer Main
Construction in Illinois, and the requirements of this chapter.
   (E)   Plans and specifications.
      (1)   The subdivider shall cause construction plans and specifications to
be prepared for all improvements required or regulated by this chapter. The
improvements shall be designed to conform to the minimum standards set forth in
this chapter and shall also conform to the minimum standards and requirements
of other local, state, and federal authorities which have jurisdiction over the
subdivision. construction plans and specifications shall be prepared under the
supervision of an engineer licensed pursuant to the laws of the State of
Illinois and shall bear the engineer’s seal and signature.
      (2)   The subdivider shall submit construction plans and specifications
to the village for review prior to the commencement of construction of any
improvements required or regulated by this chapter. Village staff shall review
construction plans and specifications for conformance to this chapter. Village
staff shall endeavor to complete review of the construction plans and
specifications within three weeks of submittal of the plans and supporting
materials.
      (3)   Construction of improvements required or regulated by this chapter
shall not commence until the Village Engineer and Board of Trustees have
approved, in writing, construction plans and specifications for the
improvements.
      (4)   The form and content of the construction plans shall be as set for
in §
154.042.
   (F)   Construction bond. All publically and privately owned public type
improvements, facilities and development required by this chapter shall be
guaranteed in a form approved by the Village Attorney, and shall be delivered
to guarantee construction of the required improvements. The form of the
performance bond and surety shall be as set for in §
154.047. Any such guarantee shall be at a rate of 115% of the estimated cost of
construction as determined by the Village Engineer. Any guarantee shall only be
released upon the certification by the developer’s engineer (with the approval
of the Village Engineer) that the public type improvements and facilities have
been constructed in compliance with the construction plans and specification
for such public type facilities and improvements.
   (G)   Maintenance bond. After inspection and acceptance of the facilities
and improvements, but before release of the construction bond for all of the
facilities and improvements, a deposit shall be made to the village in cash or
maintenance bond equal to 20% of the estimated cost of the public facilities
and improvements. This deposit shall be a guarantee of satisfactory performance
of the facilities constructed for and within the planned unit development and
satisfactory maintenance and operation of the publicly and privately owned
facilities necessary to the health, safety, and convenience of the tenants or
successor to the applicant.
      (1)   The surety for the publicly owned facilities shall be held by the
village for a period of 18 months after acceptance by the village of publicly
owned facilities; and
      (2)   The balance of the surety is to remain in effect as long as the
public type facilities remain in private ownership. Nothing in the above
maintenance guarantee clause should be constructed to prevent the filing of two
maintenance guarantees, one for publicly owned public facilities and one for
privately owned public facilities. After 18 months, the deposit covering the
maintenance of publicly owned public facilities shall be refunded if no defects
have developed, then the balance of such deposit shall be refunded after
reimbursement for amounts expended in correcting defective facilities. The
guarantee maintenance surety under this paragraph shall be made immediately
upon inspection and approval by the Village Engineer of the construction of all
facilities, but prior to release of the construction guarantee.
   (H)   Application fee. The submittal or re-submittal of a planned unit
development (be it within the corporate limits of the village, or within the
one and one-half mile extra-territorial jurisdictional area of the village)
shall be accompanied by an application fee made payable to the village. The
payment of this fee shall be in addition to any others fees required by this or
any other chapter. The amount of the fee may be as established from time to
time by resolution of the Village Board of Trustees.
(Ord. 15-12-01, passed 12-15-2015)
§ 154.053 MOBILE HOME PARKS.
   (A)   Mobile home parks shall follow all applicable procedures of a regular
subdivision.
      (1)   Mobile home parks within the village shall follow all applicable
procedures, standards, and requirements for the subdivision of land as set
forth in this chapter, and shall comply with the regulations concerning large
scale residential developments, as set forth in the village zoning ordinance.
      (2)   Before any person may undertake any construction, alteration or
erection of any civil engineering facilities, infrastructure or improvements as
part of a mobile home park within the village’s one and one-half mile extra-
territorial area, of which the County of Champaign must give zoning approval,
that person shall first obtain approval of the village as to the matters set
forth in this chapter.
   (B)   Application requirements for mobile home parks within the village
extra-territorial region.
      (1)   The developer shall submit four copies of the mobile home park plan
that the applicant has filed with the County of Champaign accompanied by an
application fee as determined from time to time by resolution of the Village
Board of Trustees.
      (2)   The development plan must include all of the following information:
         (a)   Name, location of address, owner and designer of the proposed
development in the form of drawings or written statements; and
         (b)   A legal description of the site proposed for development; and
         (c)   A general area plan drawing reflecting the intended use, future
public streets and private drive locations, and adjacent areas when the
proposed planned unit development is intend to represent a single phase of a
longer range development; and
         (d)   Location of all property lines, existing streets, easements,
utilities, and any other significant physical features; and
         (e)   Date, north arrow, and graphic scale (note less than one inch
equal 100 feet) all on drawings submitted; and
         (f)   All drawings shall be submitted on sheets no larger than 33
inches by 51 inches, with lettering that is in all capitals of not less than
one-tenth of an inch in height. All drawings shall be readily legible without
magnification.
         (g)   Present and proposed zoning (if applicable); and
         (h)   Indication and location of existing conditions on the tract
including:
            1.   Contour lines at a minimum of one foot intervals;
            2.    Watercourses and existing drainage facilities;
            3.   Wooded areas and isolated trees of six inches or more in
diameter;
            4.   Existing structures with an indication of those that will be
removed and those that will be retained as a part of the development; and
         (i)   Indication of the area surrounding the tract with respect to
land use, peculiar physical conditions, public facilities and existing zoning;
and
         (j)   A site plan indicating, among other things, the general location
of the following:
            1.   All buildings, structures and other improvements;
            2.   Common open spaces;
            3.   Off-street parking facilities and number of spaces to be
provided;
            4.   Sidewalks;
            5.   Illuminated areas;
            6.   Use of open spaces being provided;
            7.   Screening or buffering of the tract perimeters;
            8.   Indication as to which streets will be public and which drives
will be private;
            9.   All utilities including storm drainage, sanitary sewers, and
water service;
            10.   All intended easements.
            11.   Such other documents explaining unusual circumstances as the
Plan and Zoning Commission may require; and
         (k)   Quantitative data indicating the following:
            1.   Total number of dwelling units;
            2.   Proposed lot coverage of buildings and structures (percent of
total);
            3.    Approximate gross and net residential densities (excluding
all streets and roadways);
            4.   Such other calculations as the Plan and Zoning Commission may
require including, but not limited to information relating to traffic
generation impact and stormwater run-off; and
         (l)   A development schedule indicating the following:
            1.   The approximate date when construction of the project can be
expected to begin;
            2.   The stages in which the project will be built and the
approximate dates when construction of each stage can be expected to begin;
            3.   The approximate dates when the development of each of the
stages in the development will be completed;
            4.   The area and location of common open space that will be
provided at each stage; and
         (m)   A statement as to the applicant’s intention of selling or
leasing all or a portion of the mobile home park after the project is
developed. If applicable, the conditions of sale and maintenance of such
developed properties shall be stipulated. Any covenants, deed restrictions or
other similar agreements between the applicant and future owners shall be
presented.
   (C)   Public hearing.
      (1)   Upon receipt of the mobile home park application, the Village
Planner shall set a public hearing date in accordance with the Plan and Zoning
Commission’s usual procedures for considering a conditional use. Within 30 days
after the public hearing the Plan and Zoning Commission shall recommend
approval or disapproval or, at the request of the developer, continued
discussion pertinent to the development plan. The Plan and Zoning Commission
shall consider the proposed mobile home park in accordance with:
         (a)   The definition and goals as indicated herein.
         (b)   The minimum requirements as set forth herein.
         (c)   Compliance with the Mahomet Comprehensive Plan, including the
Land Use Plan and Major Street Plan.
      (2)   The Plan and Zoning Commission shall send its recommendation to the
Board of Trustees. Approval of the mobile home park by the Board of Trustees
shall constitute approval of matters governed by this subchapter.
   (D)   Standards and requirements. Unless the Plan and Zoning Commission
expressly recommends waivers thereof, the following shall be the standards for
a mobile home park reviewed under this subchapter:
      (1)   Fire and emergency access. Provisions for fire and emergency access
shall be subject to applicable codes and be reviewed and commented on by the
fire chief; and
      (2)   Street construction. Street construction, whether such be public or
private streets, shall be made in conformance with the chapter, minimum
pavement widths for private drives shall be 12 feet for the first lane of
traffic in each direction and 12 feet for each additional lane; and
      (3)   Exterior lighting facilities. Exterior lighting facilities within
the developed site shall be of such quality to promote safety and convenience,
and shall conform to the national electrical code and the requirements of this
chapter; and
      (4)   Sanitary sewers. Sanitary sewers shall conform to the Standard
Specifications for Water and Sewer Main Construction in Illinois and the
requirements of this chapter; and
      (5)   Storm drainage. Storm drainage shall be of urban design with storm
sewers and street inlets; shall conform to the Standard Specifications for
Water and Sewer Main Construction in Illinois; shall conform to the Village
Stormwater Management Ordinance, as amended; and shall conform to this chapter;
and
      (6)   Water supply. Public water supply shall be provided. All water
mains shall conform to the Standard Specifications for Water and Sewer Main
Construction in Illinois, and the requirements of this chapter.
   (E)   Plans and specifications.
      (1)   The subdivider shall cause construction plans and specifications to
be prepared for all improvements required or regulated by this chapter. The
improvements shall be designed to conform to the minimum standards set forth in
this chapter and shall also conform to the minimum standards and requirements
of other local, state, and federal authorities which have jurisdiction over the
subdivision. construction plans and specifications shall be prepared under the
supervision of an engineer licensed pursuant to the laws of the State of
Illinois and shall bear the engineer’s seal and signature.
      (2)   The subdivider shall submit construction plans and specifications
to the village for review prior to the commencement of construction of any
improvements required or regulated by this chapter. Village staff shall review
construction plans and specifications for conformance to this chapter. Village
staff shall endeavor to complete review of the construction plans and
specifications within three weeks of submittal of the plans and supporting
materials.
      (3)   Construction of improvements required or regulated by this chapter
shall not commence until the Village Engineer and Board of Trustees have
approved, in writing, construction plans and specifications for the
improvements.
      (4)   The form and content of the construction plans shall be as set for
in §
154.042.
   (F)   Construction bond. All publically and privately owned public type
improvements, facilities and development required by this chapter shall be
guaranteed in a form approved by the Village Attorney, and shall be delivered
to guarantee construction of the required improvements. The form of the
performance bond and surety shall be as set for in §
154.047. Any such guarantee shall be at a rate of 115% of the estimated cost of
construction as determined by the Village Engineer. Any guarantee shall only be
released upon the certification by the developer’s engineer (with the approval
of the Village Engineer) that the public type improvements and facilities have
been constructed in compliance with the construction plans and specification
for such public type facilities and improvements.
   (G)   Maintenance bond. After inspection and acceptance of the facilities
and improvements, but before release of the construction bond for all of the
facilities and improvements, a deposit shall be made to the village in cash or
maintenance bond equal to 20% of the estimated cost of the public facilities
and improvements. This deposit shall be a guarantee of satisfactory performance
of the facilities constructed for and within the planned unit development or
trailer court and satisfactory maintenance and operation of the publicly and
privately owned facilities necessary to the health, safety, and convenience of
the tenants or successor to the applicant.
      (1)   The surety for the publicly owned facilities shall be held by the
village for a period of 18 months after acceptance by the village of publicly
owned facilities; and
      (2)   The balance of the surety is to remain in effect as long as the
public type facilities remain in private ownership. Nothing in the above
maintenance guarantee clause should be constructed to prevent the filing of two
maintenance guarantees, one for publicly owned public facilities and one for
privately owned public facilities. After 18 months, the deposit covering the
maintenance of publicly owned public facilities shall be refunded if no defects
have developed, then the balance of such deposit shall be refunded after
reimbursement for amounts expended in correcting defective facilities. The
guarantee maintenance surety under this paragraph shall be made immediately
upon inspection and approval by the Village Engineer of the construction of all
facilities, but prior to release of the construction guarantee.
   (H)   Application fee. The submittal or re-submittal of a development plan
which includes a mobile home park (be it within the corporate limits of the
village, or within the one and one-half mile extraterritorial jurisdictional
area of the village, as such term is defined in the village zoning ordinance)
shall be accompanied by an application fee made payable to the village. The
payment of this fee shall be in addition to any others fees required by this or
any other chapter. The amount of the fee may be as established from time to
time by resolution of the Village Board of Trustees.
(Ord. 15-12-01, passed 12-15-2015)
§ 154.054 SUBDIVISIONS WITHIN SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD AREAS.
   (A)   All subdivision and planned unit development proposals shall be
consistent with the need to minimize flood damage by complying with the
requirements of this chapter and the village flood hazard area ordinance or the
county special flood hazard area ordinance.
   (B)   Plats or plans for new subdivisions and planned unit developments
shall display the following flood data:
      (1)   Boundary of the special flood hazard area and the boundary of the
floodway, if shown on available flood boundary, floodway map and flood
insurance rate maps.
      (2)   Easements or lands dedicated to the public for channel maintenance
purposes; and
      (3)   The base flood elevation for each building site.
   (C)   Encroachments, including fill, new construction, substantial
improvements, and other development shall be prohibited within special flood
hazard areas, unless the technical evaluation of the developer’s engineer
demonstrates that encroachments shall not result in any significant increase in
flood levels during the occurrence of the 100 year flood event.
   (D)   When a subdivision or part thereof is located in a flood-prone area as
designated by the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) for which no base
flood elevation has been provided, or is located near to a waterway with a
watershed tributary area of 640 acres or more, the subdivider shall provide, at
his or her own expense, such hydrologic and hydraulic design data and
calculations and utility and drainage plans as may be required by the village
to assure that the subdivision is consistent with the need to minimize or
eliminate flood damage, in accordance with the village flood hazard area
development ordinance or the county special flood hazard area ordinance.
   (E)   If a FEMA letter of map revision or letter of map amendment is
required, it shall be acquired prior to recording of the final plat.
   (F)   The village shall review all subdivision plats and plans to assure
that proposals are consistent with the need to minimize or eliminate flood
damage. Proposed locations of utilities such as sewer, gas, electric, and water
shall be located so as to minimize or eliminate flood damage to utilities. The
subdivider’s engineer shall show such utilities requiring special flood hazard
protection on all construction plans.
   (G)   Agricultural subdivisions shall be exempt from the requirements of the
village special flood hazard area ordinance requirements for subdivision
purposes.
(Ord. 15-12-01, passed 12-15-2015)
§ 154.055 ACCESS.
   Provisions shall be made to grant access for future development of unplatted
adjacent land at intervals of not more than one-quarter mile. This applies to
utilities as well as streets. Utilities and street stubs shall be extended to
the outer edge of the development where applicable.
(Ord. 15-12-01, passed 12-15-2015)
§ 154.056 EASEMENTS.
   (A)   Easements for public utilities shall be provided for the installation
of telephone, gas, electric, cable television and other utilities. In general,
an easement of at least ten feet in width shall be required at locations as
designated by the Village Planner, or as requested by the utility companies.
   (B)   Maintenance easements shall be provided around storm sewers, sanitary
sewers, water mains, and other similar utilities when these facilities are
located outside of the public street right-of-way. The size of the easement
shall be dictated by working needs. In general, an easement of at least 15 feet
in width shall be required.
   (C)   When a subdivision is bordered or traversed by an established stream,
established drainage way or channel, there shall be provided a storm water
easement or drainage right-of-way conforming substantially with the lines of
same, and such easement shall include an additional area of sufficient width
(20 feet minimum each side) to permit maintenance and any improvement or
reconstruction of the stream, drainage way or channel in the foreseeable
future.
(Ord. 15-12-01, passed 12-15-2015)
§ 154.057 WAIVERS AND DEFERRALS.
   (A)   Whenever the tract to be subdivided is of such unusual size or shape
or is surrounded by such development or unusual conditions that the strict
enforcement of the regulations would entail practical difficulties or
unnecessary hardships, the Village Board of Trustees by resolution, after
report by the Plan and Zoning Commission, may waive or defer them in such a way
that the subdivider is allowed to develop his or her property in a reasonable
manner, but at the same time, the public welfare and interests of the village
and county are protected and the general intent and spirit of the regulations
preserved.
   (B)   In the event it is deemed desirable to deviate from these subdivision
standards, by waiving or deferring such standard, the developer must submit, in
writing, a request to the Village Planner stating the requested waiver or
deferral, degree of deviation and the reasons why such waiver or deferral is
necessary or desirable. The waiver or deferral must be approved in writing by
the Board of Trustees prior to the final design work and shall apply to that
location and point in time only.
   (C)   Waiver not a matter of right. No waiver is available to a subdivider
as a matter of right. The burden of proving that a waiver is justified is on
the subdivider.
   (D)   Waiver requests. The subdivider shall submit all requests for waivers
in writing to the Village Planner at the time the area general plan,
preliminary plat, construction plans, or final plat is submitted. The
justification for the waiver and all facts relied upon by the subdivider shall
be submitted in writing along with the waiver request.
   (E)   Standard for waiver approval. The Plan and Zoning Commission may
consider and recommend, and the Village Board of Trustees may grant, waivers to
the provisions to these regulations. The waiver shall not be approved unless
the Village Board of Trustees finds that the waiver is justified according to
the following standards:
      (1)   There is substantial hardship in complying with these regulations
provided that the spirit and intent of this chapter shall be substantially
observed, and the public welfare and safety be assured;
      (2)   That the granting of the waiver will not be detrimental to the
public safety, health or welfare or injurious to other property located in the
vicinity of the property in question;
      (3)   The cost or difficulty of complying with the requirements of these
regulations is great compared to the gain such compliance provides to the
public health, safety, and welfare.
   (F)   Specific considerations. In deciding whether to approve a waiver from
this chapter, the Village Board of Trustees may consider, but is not limited
to, the following criteria:
      (1)   Whether the condition upon which the request for a waiver is based
is unique to the property, but not generally acceptable to other properties;
      (2)   Whether the property to be subdivided will be used only for farming
and related residential uses;
      (3)   Whether the property is a planned unit development approved under
the zoning ordinance, and the waivers are an approved part of the planned
development;
      (4)   Whether the waivers are included as part of an annexation or other
development agreement, provided that the standards for granting a waiver are
complied with;
      (5)   Whether conditions may be imposed which mitigate the harm to the
public caused by the failure to comply with these regulations.
   (G)   Conditions may be required. In approving waivers, the Village Board of
Trustees may require such conditions as will in its judgment secure
substantially the objectives of the standards or requirements of these
regulations. Conditions imposed for the purpose of mitigating the harm caused
to the public by the failure to comply with the provisions of these regulations
may include, but are not limited to the following:
      (1)   Landscaping;
      (2)   Parking and on-site traffic regulation;
      (3)   Lighting, including the requirement of yard or lot lighting to
replace street lighting;
      (4)   Traffic regulation including, but not limited to, on-street
parking, one-side street parking, and one-way streets;
      (5)   Submission of the remaining tract for preliminary plat or final
plat approval prior to any construction or development.
      (6)   Dedication of additional right-of-way for streets, highways, or
easements for utilities and public infrastructure;
      (7)   Site plan approval;
      (8)   Access regulation;
      (9)   Payment of a fee in lieu of construction.
   (H)   Execution of a covenant. Execution of a covenant providing additional
requirements and/or conditions necessary to the approval of the waiver may be a
condition of a waiver. If a covenant is required as a condition, the covenant
must be approved by the Village Attorney prior to recording.
   (I)   Administrative waivers. The Village Administrative Review Committee
may grant minor waivers of subdivision regulation requirements
administratively, without review by the Board of Trustees. Such waivers may
involve small changes to construction requirements, or document preparation
requirements that do not materially impact the suitability or function of the
subdivision improvements and which do not result in an increase in current or
future costs to be incurred by the village.
   (J)   Deferral or waiver of required improvements.
      (1)   The Board of Trustees may defer or waive at the time of
construction plans or final plat approval, subject to appropriate conditions,
the requirements for construction for any or all public improvements as, in its
judgment, are not requisite in the interests of the public health, safety, and
general welfare, or which are inappropriate because of the inadequacy or in
existence of connecting facilities. Any determination to defer or waive
construction of any public improvement must be made on the record and the
reasons for deferral or waiver also shall be expressly made on the record.
      (2)   Whenever it is deemed necessary by the Board of Trustees to defer
the construction of any public or quasi-public improvement required under these
regulations because of incompatible grades, future planning, inadequate or
nonexistent connecting facilities, or for other reasons, the subdivider shall
pay his share of the costs of the future improvements to the village prior to
the recording of the final plat.
(Ord. 15-12-01, passed 12-15-2015)
§ 154.058 ADMINISTRATIVE RULES.
   (A)   The Administrative Rules Committee shall be authorized to issue,
amend, and withdraw administrative rules which implement, interpret and clarify
the requirements of this chapter. Persons shall comply with these
administrative rules to the same extent they are required to comply with this
chapter. The administrative rules shall implement, interpret and clarify the
requirements of this chapter and shall not amend the chapter or its policies.
   (B)   At least 14 days prior to its effective date, the Administrative Rules
Committee shall send a copy of the administrative rules to the Plan and Zoning
Commission and Board of Trustees for review.
   (C)   Upon written request of any two Plan and Zoning Commissioners or Board
of Trustees members prior to the effective date of the administrative rule, the
rule shall be subject to Plan and Zoning Commission and Board of Trustees
review. After such a written request, the administrative rule shall not be
effective until considered by the Plan and Zoning Commission and acted upon by
the Board of Trustees. The administrative rule shall go into effect after such
action unless disapproved by a majority or the Board of Trustees members or
withdrawn by the Administrative Rules Committee.
   (D)   The form and legality of each administrative rule shall be approved by
the Village Attorney prior to its effective date.
   (E)   The Administrative Rules Committee shall publish all of its rules in
pamphlet form on or before the effective date of the rules.
   (F)   Prior to the effective date of an administrative rule, a copy shall be
filed with the Village Clerk and Village Administrator, and a copy shall be
sent to the Board of Trustees.
(Ord. 15-12-01, passed 12-15-2015)
§ 154.059 INFRASTRUCTURE DESIGN MANUAL.
   (A)   The Administrative Rules Committee shall prepare and adopt an
Infrastructure Design Manual which shall govern the design and construction of
public and quasi-public infrastructure within new subdivisions.
   (B)   The Infrastructure Design Manual shall include guidelines, design
requirements, procedures, specifications, and construction requirements
governing the design and construction of infrastructure. It shall also include
standard details applicable to the construction of infrastructure.
   (C)   Modifications and/or amendments to the Infrastructure Design Manual
shall be submitted to the Plan and Zoning Commission for review. If a majority
of the Plan and Zoning Commission objects to the proposed modification or
amendment, that modification or amendment shall not be implemented.
(Ord. 15-12-01, passed 12-15-2015)
§ 154.060 REIMBURSEMENTS FOR IMPROVEMENTS BENEFITTING AREAS OUTSIDE OF
SUBDIVISION PURSUANT TO ANNEXATION OR DEVELOPMENT AGREEMENT.
   (A)   Whenever an annexation agreement, development agreement or subdivision
approval requires the installation of one or more improvements, and where, in
the opinion of the village such improvements may be used by and uniquely
benefit property not in the subdivision or property not covered by the
annexation or development agreement, the village may agree to reimburse and may
reimburse the other party or parties to the agreement or subdivision approval
for a portion of the cost of such improvements from fees charged to owners of
benefitted property when and if collected from such owners.
   (B)   Any annexation agreement, development agreement or subdivision
approval, which requires, approves or agrees to the payment of the cost of one
or more improvements by assessments charged to owners of benefitted property
shall:
      (1)   Describe the benefitted property; and
      (2)   Include an estimate of the total cost of each improvement; and
      (3)   Specify the amount of proportion of the cost of such improvements
which is to be incurred for each benefitted property; and
      (4)   Provide that the village shall collect such fees charged to owners
of benefitted properties; and
      (5)   Provide for the payment to the owner or developer of the property
subject to annexation agreement or subdivision approval a reasonable amount of
interest on the amount expended by the owner or developer in completing such
improvements.
   (C)   Notice. Prior to approval of an annexation agreement, development
agreement or subdivision approval requiring owners of benefitted property to
pay a fee for improvements built pursuant to said agreement or subdivision
approval, the village shall provide the owners of the proposed benefitted
property with at least 28 days notice of the hearing on said agreement before
the Board of Trustees. This hearing may be continued from time to time without
further notice to such owners by the Board of Trustees at its sole discretion,
upon request of any property owner subject to the assessment or at the Board of
Trustees direction, to a date certain.
   (D)   Payment of assessment required. Until such time as the owner of
benefitted property has paid to the village the amount assessed to the owner’s
benefitted property as required by adopted ordinance and said agreement or
subdivision approval plus any interest accrued thereon, or such owner has
entered into a satisfactory agreement for the payment of such assessment and
any applicable interest to the village, the village shall not approve any final
plat of all or part of the owner’s benefitted property and shall not approve
any subsequent connection of improvements on the benefitted property to the
improvements which are subject to the assessment.
(Ord. 15-12-01, passed 12-15-2015)
§ 154.061 INTER-AGENCY COOPERATION.
   (A)   Some infrastructure improvements constructed under the requirements of
this chapter will be operated and maintained upon their completion by another
governmental entity (e.g., Sangamon Valley Public Water District or Mahomet
Township Road District). Where the rules and regulations of another entity
conflicts with the requirements of this chapter, the more stringent shall
apply.
   (B)   When a subdivision requires improvements which are to be operated and
maintained by another governmental entity, the village will cooperate with that
entity for review and approval of construction plans and specifications for
those improvements. The village will not release a performance bond upon
acceptance of the improvements until the other governmental entity provides
evidence that the constructed improvements are satisfactory.
(Ord. 15-12-01, passed 12-15-2015)
§ 154.062 PARKS, SCHOOL SITES AND OTHER PUBLIC AREAS.
   (A)   Where a proposed park, playground, school site or other public use
area shown in the general Comprehensive Plan for the village and adjacent
unincorporated areas is located in whole or in part in a subdivision, the
Village Plan and Zoning Commission or the Village Board of Trustees may require
the designation or reservation of such area in whole or in part within the
subdivision in those cases in which the Village Plan and Zoning Commission or
the Village Board of Trustees deem such requirements to be reasonable. However,
in no case shall the total amount of required public areas to be designated or
reserved in addition to public streets and easements exceed 5% of the total
gross acreage controlled by the owner. The acquisition of the additional area
needed for parks, playgrounds, school or other public uses other than streets
and alleys, shall be secured by the authority having jurisdiction. Arrangements
for securing said area via purchase or other means from the owner shall be made
within a period not to exceed six months from the date the plat is approved by
the Village Board of Trustees. When any private open space is to be owned in
common by multiple owners is proposed, the conditions of ownership and
maintenance shall be approved by the Village Plan and Zoning Commission and the
Village Board of Trustees.
   (B)   After the effective date of this chapter, no permanent buildings or
structures shall be erected within the extended street lines of proposed
extensions of major streets shown on the Major Street Plan adopted as part of
the Comprehensive Plan for Mahomet.
   (C)   In all subdivisions in which the overall development, as defined by
the Preliminary Plat or the area general plan (in phased subdivisions) exceeds
59 acres in area, the developer shall provide not less than 5% of the total
gross acreage of the subdivision reserved as common open space, to be utilized
for recreational or other similar purposes. Public park lands within the
subdivision shall count towards compliance with this requirement. For purposes
of compliance with this requirement each acre of land within areas designated
for use of stormwater detention/retention shall be considered as one-half acre
for purposes of compliance with these provisions, so long as those areas are in
common ownership by all the lot owners within the subdivision. Lands within
surface drainage channels do not count towards compliance with this
requirement.
(Ord. 15-12-01, passed 12-15-2015)
§ 154.063 STORMWATER FACILITY MAINTENANCE.
   (A)   Drainage facility maintenance responsibility. Prior to acceptance and
final-out of any subdivision public improvements construction work by the
village and prior to release of any subdivision bond or surety, the owner/
developer of any land intended for subdivision shall enter into a maintenance
agreement with the village. Said agreement will obligate the owner/developer of
the intended subdivision to maintain all private stormwater water drainage and
stormwater detention facilities located within the boundaries of the
development. Further said, agreement will be binding upon the successors, heirs
and assigns of the developer (so as to create joint and several liability on
all future property owners in the development) for maintenance of the drainage
facilities located within the boundaries of the development. Such maintenance
agreement shall be recorded in the Recorder’s Office of Champaign County,
Illinois.
   (B)   F orm of maintenance agreement:
      (1)   The general form of the maintenance agreement shall be as set forth
in an administrative rule.
      (2)   The maintenance agreement shall include a schedule for regular
maintenance of each aspect of the development’s stormwater drainage facility
system and shall provide to the village a perpetual easement for access above
and across the property for the purpose of inspection of the drainage facility
system. The maintenance agreement shall also stipulate that if the appropriate
personnel of the village notify the owner(s), his/her/its successors, heirs,
assigns, or the subsequent owners of property within the subdivision in writing
of maintenance problems requiring correction, the owner(s), his/her/its
successors, heirs, assigns, or the subsequent owners of property within the
subdivision shall begin such corrections within 48 hours or such other time as
is allowed by the Notice and shall not extend beyond the date for completion of
work as established by the Notice. If the corrections are not made within this
time period the village may have the necessary work completed and assess the
cost to the owner(s), his/ her/its successors, heirs, assigns, or the
subsequent owners of property within the subdivision pursuant to the
maintenance agreement.
(Ord. 15-12-01, passed 12-15-2015)
§ 154.064 TRAFFIC IMPACT ANALYSES (TIAS).
   (A)   Traffic generation. The amount of traffic to be generated by a
subdivision shall be estimated by the subdivider. Trip generation rates shall
be taken from the ITE Trip Generation Manual (most recent edition) or
alternative study information acceptable to the village.
   (B)   TIAs are required to be prepared by the developer in the following
situations:
      (1)   Developments that can be expected to generate more than 200 new
peak-hour vehicle trips on the adjacent street per ITE Trip Generation Manual.
      (2)   Any changes that will increase the site traffic generation by more
than 15% if more than 200 peak-hour trips are involved.
      (3)   When an agreement between the developer and the village requires
cost sharing contributions to major roadway improvements.
(Ord. 15-12-01, passed 12-15-2015)
§ 154.065 ELECTRONIC DRAFTING FILE STANDARDS.
   (A)   Electronic files. Electronic files are required when submitting final
copies of:
      (1)   Final plats: to minimally include a geographical information
drawing showing property and tract boundaries and adjacent right-of-way.
      (2)   Record drawings of public improvement construction plans and
specifications.
   (B)   Submittal requirements. Requirements for submittal of electronic files
shall be as set forth in administrative rules.
INFRASTRUCTURE DESIGN
§ 154.080 LOCATION, GEOMETRY AND DESIGN OF STREETS.
   (A)   General.
      (1)   The classification and location of all streets shall conform to the
Village Comprehensive Plan, including the Transportation System Master Plan,
and this section and shall be planned in relation to existing and proposed
streets, topographical conditions, public safety and convenience, and
anticipated land use.
      (2)   Each lot or parcel of ground within a new subdivision shall be
adjacent to a public street.
      (3)   The street system in each new subdivision shall continue and extend
existing, connecting streets in adjoining subdivisions, except that local
access streets shall not be required to cross arterial streets unless such
continuation and crossing is deemed necessary to promote pedestrian and/or
vehicular circulation and safety.
      (4)   The street system in each new subdivision shall be extended and
dedicated to any property adjacent to the subdivision, except in those
instances in which the adjacent property is not and cannot be subdivided in the
future.
      (5)   No private streets shall be permitted.
      (6)   When a subdivision borders on and has lots fronting on or
contiguous to a present or proposed arterial or collector street, as depicted
or described in the Comprehensive Plan and/or Transportation System Master
Plan, necessary traffic service to lots of the subdivision bordering said
street shall be provided by a marginal access street or local street, unless
otherwise approved by the village.
      (7)   Access to an arterial street from a marginal access street, local
street, or collector street shall be taken at approximately one-fourth mile
intervals, unless subdivision frontage is less than one-fourth mile, in which
case the subdivision shall have no more than one access point to the arterial
street, at a location to be approved by the Village Board of Trustees.
      (8)   No street shall be located less than 200 feet from the edge of any
parallel street, measured from the straight line portion of the right-of-way
for each street.
   (B)   Design. New streets shall be designed and constructed in accordance
with the requirements of the Infrastructure Design Manual of the Village of
Mahomet, latest edition.
(Ord. 15-12-01, passed 12-15-2015)
§ 154.081 STORM DRAINAGE SYSTEM.
   (A)   General.
      (1)   All subdivisions shall be provided with drainage facilities having
a design capacity adequate to carry off surface water falling or coming on the
streets and developed areas in a ten year return period storm event under the
projected final state of development of the entire upstream watershed.
      (2)   The minor drainage system components shall consist of storm drains,
street gutters, small open channels, and swales designed to store and convey
the peak rate of runoff from the ten year return period precipitation event of
critical duration.
      (3)   The major drainage components such as open ditches and streams
draining 40 acres or more in area shall be designed to store and convey
stormwater flows beyond the capacity of the minor drainage components. They
shall be designed to convey the peak rate of runoff from the 25 year return
period precipitation event.
      (4)   (a)   An excess stormwater passageway shall be provided for the
floodplain of all natural water courses and such manmade water courses and
storm drainage systems as the Village Engineer may direct, which shall have
adequate capacity to convey the excess stormwater runoff from the tributary
watershed. The capacity of this excess stormwater passageway shall be adequate
to transport the peak rate of runoff from the 100 year return period storm,
assuming all upstream areas are fully developed for uses specifically permitted
by existing zoning, and antecedent rainfall in the tributary watershed is
average (e.g., Antecedent Moisture Condition II).
         (b)   An excess stormwater passageway shall be provided within the
design of all parts of a subdivision with a watershed area of ten acres or
more. The excess stormwater passageway through the subdivision shall be
adequate to transport the peak rate of runoff from the 25 year return period
storm.
         (c)   No buildings or structures shall be constructed within an excess
stormwater passageway;
however, streets, parking lots, playgrounds, park areas, pedestrian walkways,
open green space, and utility and sewer easements may be considered compatible
uses.
      (5)   All storm drainage facility construction activity shall conform to
the requirements of the Village of Mahomet Infrastructure Design Manual.
      (6)   All stormwater drainage facilities shall comply with the
requirements of the village stormwater management ordinance. When required by
the stormwater management ordinance, stormwater detention facilities shall be
provided for new subdivisions.
      (7)   Standard drainage systems shall consist of storm drains, inlets,
manholes, and other related underground drainage facilities.
      (8)   Reduced impact development drainage systems may utilize surface
drainage components such as roadside swales, culverts, subsurface drain tiles,
and other related surface drainage facilities.
      (9)   Alternate drainage systems may be approved by the Village Engineer
if a detailed engineering study performed by the subdivider’s engineer
demonstrates that the alternate drainage system provides a level of service at
least equal to that provided by the above requirements without increasing
maintenance and operating costs to the village.
      (10)   All single family and two-family residential lots shall be
provided with the ability to connect a private sump pump discharge line to a
storm drain, tile drain, or sump pump discharge line.
      (11)   All multifamily residential, commercial, and industrial lots
larger than 1 acre in size shall be provided with a subsurface service
connection to the storm drainage system.
      (12)   The storm drain system in each new subdivision shall continue and
extend existing, connecting storm drains in adjoining subdivisions, where
appropriate.
      (13)   The storm drain system in each new subdivision shall be extended
to any property adjacent to the subdivision and shall accommodate the tributary
watershed from adjacent property.
(Ord. 15-12-01, passed 12-15-2015)
§ 154.082 SANITARY SEWER SYSTEM.
   General. In general, all sites within 500 feet of a public sanitary sewer
main shall connect to and utilize the public sanitary sewer system. This
requirement may be waived by agreement of both the Village Engineer and Village
Planner if a substantial physical obstruction prevents connection without
incurring extraordinary costs.
   (A)   No plat of any subdivision shall be approved unless the subdivider
provides for construction of a sanitary sewer system adequate to serve the
needs of the entire subdivision when the same is fully developed. The location
and design of the sanitary sewer system shall be approved by the village, the
Illinois Environmental Protection Agency, and the corporate authorities of the
sanitary sewer district in which the subdivision is located. This requirement
shall not apply to any new subdivision which cannot reasonably be provided with
sanitary sewer service.
   (B)   The adequacy of the existing sanitary sewers to which the proposed
development is to outlet into must first be determined by the subdivider. If
the existing sewers are not adequate, it shall be the subdivider’s
responsibility to find an outlet for the sanitary sewers. This work shall be
done in cooperation with the Village Engineer. Capacity of sanitary sewers
shall be determined utilizing Illinois Environmental Protection Agency
regulatory requirements. The peaking factor for all eight inch and ten inch
diameter sewers shall be at least 4.0.
   (C)   All permits required must be obtained by the subdivider (i.e.
Environmental Protection Agency permit). Permit application forms shall be
reviewed and approved by the Village Engineer before being submitted to the
Illinois Environmental Protection Agency.
   (D)   All sanitary sewer work shall be performed in accordance with the
current Standard Specifications for Water and Sewer Main Construction in
Illinois, the regulations of the Illinois Environmental Protection Agency, and
the village sewer use ordinance.
   (E)   The sanitary sewer system in each new subdivision shall continue and
extend existing, connecting sanitary sewers in adjoining subdivisions.
   (F)   The sanitary sewer system in each new subdivision shall be extended to
any property adjacent to the subdivision, except in those instances in which
the adjacent property is not and cannot be subdivided in the future.
   (G)   No private sanitary sewers or onsite wastewater disposal systems shall
be permitted.
   (H)   Each lot within a new subdivision shall be provided with a service
connection to the public sanitary sewer system.
   (I)   All sanitary sewer system facilities shall conform to the requirements
of the Village of Mahomet Infrastructure Design Manual.
(Ord. 15-12-01, passed 12-15-2015)
§ 154.083 WATER DISTRIBUTION SYSTEM.
   General. In general, all sites within 500 feet of a public water main shall
connect to and utilize the public water supply system. This requirement may be
waived by agreement of both the Village Engineer and Village Planner if a
substantial physical obstruction prevents connection without incurring
extraordinary costs.
   (A)   No plat of any subdivision shall be approved unless the subdivider
provides for construction of a public water supply system adequate to serve the
needs of the entire subdivision when the same is fully developed. The location
and design of the public water supply system shall be approved by the Village
Engineer, the Illinois Environmental Protection Agency, and the corporate
authorities of the public water district in which the subdivision is located.
This requirement shall not apply to any new subdivision which cannot be
provided with public water service.
   (B)   The adequacy of the existing public water mains to which the proposed
development is to connect into must first be determined by the subdivider. If
the existing public water mains are not adequate, it shall be the subdivider’s
responsibility to find an adequate connection. This work shall be done in
cooperation with the Village Engineer. Capacity of water mains shall be
determined utilizing Illinois Environmental Protection Agency regulatory
requirements.
   (C)   All permits required must be obtained by the subdivider (i.e.
Environmental Protection Agency permit). Permit application forms shall be
reviewed and approved by the Village Engineer before being submitted to the
Illinois Environmental Protection Agency.
   (D)   All water main work shall be performed in accordance with the current
Standard Specifications for Water and Sewer Main Construction in Illinois, the
regulations of the Illinois Environmental Protection Agency, and the village
water use ordinance.
   (E)   The public water supply system in each new subdivision shall continue
and extend existing, connection water mains in adjoining subdivisions.
   (F)   The public water supply system in each new subdivision shall be
extended to any property adjacent to the subdivision, except in those instances
in which the adjacent property is not and cannot be subdivided in the future.
   (G)   No private water mains or private water wells shall be permitted.
   (H)   Each lot within a new subdivision shall be provided with a service
connection to the public water supply system.
   (I)   All water system facilities shall conform to the requirements of the
Village of Mahomet Infrastructure Design Manual.
(Ord. 15-12-01, passed 12-15-2015)
§ 154.084 SIDEWALKS AND PATHWAYS.
   General.
   (A)   Sidewalks and pathways shall be installed on both sides of all public
streets and shall run to the back of the curb at each corner lot.
   (B)   All sidewalks and pathways along streets shall be installed in the
public right-of-way. The back of the sidewalk shall be one foot inside the
right-of-way, unless, for good cause shown, a variance in location is approved
by the village. Sidewalks at the cul-de-sac terminus of dead end streets may be
built as close as four feet to the curb with the approval of the village.
   (C)   Mid-block sidewalks. When the length of a block exceeds 800 feet and
at locations deemed essential to provide circulation to schools, playgrounds,
shopping areas and other community facilities, public sidewalks, within a
dedicated right-of-way or permanent easement of at least ten feet in width,
shall be required at the discretion of the Village Engineer and Village
Planner.
   (D)   The sidewalk and pathway system in each new subdivision shall continue
and extend existing, connecting sidewalks or pathways in adjoining subdivision.
   (E)   The sidewalk and pathway system in each new subdivision shall be
extended to any property adjacent to the subdivision except in those instances
in which the adjacent property is not and cannot be subdivided in the future,
the Village Planner may waive this requirement.
   (F)   Sidewalks and pathways shall comply with the applicable Illinois
Department of Transportation Standards and Specifications. Sidewalks and
pathways shall be accessible to the handicapped per the American Disabilities
Act (ADA).
   (G)   When a subdivision borders on and has lots fronting on or contiguous
to a present or proposed arterial or collector street, as depicted or described
in the Comprehensive Plan and/or Transportation System Master Plan a pathway
shall be constructed along one side of the street as directed by the Village
Planner.
   (H)   All sidewalks and pathways shall conform to the requirements of the
Village of Mahomet Infrastructure Design Manual.
(Ord. 15-12-01, passed 12-15-2015)
§ 154.085 ELECTRICAL AND UTILITY SERVICES.
   (A)   The developer’s responsibilities will be as follows:
      (1)   The developer shall provide all necessary utility easements.
      (2)   The developer shall be responsible for all final grading, seeding,
and sodding necessary after the installation of the utility facilities.
   (B)   The electrical distribution system installed in all new residential
developments shall be of the underground distribution type.
   (C)   All electrical distribution facilities shall be installed by the
electric utility or by use of an electrical contractor under contract to the
electric utility.
   (D)   All single phase electric distribution transformers, pedestals,
junctions, handholes, streetlights and all other devices that the utility may
deem necessary, in its exclusive judgment, shall be installed within 10 feet of
the side property line (typically) unless conflicts develop.
   (E)   As directed by the utility companies, the developer of residential
subdivisions shall install conduits for the future installation of cable.
   (F)   Underground service connections for said utilities shall be provided
at the property line of each platted lot.
   (G)   All conduits or cables for said utilities shall be located within
easements or public rights-of-way in such a manner that they do not interfere
with other underground services or utilities.
   (H)   It shall be the responsibility of the owner / subdivider to forward
Plans for the subdivision/ development to the respective providers of natural
gas, telephone, cable television services, internet services, and any other
requesting utility agency.
   (I)   Said utility companies shall have 30 days to develop and submit to the
owner/subdivider, proposed layouts for their facilities so that the owner/
subdivider may approve said layouts and forward them to the village for review
as part of the village’s approval process.
   (J)   Underground service connections for said utilities shall be provided
at the property line of each platted lot.
   (K)   No underground utilities shall be constructed until their physical
location is reviewed and approved in writing by the village.
(Ord. 15-12-01, passed 12-15-2015)
§ 154.086 RIGHT-OF-WAY LIGHTING.
   General.
   (A)   The purpose of this section is to provide the basis for construction
of fixed lighting for rights-of-way, including streets, adjacent sidewalks,
bikeways and alleyways in the village. All right-of-way lights owned or leased
by the village shall be designed and built in accordance with this section.
   (B)   A street light shall be installed at each intersection of a major
collector and/or arterial street with another street.
   (C)   Street lighting in new developments inside the village limits shall be
installed by the developer as part of improvements for new developments and
shall be owned, operated and maintained by the village.
   (D)   Street lighting shall comply with the applicable requirements of the
IDOT Standard Specifications for Road and Bridge Construction, latest edition.
   (E)   Street lighting within residential subdivisions shall be shielded to
reduce glare into adjoining homes.
   (F)   Street lighting facilities shall conform to the requirements of the
Village of Mahomet Infrastructure Design Manual.
(Ord. 15-12-01, passed 12-15-2015)
§ 154.087 EROSION CONTROL.
   (A)   General. Water caused erosion and eroded soil sediments are considered
a form of pollution by the Federal Clean Water Act and the United States
Environmental Protection Agency (USEPA). The current National Pollutant
Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) program of the Federal Clean Water Act
requires that construction sites disturbing one acre and greater be covered by
a NPDES permit. The Illinois Environmental Protection Agency (IEPA) has issued
a statewide general permit (NPDES Permit No. ILR10) that details the NPDES
requirements for construction projects that meet or exceed the threshold for
permit applicability.
   (B)   Stormwater pollution prevention plan. An erosion and sedimentation
control plan shall be prepared showing: all erosion and sedimentation control
measures necessary to meet the objective of this chapter throughout all phases
of construction and permanently after completion of development of the site.
The plan shall comply with IEPA guidelines.
   (C)   Referenced standards. Design standards for erosion and sediment
control shall comply with the provisions of the “Illinois Urban Manual”,
prepared by the United States Department of Agriculture, Natural Resources
Conservation Service, latest edition.
   (D)   It is the responsibility of the owner/ subdivider to prepare and
maintain documentation to meet the NPDES permit requirements for grading and
construction projects.
   (E)   All work and materials shall conform to the applicable requirements of
the IDOT Standard Specifications for Road and Bridge Construction in Illinois,
latest edition.
   (F)   Permanent seeding. Immediately after to completion of construction,
permanent seeding shall be planted.
   (G)   Erosion control during construction shall conform to the requirements
of the Village of Mahomet Infrastructure Design Manual.
(Ord. 15-12-01, passed 12-15-2015)
§ 154.088 TRAFFIC CONTROL.
   A traffic control plan shall be included in the site construction plans for
all subdivisions. Barricades and lighting and other traffic control measures
shall be provided as necessary, during construction, in accordance with the
Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices, latest edition. The traffic control
plan shall indicate the locations and timing of street closures, and other
disruptions to traffic on existing streets.
(Ord. 15-12-01, passed 12-15-2015)
§ 154.089 ON-SITE WASTEWATER DISPOSAL SYSTEMS.
   Where public sanitary sewers are not available on-site wastewater disposal
systems may be utilized, as approved by the Village Engineer. Within the
Sangamon Valley Public Water District service area approval must also be
obtained from that agency. The subdivider shall furnish soil percolation test
results and other soil test results to indicate that the lots are of adequate
size for proper sanitary wastewater disposal. This information shall be
prepared by a registered professional engineer. The area used for seepage
fields shall not be under any proposed driveways, parking areas, buildings, nor
on public property nor within public easements. No seepage field shall be
connected to any storm drainage facility. Discharges from individual on-site
treatment units shall not be directed above the ground surface. All private
sewage disposal systems shall be constructed in accordance with the State of
Illinois Private Sewage Disposal Licensing Act and Code of the Illinois
Department of Public Health, latest revision thereof.
(Ord. 15-12-01, passed 12-15-2015)
VALIDITY, VIOLATIONS, ENFORCEMENT, AMENDMENT, EFFECTIVE DATE
§ 154.115 VALIDITY.
   (A)   In accordance with state law, no deed or other instrument of transfer
of real property within the corporate limits or within the one and one-half
mile extra-territorial jurisdiction of the village shall be accepted by the
County Recorder for recording unless said deed or other instrument of transfer
is to a lot or parcel platted and on file or accompanied with a plat approved
by the Board of Trustees.
   (B)   No person owning land composing a subdivision, nor his or her agent,
shall transfer or sell or agree to sell any lot or parcel of land located
within such subdivision by reference to, or exhibition of, or by any other use
of a plat of such subdivision, before such plat has been approved, filed and
recorded as provided in this chapter. The description of such lot or parcel by
metes and bounds in any contract or instrument of transfer or other document
used in the process of selling or transferring same shall not exempt such owner
or agent from the penalties provided herein.
   (C)   No building or occupancy permit shall be issued for any lot hereafter
platted unless such lot has been approved, filed and recorded in accordance
with the requirements of this chapter.
   (D)   The application fees set forth herein are established with the
understanding that all plats and their supporting documents are presented to
the village in final form and that all submittals are fully complete. In the
event that the subdivider provides the village with incomplete submittals or
materials which require, substantial review or revision by the village on more
than two occasions, the village may, at its option, consider the materials as
being incomplete and any approvals granted as void. Further review and action
of such incomplete documents shall occur only upon resubmittal of those
materials, including any payment of any associated application fee.
(Ord. 15-12-01, passed 12-15-2015)
§ 154.116 VIOLATIONS.
   Violations of these regulations include, but are not limited to, the
following:
   (A)   Recording of any plat or portion thereof that is not in compliance
with this chapter.
   (B)   The sale, offering for sale, or other transfer of ownership, of any or
all lots, without prior recording as set forth in this chapter.
   (C)   Failure to construct any public or private improvement included in any
approved plat or construction plans and specifications.
   (D)   Construction of improvements not specifically approved in any approved
plat or construction plans, including changes in grading, fill, alteration of
drainage systems, and the like.
   (E)   Failure to comply with any of the provisions of this chapter.
(Ord. 15-12-01, passed 12-15-2015)
§ 154.117 ADMINISTRATIVE FINE.
   The Village President of the Board of Trustees may determine and
administratively assess a fine for any instance of noncompliance with this
chapter which he or she may find, noting that said fine shall continue for each
day that such violation continues. The per diem administrative fine for
noncompliance shall be not greater than $50 per day. If the offender pays the
administrative fine assessed and also corrects the noncompliance, then no
further proceedings shall be required. In the event that an administrative fine
has been assessed, the extent of the fine may be appealed to the Village Board
of Trustees. The decision of the Board of Trustees shall be final.
(Ord. 15-12-01, passed 12-15-2015)
§ 154.118 STOP WORK ORDER.
   The Village Planner or Village Engineer may also, in the event he or she
finds any improper construction activities not in conformance with this
chapter, issue a stop work order which shall require the immediate cessation of
any further work on the project until the violations are corrected.
(Ord. 15-12-01, passed 12-15-2015)
§ 154.119 PENALTY.
   Any owner or agent who violates any section of this chapter shall be guilty
of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be fined not less than $50
nor more than $500 for each lot or parcel so transferred or sold or agreed to
be sold; each day the violation continues shall be deemed a separate offense.
(Ord. 15-12-01, passed 12-15-2015)
§ 154.120 AMENDMENT.
   (A)   Amendments to this chapter may be proposed by the Village
Administrator, any member of the Board of Trustees, any Plan and Zoning
Commission member, the Village Planner, or any party in interest. Every
amendment proposal shall be filed on a prescribed form with the village. The
Village Planner shall promptly transmit each proposal, together with any
comments or recommendations (s)he or she may wish to make, to the combined Plan
and Zoning Commission for a public hearing.
      (1)   The Plan and Zoning Commission shall hold a public hearing on the
proposed amendment. Notice of the public hearing shall be published in a
newspaper of general circulation in the village at least one time, no less than
15 days prior to the hearing.
      (2)   Following the public hearing, the proposed amendment may be
recommended as presented or in modified form by a majority vote of the entire
Plan and Zoning Commission.
      (3)   Following its adoption of a recommendation, the Plan and Zoning
Commission shall certify such recommended amendment to the Board of Trustees
for its adoption.
      (4)   The Board of Trustees shall consider the proposed amendment at its
next regularly scheduled meeting. The Board of Trustees may return the proposed
amendment to the Plan and Zoning Commission for further study or re-
certification, or by a majority vote of the membership, may, by ordinance or
resolution adopt the recommended amendment submitted by the Plan and Zoning
Commission. However, nothing in this chapter shall be construed to limit the
Village Board’s authority to recall the amending ordinance by a vote of a
majority of the Village Board of Trustees.
      (5)   Following adoption by the Board of Trustees, the adopted amending
ordinance shall be filed in the office of the Village Clerk. The Village Clerk
shall file with the County Recorder of Champaign County a copy of the amending
ordinance.
   (B)   Before any action shall be taken as provided in this section, any
private party or parties proposing an amendment to this chapter shall deposit
with the Village Treasurer an application fee as set from time to time by
Resolution of the Board of Trustees to cover the approximate cost of this
procedure, and under no condition shall the sum or any part thereof be refunded
for failure of the change to be adopted by the Board of Trustees.
(Ord. 15-12-01, passed 12-15-2015)
§ 154.121 UNCONSTITUTIONALITY.
   If any part or parts of this chapter shall be held to be unconstitutional,
the unconstitutionality shall not affect the validity or remaining parts of
this chapter.
(Ord. 15-12-01, passed 12-15-2015)
§ 154.122 SAVING CLAUSE.
   Nothing herein hereby adopted shall be construed to affect any suit or
proceeding now pending in any court or any rights accrued or liability incurred
or any cause or causes of action accrued or existing under any prior
constitution or ordinance. Nor shall any right or remedy of any character be
lost, impaired, or affected by this chapter.
(Ord. 15-12-01, passed 12-15-2015)
§ 154.123 APPLICABILITY.
   When this chapter imposes a greater restriction than those imposed or
required by the provisions of exiting ordinances or rules and regulations, this
chapter shall control. When the provisions of existing ordinances or rules and
regulations impose greater restrictions than those imposed or required by this
chapter, they shall control. Areas within the Sangamon River Floodplain and
other regulated floodplains are subject to the requirements of the flood hazard
area development regulations.
(Ord. 15-12-01, passed 12-15-2015)
CHAPTER 155: FEES IN LIEU OF CONSTRUCTION
Section
General Provisions
   
155.01   Purpose of regulations
   
155.02   Objectives
   
155.03   Relationship to comprehensive plan and other development ordinances
   
155.04   Definitions   
   
155.05   Construction required
Procedures
   
155.20   Relief from public infrastructure construction
   
155.21   Waivers
   
155.22   Deferrals
   
155.23   Payment of fee in lieu of installation
   
155.24   Separate fund accounts established
   
155.25   Use of funds
   
155.26   Fee schedule
   
155.27   Payment of fees
   
155.28   Assessments for public infrastructure improvements
   
155.29   Service extensions
§ 155.01 PURPOSE OF REGULATIONS.
   These regulations are designed to provide standards and rules related to the
making, reviewing, and filing of payments in lieu of construction for the
public infrastructure improvements to benefit rural subdivision and
development. The purpose of these regulations is to establish a system of
payment of a fee or fees in lieu of construction of certain public
infrastructure improvements when immediate construction is not reasonable but
when construction of those improvements in the future can be reasonably
foreseen. These regulations are intended to help assure provision of safe
vehicular and pedestrian access, clean and adequate public water, sanitary
sewerage and storm water drainage systems, and other improvements and
facilities sufficient to serve the proposed subdivision and surrounding
properties.
(Ord. 18-01-01, passed 1-23-2018)
§ 155.02 OBJECTIVES.
   Pursuant to the authority conferred by the Statutes of the State of
Illinois, the objective of these regulations are to provide for orderly growth,
and harmonious development of the Village; to facilitate adequate provisions
for transportation, water supply, storm water drainage, sanitary sewerage, and
health requirements; to establish standards for the payment of construction for
public improvements; to encourage adequate provisions for the installation of
underground utilities and surface infrastructure upgrades; and to provide
administrative and review procedures for the attainment of these objectives.
(Ord. 18-01-01, passed 1-23-2018)
§ 155.03 RELATIONSHIP TO COMPREHENSIVE PLAN AND OTHER DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCES.
   These regulations are one of several documents in effect and in force within
the village that govern the use and development of land. Other applicable and
relevant documents include but not limited to the Comprehensive Plan;
Subdivision Ordinance; Zoning Ordinance; Development Within Floodplain Areas
Ordinance; Water Regulations; Sewer Regulations; and Stormwater Management
Ordinance. Where and if the provisions of these documents conflict, the
stricter of the regulations shall apply. For areas outside the corporate limits
of the Village, the Champaign County Zoning Ordinance; the Champaign County
Special Flood Hazard Area Ordinance; and the regulations of the Sangamon Valley
Public Water District may be applicable, in addition to applicable Village
Ordinances.
(Ord. 18-01-01, passed 1-23-2018)
§ 155.04 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of these regulations, the following definition and the
definitions in
Chapter 154: Subdivisions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or
requires a different meaning.
   RURAL SUBDIVISION. A minor subdivision of land into four or fewer lots
which:
      (1)   Are located more than 500 feet from the nearest sanitary sewers and
/ or public water mains, or are located in an area where extension of the water
supply or sanitary sewer facilities is not currently practical /feasible;
      (2)   The parent parcel is located more than 500 feet outside of the
Village but is the subject of an annexation agreement or annexation covenant
which requires and sets forth the condition of its future annexation to the
village; and
      (3)   Public infrastructure currently in existence does not meet current
design standards;
      (4)   Are located more than 500 feet from the nearest public sidewalk.
(Ord. 18-01-01, passed 1-23-2018)
§ 155.05 CONSTRUCTION REQUIRED.
   Except as may be provided elsewhere herein or in other ordinances or
regulations, improvements to public infrastructure, including streets,
sidewalks, storm drains, water mains and sanitary sewers shall be required
whenever a tract of land is subdivided. Improvements shall be provided and
installed in accordance with the standards and engineering requirements
established by the Village of Mahomet and other local, state and federal
authorities which may have jurisdiction of the area being subdivided.
(Ord. 18-01-01, passed 1-23-2018)
PROCEDURES
§ 155.20 RELIEF FROM PUBLIC INFRASTRUCTURE CONSTRUCTION.
   (A)   For rural subdivisions, upon a favorable recommendation by the
Administrative Review Committee the President of the Board of Trustees may
approve an administrative waiver of the requirements for construction of
otherwise required public infrastructure. The administrative waiver may include
one of the following alternatives for each type of public infrastructure:
      (1)   Waiver of the construction requirements in the entirety.
      (2)   Payment of a fee in lieu of immediate construction of the public
infrastructure otherwise required.
      (3)   Deferral of the construction requirements for water main and
sanitary sewer infrastructure within the service area of Sangamon Valley Public
Water District (SVPWD).
   (B)   Any relief granted from the requirement that public infrastructure be
constructed shall be at the sole discretion of the Village of Mahomet. No
subdivider or subdivision shall have a right to a waiver or other relief. A
request for relief from the requirement to construct public infrastructure
shall accompany the application for subdivision approval.
(Ord. 18-01-01, passed 1-23-2018)
§ 155.21 WAIVERS.
   When construction of public infrastructure is waived the subdivider is
released from his/her obligation to construct public infrastructure
improvements as a part of the subdivision process. No further action is
necessary.
(Ord. 18-01-01, passed 1-23-2018)
§ 155.22 DEFERRALS.
   When construction of public infrastructure is deferred, the obligation to
construct shall be placed upon the current and future owners. The obligation to
construct public improvements in the future shall be documented via an
annexation agreement, subdivision covenants, or other suitable means. The
obligation shall be recorded with the Champaign County Recorder along with
other subdivision documents so that future owners of the lot or lots might be
made aware of the ongoing obligation. The terms and conditions of each deferral
granted by the village shall be established from time to time by the
Administrative Review Committee.
(Ord. 18-01-01, passed 1-23-2018)
§ 155.23 PAYMENT OF FEE IN LIEU OF INSTALLATION.
   The requirements for construction of public infrastructure may be met by the
payment of a fee in lieu of construction for each type of public
infrastructure. The calculation of the fee shall be based upon the estimated
cost of construction for each type of public infrastructure, as set forth
herein. The fees collected by the Village shall be specifically identified and
maintained as a separate account within the village's General Fund for each
type of infrastructure. The fees collected shall only be utilized for
construction of public infrastructure in furtherance of the Village policies
for extension of urban public infrastructure to urbanizing or developing areas.
The subdivider will be considered to have met his/her obligation to construct
public infrastructure improvements as a part of the subdivision process.
(Ord. 18-01-01, passed 1-23-2018)
§ 155.24 SEPARATE FUND ACCOUNTS ESTABLISHED.
   Separate accounts within the General Fund are hereby established for fees
paid in lieu of construction. Separate accounts are established for streets,
sidewalks, storm drainage, sanitary sewers, and public water supply mains.
Payments of fees in lieu of construction for each type of infrastructure shall
be deposited within that designated account.
(Ord. 18-01-01, passed 1-23-2018)
§ 155.25 USE OF FUNDS.
   (A)   The Board of Trustees of the Village of Mahomet shall have the sole
authority to authorize the use and expenditure of funds collected via the
payment in lieu of construction program. Fees collected shall be utilized for
the design and construction of capital improvements to public infrastructure
intended to extend service to existing rural residential subdivisions or to
upgrade existing rural facilities to suitable urban standards within newly
developing areas and existing rural subdivisions.
   (B)   Funds collected via payments in lieu of construction shall only be
utilized in the following manner:
      (1)   Upgrade of existing infrastructure that does not meet current
village requirements for urban uses.
      (2)   Extension of public infrastructure to unserved lands as a part of
extension of service to newly developed or developing areas.
      (3)   Extension of public infrastructure or upgrade of existing
infrastructure intended to serve tracts of land in a subdivision for which a
payment in lieu of infrastructure construction was previously made.
   (C)   Funds shall only be utilized to upgrade or extend public
infrastructure to tracts of land that have been annexed to the village within
the previous five years (at the time of the expenditure of funds); tracts of
land for which an annexation agreement or other suitable provisions for future
annexation has been made; or to tracts of land that have previously made a
payment in lieu of construction for public infrastructure. Funds obtained from
payments in lieu of construction shall not be utilized for the upgrade, repair,
or maintenance of existing village infrastructure unless meeting the criteria
in this paragraph.
   (D)   Annually the Village Treasurer shall prepare a report to the Board of
Trustees which outlines the source and amount of all monies collected, earned,
or received and the amount of funds expended upon projects, financed in whole
or in part by the funds.
(Ord. 18-01-01, passed 1-23-2018)
§ 155.26 FEE SCHEDULE.
   (A)   In order to simplify the payment of fee in lieu of construction
process the Village of Mahomet has determined that the following standard fees
shall apply whenever this alternative is selected for implementation. All fees
are based upon the lineal foot of frontage of the subdivision / tract of land:
 
Facility                       Fee (per lineal foot of frontage) Minimum Fee
Storm drainage                 $85 per lineal foot               $17,000
Sidewalk (one side)            $37 per lineal foot               $7,400
Street pavement - (1/2 street) $125 per lineal foot              $25,000
Sanitary sewer                 $90 per lineal foot               $18,000
Water main                     $70 per lineal foot               $14,000
 
   (B)   Beginning May 1, 2019 and for every year thereafter the amount of the
fees set forth above shall be automatically adjusted for the increase in
construction costs during the previous calendar year. The Engineering News
Record Construction Cost Index or other cost adjustment index published by a
reliable/reputable source shall be utilized by the Village Administrator to
update the published fee amounts.
   (C)   The President of the Board of Trustees may adjust (reduce) the
standard fee at the time the fee is determined to consider unusual
circumstances in specific cases to help ensure that the fee amount has been
fairly calculated.
(Ord. 18-01-01, passed 1-23-2018)
§ 155.27 PAYMENT OF FEES.
   The Village Administrator or his/her designee shall calculate the amount of
a fee as set forth in these regulations. The Village Administrator is hereby
designated to administer this payment of fee in lieu of construction program.
Payment of fees in lieu of construction shall be made prior to the recording of
the subdivision documents. Payments may be by cash or check made payable to the
Village of Mahomet. The payment of fees in lieu of construction of public
infrastructure shall satisfy the requirement that public infrastructure be
constructed as part of the subdivision process.
(Ord. 18-01-01, passed 1-23-2018)
§ 155.28 ASSESSMENTS FOR PUBLIC INFRASTRUCTURE IMPROVEMENTS.
   Nothing contained herein shall affect the right of the Village of Mahomet to
enact ordinances requiring assessments for construction of public
infrastructure from property owners as authorized under the Illinois Compiled
Statutes in accordance with statutory rights granted to municipalities.
(Ord. 18-01-01, passed 1-23-2018)
§ 155.29 SERVICE EXTENSIONS.
   Payment of a fee in lieu of construction shall in no way obligate the
Village of Mahomet to extend public water lines or sanitary sewers to provide
service to any lands within the applicable subdivision, nor does it obligate
the Village of Mahomet to construct street improvements, storm drainage
improvements, sidewalks, or other public infrastructure within the applicable
subdivision. Further, payment of a fee in lieu of construction does not relieve
any land owner of the obligation to construct private infrastructure to serve
any of the lands within the applicable subdivision, including but not limited
to private stormwater drainage and management facilities.
(Ord. 18-01-01, passed 1-23-2018)
CHAPTER 156: PUBLIC RIGHT-OF-WAY
Section
   
156.001   Purpose
   
156.002   Intent
   
156.003   Administration
   
156.004   Applicability
   
156.005   Conflicts with state and federal laws
   
156.006   Sound engineering judgment
   
156.007   Definitions
   
156.008   Facilities subject to this chapter
   
156.009   Other activities subject to this chapter
   
156.010   Obstructions and encroachments
   
156.011   Agreements, registration, status changes, and insurance
   
156.012   Permit required, applications and fees
   
156.013   General construction standards
   
156.014   Vegetation control
   
156.015   Removal, relocation, or modifications of utility facilities
   
156.016   Cleanup and restoration
   
156.017   Maintenance and emergency maintenance
   
156.018   Deviations, exceptions or relief
   
156.019   Requirements to repair or remove
   
156.020   Pavement degradation
   
156.021   Relocations and rescission of use requested by village
 
   
156.999   Penalty
§ 156.001 PURPOSE.
    The purpose of this chapter is to establish policies and procedures for
constructing and maintaining all facilities utilizing rights-of-way within the
village's jurisdiction, which will provide public benefit consistent with the
preservation of the integrity, safe usage, and visual qualities of the village
rights-of-way and the village as a whole. This applies to all facilities on,
over, above, along, upon, under, across or within the public rights-of-way.
Nothing herein shall be construed to limit the ability of the village to
regulate its rights-of-way for the protection of the public health, safety, and
welfare.
(Ord. 21-06-02, passed 6-22-2021; Ord. 22-03-04, passed 3-22-2022)
§ 156.002 INTENT.
    In enacting this chapter, the village intends to exercise its authority
over rights-of-way in the village and, in particular the use of public ways and
property by utilities and others desiring to utilize rights-of-way, by
establishing uniform standards to address issues presented by such facilities,
including without limitation to:
   (A)   Prevent interference with the use of streets, sidewalks, alleys,
parkways and other public ways and places;
   (B)   Prevent the creation of visual and physical obstructions and other
conditions that are hazardous to vehicular and pedestrian traffic;
   (C)   Prevent interference with the facilities and operations of the
village's utilities and of other utilities lawfully located in rights-of-way or
public property;
   (D)   Protect against environmental damage, including damage to trees, from
the installation of utility facilities;
   (E)   Prevent visual blight from the proliferation of facilities in the
rights-of-way;
   (F)   Preserve the character of the neighborhoods in which facilities are
installed;
   (G)   Assure the continued safe use and enjoyment of private properties
adjacent to utility facilities locations; and
   (H)   Prevent proliferation of facilities utilizing rights-of-way or areas
adjacent to rights-of-way which would increase the expense of maintenance and
the cost of repair, rebuilding, or expansion of rights-of-way;
   (I)   Keep roadside ditches and culverts clean and maintained properly so
they can adequately convey stormwater;
   (J)   Prevent unauthorized changes to public stormwater facilities that
affect properties up and down stream; and
   (K)   Outline maintenance expectations for owners of properties adjacent to
public right-of-way.
(Ord. 21-06-02, passed 6-22-2021; Ord. 22-03-04, passed 3-22-2022)
§ 156.003 ADMINISTRATION.
    It shall be the duty of the Village Administrator or his or her designee to
administer and enforce the regulations contained herein. Nothing in this
chapter shall be construed as limiting any additional or further remedies that
the village may have for enforcement of this chapter.
(Ord. 21-06-02, passed 6-22-2021; Ord. 22-03-04, passed 3-22-2022)
§ 156.004 APPLICABILITY.
    When this chapter imposes a greater restriction than those imposed or
required by the provisions of another exiting chapter or rules and regulations,
this chapter shall control. When the provisions of existing chapter or rules
and regulations impose greater restrictions than those imposed or required by
this chapter, they shall control.
(Ord. 21-06-02, passed 6-22-2021; Ord. 22-03-04, passed 3-22-2022)
§ 156.005 CONFLICTS WITH STATE AND FEDERAL LAWS.
    In the event that applicable federal or state laws or regulations conflict
with the requirements of this chapter, the applicant shall comply with the
requirements of this chapter to the maximum extent possible without violating
federal or state laws or regulations.
(Ord. 21-06-02, passed 6-22-2021; Ord. 22-03-04, passed 3-22-2022)
§ 156.006 SOUND ENGINEERING JUDGMENT.
   The village will use sound engineering judgment when administering this
chapter and may vary the standards, conditions, and requirements expressed in
this chapter when the village so determines it is necessary and consistent with
sound engineering judgement. Nothing herein shall be construed to limit the
ability of the village to regulate its rights-of-way for the protection of the
public health, safety, and welfare.
(Ord. 21-06-02, passed 6-22-2021; Ord. 22-03-04, passed 3-22-2022)
§ 156.007 DEFINITIONS.
    For the purpose of this code, the following definitions shall apply unless
the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning. Any term not
defined in this chapter shall have the meaning ascribed to it in 92 Illinois
Administrative Code Chapter 530.30, unless the context clearly requires
otherwise.
   AASHTO. American Association of State Highway and Transportation Officials.
   ANSI. American National Standards Institute.
   APPLICANT. Any person or entity, firm, corporation or other legal entity
applying for a permit under this chapter.
   ASLA. American Society of Landscape Architects.
   ASTM. American Society for Testing and Materials.
   AWWA. American Water Works Association.
   BACKFILL. The methods or materials for replacing excavated material in a
trench or pit.
   BORE or BORING. To excavate an underground cylindrical cavity for the
insertion of a pipe or electrical conductor or conduit by means of a rotating
cutting head or auger. See HORIZONTAL DIRECTIONAL DRILLING.
   CARRIER PIPE. The pipe enclosing the liquid, gas or slurry to be
transported.
   CASING. A structural protective enclosure for transmittal devices such as
carrier pipes, electrical conductors, and fiber optic devices.
   CLEAR ZONE. The total roadside border area, starting at the edge of the
pavement, available for safe use by errant vehicles. This area may consist of a
shoulder, a recoverable slope, a nonrecoverable slope, and a clear run out
area.
   CONDUCTOR. Wire carrying electrical current.
   CONDUIT. A casing or encasement for wires or cables.
   CONSTRUCTION or CONSTRUCT. The installation, repair, maintenance, placement,
alteration, enlargement, demolition, modification, reconstruction, or
abandonment in place of facilities.
   CONTROLLED LOW STRENGTH MATERIAL (CLSM). A mixture of Portland Cement, fly
ash, fine aggregate, and water. The mix shall be proportioned to provide a
backfill material which is self-compacting and capable of being excavated with
hand tools, If necessary, at a later date. Materials and proportioning shall
comply with Article 593 of the Illinois Department of Transportation Standard
Specifications for Road and Bridge Construction, latest edition.
   COVER. The depth of earth or backfill over a buried utility line, conductor,
conduit, carrier pipe.
   CROSSING FACILITY. A facility that crosses one or more right-of-way lines.
   CULVERT. A conduit for the passage of surface drainage water under a
roadway, driveway approach, railroad, or other surface impediment.
   DISCHARGE. The rate of outflow of water from a stormwater drainage or
stormwater detention facility.
   DISRUPT THE RIGHT-OF-WAY. For the purposes of this chapter, any work that
obstructs the right-of-way or causes a material adverse effect on the  use of
the right-of-way for its intended purpose. Such work may include, without
limitation, the following: excavating or other cutting; placement (whether
temporary or permanent) of materials, equipment, devices, or structures; damage
to vegetation; and compaction or loosening of the soil but shall not include
the parking of vehicles or equipment in a manner that does not materially
obstruct the flow of traffic on a roadway or street.
   DRIVEWAY APPROACH. A privately maintained roadway located within a public
right-of- way providing access for vehicles between a public street and private
property.
   DRY WEATHER WATER OUTLET. An outlet from a sump pump, footing tile, field
tile, or other source which may discharge at times other than during periods of
rainfall and pursuant to direct surface runoff.
   DUMPSTER. A receptacle designed for the disposal of litter, trash, refuse,
or recycled materials.
   EMERGENCY. Any immediate maintenance to a facility required for the safety
of the public using or in the in the vicinity of the right-of-way or immediate
maintenance required for the health and safety of the general public served by
the utility.
   ENCASEMENT. Provision of a protective casing.
   ENCROACHMENT. A private improvement, structure or obstruction extending into
or located within, upon, above or under any public right-of-way or public
easement.
   EQUIPMENT. Materials, tools, implements, supplies, and/or other items used
to facilitate construction of facilities.
   EXCAVATION. The making of a hole or cavity by removing material or laying
bare by digging.
   FACILITY. All structures, devices, objects, and materials (including, but
not limited to, track and rails, wires, ducts, fiber optic cable, antennas,
vaults, boxes, equipment enclosures, cabinets, pedestals, poles, conduits,
street lights, grates, covers, pipes, cables, and appurtenances, signs thereto,
together with any natural vegetation, screening, and other materials installed
or planted to hide or otherwise camouflage any of the forgoing) located on,
over, above, along, upon, under, across, or within rights-of-way under this
chapter. For purposes of this chapter, the term FACILITY shall not include any
facility owned or operated by the village.
   FENCE. A constructed barrier erected as a means of protection or confinement
to enclose or screen areas of land.
   FENCE, ELECTRONIC. An underground means of controlling the movement of an
animal by emitting an electrical signal when the animal wearing an electronic
collar nears the boundary of the fence.
   FREESTANDING FACILITY. A facility that is not a crossing facility or a
parallel facility, such as an antenna, transformer, pump, or meter station
located outside of the right-of-way.
   GLARE. Lighting entering the eye directly from a light fixture or indirectly
from reflective surfaces that causes visual discomfort or reduced visibility.
   HAZARDOUS MATERIALS. Any substance or material which, due to its quantity,
form, concentration, location, or other characteristics, is determined by the
village to pose an unreasonable and imminent risk to the life, health or safety
of persons or property or to the ecological balance of the environment,
including, but not limited to, explosives, radioactive materials, petroleum or
petroleum products or gases, poisons, biological agents, flammables, corrosives
or any substance determined to be hazardous or toxic under any federal or state
law, statute or regulation.
   HIGHWAY. A specific type of right-of-way used for vehicular traffic
including rural or urban roads or streets. HIGHWAY includes all highway land
and improvements, including roadways, ditches and embankments, bridges,
drainage structures, signs, guardrails, protective structures and appurtenances
necessary or convenient for vehicle traffic.
   HIGHWAY CODE. The Illinois Highway Code, ILCS Ch. 605, Act 5, §§1-101 et
seq., as amended from time to time.
   HOLDER. A person or entity that has received authorization to offer or
provide cable or video service from the ICC pursuant to the Illinois Cable and
Video Competition Law, ILCS Ch. 220, Act 5, §21-401.
   HORIZONTAL DIRECTIONAL DRILLING (HDD). A steerable system for installing
pipes, conduits, or cables using a drilling machine which is located on the
surface of the ground. The HDD equipment drills a pilot bore hole through the
soils in a shallow arc, exiting the soils at a predetermined location. The
pilot hole is enlarged by pulling back a reaming tool and product/carrier pipe
to the drill rig location.
   ICC. Illinois Commerce Commission.
   IDOT. Illinois Department of Transportation.
   IEPA. Illinois Environmental Protection Agency.
   JACKING. Pushing a pipe horizontally under a roadway by mechanical means
with or without boring.
   JETTING. Pushing a pipe through the earth using water under pressure to
consolidate loose backfill.
   JOINT USE. The use of pole lines, trenches, conduits, or other facilities by
two or more utilities.
   JULIE. The one-call joint utility locating system in Illinois.
   LIGHT TRESPASS. Light falling where it is not wanted or needed (also
referred to as spill light or obtrusive light).
   LOCAL TRAFFIC. Traffic whose immediate destination is within the limits of
construction or right- of-way closure, for access to real property not
otherwise accessible by other means.
   MICROTUNNELING. A one or two pass tunneling method, which utilizes a
remotely controlled micro tunnel boring machine (MTBM) which can control the
volume of excavated soils entering the MTBM, to install a carrier pipe or
conduit to the required tolerances for line and grade.
   MUTCD. Illinois Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices.
   NEC. National Electrical Code.
   OBSTRUCT. To place any tangible object in a right-of-way to hinder free and
open passage over that or any part of the right-of-way.
   OCCUPANCY. The presence of facilities on, over or under right-of-way.
   OWNER. When applied to property, includes any part owner, joint owner,
purchaser, and seller under a contract and/or deed, or tenant in common of the
whole or part of the property, and includes any beneficiary of a land trust
which owns property.
   PARALLEL FACILITY. A facility that is generally parallel or longitudinal to
the centerline of a right-of-way.
   PARKWAY. Any portion of the right-of-way not improved by street, sidewalk,
or bike path.
   PAVEMENT CUT. The removal of an area of pavement for access to a facility or
for the construction of a facility.
   PERFORMANCE GUARANTEE. Any security that may be accepted by the village as a
guarantee that the improvements and repairs required as a part of facility
installation are satisfactorily completed.
   PERMITTEE. That entity to which a permit has been issued for use of right-
of-way pursuant to the terms of this chapter.
   PERSON. Any legal person; includes associations, partnerships, corporations,
joint ventures and bodies politic and corporate as well as individuals.
   PETROLEUM PRODUCTS PIPELINES. Pipelines carrying crude or refined liquid
petroleum products including, but not limited to, gasoline, distillates,
propane, butane, or coal slurry.
   PORTABLE STORAGE CONTAINER. A container used for temporary storage of non-
waste items.
   PRACTICABLE. That which is performable, feasible or possible, rather than
that which is simply convenient.
   PRESSURE. The internal force acting radially against the walls of a carrier
pipe expressed in pounds per square inch gauge (psig).
   PROMPT. That which is done within a period of time specified by the village.
If no time period is specified, the period shall be 15 calendar days.
   PROPERTY, PERSONAL. Includes all property except real.
   PROPERTY, REAL. Land and whatever is erected, growing upon, or affixed to
land.
   PUBLIC ENTITY. A legal entity that constitutes or is part of the government,
whether at local, state, or federal level.
   PUBLIC IMPROVEMENTS. Street pavements, public walkways, monuments,
watermains, sanitary sewers, storm drain lines, street signs, streetlights,
drainage ditches, culverts, and appurtenances to the foregoing items owned,
operated and maintained by the village and for use by the public.
   PUBLIC UTILITY EASEMENT. Land set aside or over which a liberty, privilege,
or advantage in land existing distinct from the ownership of the land is
granted to the public for limited use for a public purpose.
   RESTORATION. Repair of a right-of-way, highway, roadway, or other area
disrupted by the construction of a facility to a condition equal or better than
what existed prior to the repair.
   RIGHTS-OF-WAY. The area on, below, or above land dedicated to a public
roadway, highway, street, public sidewalk, or alley dedicated for
transportation and other compatible uses.
   ROADWAY. That part of the right-of-way that includes the pavement,
shoulders, curbs, and roadside drainage ditches.
   SALE OF TELECOMMUNICATIONS AT RETAIL. The transmitting, supplying, or
furnishing of telecommunications and all services rendered in connection
therewith for a consideration, other than between a parent corporation and its
wholly owned subsidiaries or between wholly owned subsidiaries, when the gross
charge made by one such corporation to another such corporation is not greater
than the gross charge paid to the retailer for their use or consumption and not
for sale.
   SERVICE LINES. A pipe, conduit, cable, wire, or other similar facility
intended to make a connection between a utility owned facility and provide
service an adjacent property.
   SHOULDER. A width of roadway, adjacent to the pavement, providing lateral
support to the pavement edge and providing an area for emergency vehicular
stops and storage of snow removed from the pavement.
   TELECOMMUNICATIONS. This term includes, but is not limited to, messages or
information transmitted through use of local, toll and wide area telephone
service, channel services, telegraph services, teletypewriter service, computer
exchange service, private line services, mobile radio services, cellular mobile
telecommunications services, stationary two-way radio, paging service and any
other form of mobile or portable one-way or two-way communications, and any
other transmission of messages or information by electronic or similar means,
between or among points by wire, cable, fiber optics, laser, microwave, radio,
satellite, or similar facilities. "Private line" means a dedicated nontraffic
sensitive service for a single customer that entitles the customer to exclusive
or priority use of a communications channel, or a group of such channels, from
one or more specified locations to one or more other specified locations.
TELECOMMUNICATIONS shall not include value added services in which computer
processing applications are used to act on the form, content, code and protocol
of the information for purposes other than transmission. TELECOMMUNICATIONS
shall not include purchase of telecommunications by a telecommunications
service provider for use as a component part of the service provided by such
provider to the ultimate retail consumer who originates or terminates the end-
to-end communications. TELECOMMUNICATIONS shall not include the provision of
cable services through a cable system as defined in the cable communications
act of 1984 (47 U.S.C. chapters 521 and following), as now or hereafter
amended, or cable or other programming services subject to an open video system
fee payable to the village through an open video system as defined in the rules
of the Federal Communications Commission (47 C.F.R. Chapter 76.1500 and
following), as now or hereafter amended.
   TELECOMMUNICATIONS PROVIDER. Any person that installs, owns, operates, or
controls facilities in the right-of-way used or designed to be used to transmit
telecommunications in any form.
   TELECOMMUNICATIONS RETAILER. Means and includes every person engaged in
making sales of telecommunications at retail as defined herein.
   TRENCH. A relatively narrow open excavation for the installation of an
underground facility.
   UTILITY. The individual, unit of local government, corporation or entity
owning or operating any "facility" as defined in this chapter.
   VEGETATION. Growing plants, grasses, and ground cover.
   VENT. A pipe to allow the dissipation into the atmosphere of gases or vapors
from an underground casing.
   VIDEO SERVICE. That term as defined in Section 21-201(v) of the Illinois
Cable and Video Competition Law of 2007 (ILCS Ch. 220, §21-201(v).
   VILLAGE. The Village of Mahomet, Champaign County, Illinois.
   VILLAGE ENGINEER. A professional engineer, registered as such and licensed
to practice in the State of Illinois, and employed by the Board of Trustees of
the Village of Mahomet, to provide technical expertise and counsel.
   VISIBILITY TRIANGLE. The area within the vertices of an isosceles triangle
whose two equal legs are to be measured along the right-of-way lines of the
adjoining or intersecting streets or roads (or extensions thereof). The
TRIANGLE shall be formed by a diagonal line connecting two points measured on
the right-of-way lines of the intersecting streets located 30 feet from the
point of intersection at the street right-of-way lines.
   WATER LINES. Pipelines carrying raw or potable water.
   WET BORING. Pushing a pipe through the earth using water under pressure to
create a cavity ahead of a pipe, or boring using water under pressure at the
cutting auger to soften the earth and to provide a slurry for the excavated
material.
(Ord. 21-06-02, passed 6-22-2021; Ord. 22-03-04, passed 3-22-2022)
§ 156.008 FACILITIES SUBJECT TO THIS CHAPTER.
    This chapter applies to all facilities on, over, above, along, upon, under,
across, or within the village controlled rights-of-way. A facility lawfully
established prior to the effective date of this chapter may continue to be
maintained, repaired, and operated by the utility as presently constructed and
located, except as may be otherwise provided in any applicable franchise,
license or similar agreement.
(Ord. 21-06-02, passed 6-22-2021; Ord. 22-03-04, passed 3-22-2022)
§ 156.009 OTHER ACTIVITIES SUBJECT TO THIS CHAPTER.
    Any type of construction activity, tree planting, landscape planting,
mailbox installation, placement of personal property or any activity that
results in a closure of one or more lanes of traffic.
(Ord. 21-06-02, passed 6-22-2021; Ord. 22-03-04, passed 3-22-2022)
§ 156.010 OBSTRUCTIONS AND ENCROACHMENTS.
    Except otherwise provided, no person shall cause, create, or maintain any
obstruction, encroachment, or disruption of any village rights-of-way without a
permit or approval from the village. The village is not responsible for repair
or replacement of any obstructions, disruptions or encroachments located in
public rights-of-way.
   (A)   Signage. Placement of signage, other than government placed signage
including wayfinding signage, is prohibited on public rights-of-way except
where permitted by
Chapter 152.
   (B).   Barriers. Construction or maintenance of structures, fences, posts,
barriers, or other decorative or preventative materials is prohibited on public
rights-of-way.
   (C)   Personal property. The presence of unattended personal property in the
right-of-way shall be prohibited.
      (1)   This includes but is not limited to the placement of the following
on public rights-of-way:
         (a)   Permanent or portable basketball hoops, soccer goals, or other
sports equipment;
         (b)   Driveway approach ramps;
         (c)   Boulders, rocks, and other hazardous landscaping material;
         (d)   Mailboxes that do not meet standards required by the United
States Postal Service (USPS) and as outlined herein;
         (e)   The construction or placement of personal utility service lines
that do not meet the standards outlined herein;
         (f)   Objects that obstruct the flow of stormwater runoff;
         (g)   Objects that create a hazard for the traveling public.
      (2)   Except otherwise authorized by this code, no person shall use any
rights-of-way for the placement or storage of unattended personal property
unless such person has obtained a permit pursuant to this code. Unauthorized
unattended personal property on the rights-of-way shall be presumed abandoned
and may be removed, disposed of or salvaged by the village.
      (3)   If the unattended personal property belongs to the property owner,
tenant, or former tenant, of the real estate immediately adjacent to the
location of the unattended personal property, the owner of such adjacent real
estate shall, upon notice from the village, cause prompt removal of the
unattended personal property and upon failure to do in the time frame indicated
in the village notice, the village may remove the unattended personal property
and file a lien for the reasonable costs of the removal.
   (D)   Lawn sprinkler/irrigation systems. Any construction, maintenance, and/
or marking of personal lawn sprinkler or irrigation systems installed within or
below the public rights-of-way is the sole responsibility of the owner of the
property outside of the public right-of-way for which the personal lawn
sprinkler or irrigation system serves.
      (1)   Any damage caused to the public right-of-way or public
infrastructure by the placement of a personal lawn sprinkler or irrigation
system will be the sole responsibility of the owner to pay for the cost to
repair the damage.
      (2)   The irrigation system owner is responsible for properly marking the
system prior to construction work within the right-of-way. Any irrigation
system that interferes with existing or proposed work within public right-of-
way must be relocated as to not interfere. Relocation of interfering irrigation
systems will be the sole responsibility and cost of the system owner.
      (3)   The village and any other entity authorized to do work within the
right-of-way is not responsible for any damages done to or costs associated
with any irrigation system that interferes with work within the public right-
of-way.
   (E)   Fences. The construction of personal property fences including
electronic fences on, or below public rights-of-way is prohibited.
   (F)   Street trees, grass, landscaping, and other vegetation.
      (1)   Street trees. Any person that desires to plant tree(s) within the
right-of-way must first obtain a permit from the village prior to planting. Any
tree planted must comply with provisions within
Chapter 94.
      (2)   Maintenance of street trees, grass, landscaping, and other
vegetation. In accordance with
Chapters 93 and
94, plants, weeds, and trees within the right-of-way must be maintained by the
adjacent property owner.
         (a)   It is the responsibility of the adjacent property owner to
maintain grass, trees, bushes, flowers, or other ornamental plants within the
public right-of-way.
         (b)   Plantings within the right-of-way shall not interfere with the
visibility triangle for any roadway intersection. Any planting that interferes
with the visibility at any intersection is hereby declared to be a nuisance.
         (c)   It shall be unlawful for anyone to permit any weed, grass, or
plant, other than trees, bushes, flowers, or other ornamental plant, to grow to
a height exceeding 12 inches anywhere in the right-of-way. Any plant or weed
exceeding this height is hereby declared to be a nuisance.
         (d)   Mowing discharge from maintenance activities must be removed
from sidewalks and streets in compliance with applicable Illinois State Laws
and the Litter Control Act (ILCS Ch. 415, Act 105).
         (e)   Any tree or vegetation planted on private property and/or within
the public right-of-way that encroaches or hangs over into the public right-of-
way and interferes with a sidewalk or street is the responsibility of the
adjacent property owner or the private property owner for where the offending
vegetation is located to trim the vegetation back to provide an appropriate
clearance next to and above the effected public infrastructure.
         (f)   It is the responsibility of the adjacent property owner to
remove or cut back any vegetation growing within the sidewalk joints or
encroaching along sidewalk edges.
         (g)   It shall be unlawful to spray, inject, or pour any chemicals on
or near any trees, shrubs, grass or other vegetation in the right-of-way for
the purpose of killing plantings to avoid maintenance responsibilities.
   (G)   Landscape waste and debris.
      (1)   Landscape waste and debris may only be placed in the right-of-way
in accordance with the Village Landscape Waste Collection Programs outlined in
Chapter 50.
      (2)   Placement of grass clipping debris, tree limbs and similar
landscape waste on the public right-of-way, sidewalk, roadway, ditch, or other
public facility when not in compliance with Village Landscape Waste Collection
Programs shall be declared a public nuisance. Abatement measures shall follow
the required actions outlined in
Chapter 93.
   (H)   Sidewalk snow removal. Snow removal for sidewalks within the public
right-of-way shall be the responsibility of the owner of the property adjacent
to the sidewalk.
   (I)   Parking. Standing or parking a private vehicle in the public right-of-
way, whether occupied or not, except momentarily to load or unload passengers
shall be prohibited in the following locations:
      (1)   On a sidewalk;
      (2)   Within 15 feet of a fire hydrant;
      (3)   Within 20 feet of a crosswalk at an intersection;
      (4)   Within 30 feet upon the approach to any flashing signal, stop sign,
yield sign or traffic control signal located at the side of a roadway;
      (5)   At any place where official signs prohibit standing or parking;
and/or
      (6)   Within the parkway on an unimproved or grass surface.
   (J)   Mailboxes. Mailboxes or cluster box units and supporting structures
may be installed in public rights-of-way provided said mailbox and supporting
structure is erected and located in accordance with the requirements of the
United States Postal Service (USPS), does not interfere with on-street parking
or, village roadway maintenance, such as snow removal activities and snow hold
areas and are subject to the following conditions:
      (1)   All mailboxes.
         (a)   The owner of the mailbox shall be responsible for all costs for
installation and maintenance of the mailbox and mailbox structure.
         (b)   It shall be unlawful to install, maintain or connect utility
lines to mailbox structures for any purpose. Residents should take all
necessary precautions to prevent damage to any existing utilities located in
the parkway.
         (c)   Replacement of improperly installed or non-conforming mailboxes
damaged during snow removal or other municipal work will be the responsibility
of the property owner.
         (d)   The village will not repair or replace any damaged mailbox
unless said damage was caused solely by the village and unless said mailbox is
considered conforming and was removed due to parkway maintenance, road widening
or utility installation by the village or its contractors.
         (e)   Notice is hereby given that in the event of any claim, lawsuit,
cause of action or liability against the village arising out of any damage to
persons or property caused by or alleged to be caused by any such mailbox and/
or its supporting structure which has been installed in the public right-of-
way, the village shall seek indemnification, contribution and/or otherwise seek
to recover its expenses in defending any such action and/or damages suffered
from the owner of the premises and/or any other party or parties responsible
for installing such mailbox and/or structure in the public right-of-way.
         (f)   Reflective material should be placed on the side of the mailbox
visible to approaching traffic.
      (2)   Mailboxes and mailbox structures that hold up to four individual
mailboxes on one supporting post.
         (a)   Any location change of an existing mailbox or establishment of a
new mailbox must be approved by the village and by USPS.
         (b)   No part of the structure on which the mailbox rests or which
holds or supports it or the face of the mailbox shall be closer than eight
inches from the back of curb or if there is no curb the location shall be
determined on a case-by-case basis and approved by the village.
         (c)   The supporting post shall be no closer than 18 inches from the
back of a curb or edge of pavement (if there is no curb), and posts shall be
constructed of materials having sufficient strength to withstand forces of snow
applied during normal roadway snow plowing operations.
         (d)   Mailbox supporting structures should be constructed of four-inch
by four-inch wood posts or a two-inch diameter thin wall steel pipe. Supporting
structures that are more substantial in construction will be considered non-
conforming hazardous fixed objects and are not permitted.
         (e)   If a conforming mailbox is damaged during municipal work, it
will be replaced with a model 1C or equivalent box and four-inch by four-inch
wood post or a two-inch diameter thin wall steel pipe support structure.
      (3)   Cluster box units (CBUs).
         (a)   Cluster box units (CBUs) may be supported by a cluster box
pedestal as approved by the USPS.
         (b)   If a conforming CBU mailbox is damaged during municipal work,
cluster box units will be replaced with the appropriate, compliant unit.
         (c)   CBU mailbox locations must be approved by the village, which
could be part of an overall development plan for the area to be served by the
CBU.
         (d)   CBU mailboxes must be placed at least six feet from a curb edge
or street pavement (if there is no curb) and must be placed on the back side of
a public sidewalk and not located between the sidewalk and the street pavement
unless an alternative location is approved by the village.
   (K)   Dumpster, equipment and construction material storage. The placement
and storage within the public right-of-way of a dumpster, portable storage
container, and/or construction materials shall require a permit from the
village. The holder of a right-of-way storage permit for a dumpster, equipment,
portable storage container and/or construction materials container shall comply
with the following restrictions and requirements:
      (1)   Only dumpsters, equipment, portable storage containers, or
construction materials container identified in the permit shall be stored
pursuant to said permit and only in the location identified on the permit.
      (2)   Any dumpsters, equipment, portable storage containers, or
construction materials stored pursuant to the permit shall be positioned in the
right-of-way in a manner that maximizes the area on the right-of-way that will
remain unobstructed for use by the public.
      (3)   Lids or doors on any stored dumpster or portable storage container
shall remain closed and secure except when said dumpster or container is being
loaded or emptied.
      (4)   No trash or other refuse shall be stored or allowed to remain
outside of a dumpster or portable storage container, and the area immediately
around the dumpster or containers shall be maintained in a clean and sanitary
manner.
   (L)   Stormwater discharge onto public property. The purpose of this section
is to regulate stormwater discharge onto public property. Any regulation
outlined by this section shall be superseded by
Chapter 51 if those requirements are more stringent than those outlined herein.
      (1)   Discharges. Stormwater and groundwater discharges onto public
right-of-way and direct connections to any public stormwater infrastructure are
prohibited, as stated below, unless a permit is issued by the village.
         (a)   Sump pumps installed to receive or discharge groundwater or
stormwater runoff shall be connected to a storm drain where possible or
discharged into a designated stormwater drainage facility. No sump pump shall
discharge directly onto a street surface or public sidewalk. Sump pumps are
prohibited from discharging in any way that would cause water to flow onto any
public sidewalks, roadways, or driveway approaches within the public right-of-
way. No sump pump outlets shall be connected to or discharged into a sanitary
sewer.
         (b)   Footing drains and drainage tile lines shall discharge into a
storm drain or other designated stormwater drainage facility. No footing drains
or drainage tile lines shall be connected to a sanitary sewer or be discharged
directly onto a roadway surface or public sidewalk.
         (c)   Downspouts and roof drains shall discharge onto the ground
outside of the public right-of-way or be connected to a storm drain. No
downspouts or roof drains shall be connected to a sanitary sewer or be
discharged directly onto a roadway surface or public sidewalk.
         (d)   Sump pumps, footing drains, downspouts, and other dry weather
water outlets shall discharge at a distance from the property line that is
sufficient to allow for water absorption into the ground but not less than five
feet away from the nearest property line. Such outlets shall not discharge
directly onto an adjacent property. If five feet is not sufficient for proper
water absorption, the offending property must remediate to a distance that will
allow for proper absorption.
      (2)   Permit required.
         (a)   No person shall hereafter construct, build, establish, replace,
or maintain any dry weather water outlet which discharges onto a public right-
of-way, public street, public sidewalk, roadside ditch, or other public
property maintained by the village without first obtaining a permit to do so.
Dry weather water outlets are prohibited from discharging directly onto any
public property, public right-of-way, public street, or public sidewalk if such
discharge creates or contributes to a public hazard or public nuisance.
         (b)   Failure to obtain a permit for a dry weather water outlet
discharge onto a public roadway, public right-of-way, public sidewalk, or other
public property shall be deemed a violation of
Chapter 51.
   (M)   Driveway approaches. Any person that desires to construct a driveway
approach within the right-of-way must first obtain a permit from the village
prior to construction, replacement, or alteration of a driveway approach. All
driveway approaches hereafter constructed, replaced, altered, established or
maintained shall conform with applicable provisions of this chapter.
Maintenance and installation of a driveway approach and the costs thereof shall
be the responsibility of the owner of the property served by the driveway
approach. The owner shall at all times maintain the driveway approach within
and any culvert beneath the village right-of-way in a reasonable condition
which allows water to flow free and clear of obstruction. The village may
perform routine maintenance of the culvert beneath a driveway approach as
needed and may request that the owner repair or replace any driveway approach
that doesn't meet the requirements of this chapter. The replacement of any
culvert beneath a driveway approach shall be the responsibility of the driveway
owner at said owner's expense.
   (N)   Parking spaces. Any person that desires to construct, replace or alter
a parking space within the right-of-way adjacent to their private property must
first obtain a permit from the village prior to construction, replacement, or
alteration of a parking space. A detailed plan including construction plans for
installation of a parking space within the public right-of-way must be
submitted with any permit request. Any permit issued is at the sole discretion
of the village and information submitted with a permit request will be reviewed
for safety and community need. Any constructed parking space is for public use
only.
   (O)   General construction and excavation. All construction in the right-of-
way shall be consistent with applicable ordinances, codes, laws, rules and
regulations, and commonly recognized and accepted traffic control and
construction principles, sound engineering judgment and, where applicable, the
principles and standards set forth in the following most recent IDOT
publications, as amended from time to time.
      (1)   Permit required. No person shall hereafter construct, build,
establish, modify, or replace a driveway, approach, sidewalk, culvert, or
utility in a street or alley right-of-way maintained by the village without
first obtaining a permit to do so, as hereinafter provided. Residents or
entities may obtain the application and permit forms for construction and
excavation in public rights-of-way from the village. Completed applications
shall be submitted to the village, along with a nonrefundable fee for
processing and construction inspection. Fees shall be as determined from time
to time by the Village Board of Trustees.
         (a)   Upon review of the permit application, the Building Inspector
shall determine whether the proposed construction conforms to the requirements
of any relevant ordinance(s), village codes and regulations. If it does, the
Building Inspector shall issue the permit for construction. If the proposed
construction does not conform to the requirements, the Building Inspector shall
deny issuance of the permit. If approval is denied, the applicant may appeal to
the corporate authorities for a deviation to the decision of the Building
Inspector.
         (b)   The corporate authorities may vary or adapt the strict
application of any of the requirements of this chapter where the strict
application would result in practical difficulty or unnecessary hardship that
would deprive the owner of the reasonable use of the land.
   (P)   Utilities. Utilities on, over, above, along, upon, under, across, or
within the village controlled rights-of-way shall conform with regulations set
forth in this chapter.
   (Q)   Utility service lines. All utility service lines within the public
right-of-way shall be owned, operated, and maintained by the utility. Privately
owned utility service lines located within the public right-of-way are
prohibited.
    (R)   Small wireless facilities. Any person constructing, building,
establishing, replacing, or maintaining a small wireless facility in a public
right-of-way maintained by the village shall comply with the regulations set
forth in
Chapter 96.
   (S)   Special events. Any special event shall comply with the regulations
set forth in
Chapter 97.
   (T)   Outdoor dining, seating, or retail sales. Any person that desires to
establish outdoor dining, seating, or retail sales that are associated with an
adjacent business which would be located on or partially on any part of the
public right-of-way must first obtain a permit from the village to do so. A
detailed plan for use of the public right-of-way must be submitted with any
permit request. Any permit issued is at the sole discretion of the village and
information submitted with a permit request will be reviewed for safety and
community need. The permit may also limit the duration of the use of the public
right-of-way and may require periodic renewal based on seasonal needs.
   (U)   Mobile food vendors and food trucks. Any person that desires to
operate as a mobile food vendor while on the public right-of-way must first
obtain a permit from the village to do so. Any request will be reviewed based
on any established Mobile Food Vendor Program guidelines and any permit issued
is at the sole discretion of the village.
   (V)   Glare and light trespass. Any lighting installed on adjacent private
property should be installed to minimized glare and excessive light trespass
within the public right-of-way. At the sole discretion of the village a request
may be made to any owner of installed lighting which is determined to cause
glare and excessive light trespass, to remove, discontinued use or alter
existing lighting to eliminate the glare and excessive light trespass on to
public right-of-way.
(Ord. 21-06-02, passed 6-22-2021; Ord. 22-03-04, passed 3-22-2022 ) Penalty,
see §
156.999
§ 156.011 AGREEMENTS, REGISTRATION, STATUS CHANGES, AND INSURANCE.
   (A)   Franchises, licenses, or similar agreements. The village, in its
discretion and as limited by law, may require utilities to enter into a
franchise, license or similar agreement for the privilege of locating their
facilities on, over, above, along, upon, under, across, or within the village
rights-of-way. Utilities that are not required by law to enter into such an
agreement may request that the village enter into such an agreement. In such an
agreement, the village may provide for terms and conditions inconsistent with
this chapter.
      (1)   In the event of any conflict with, or inconsistency between, the
provisions of this chapter and the provisions of any franchise, license or
similar agreement, the provisions of such franchise, license or similar
agreement shall govern and control during the term of such agreement and any
lawful renewal or extension thereof.
   (B)   Annual registration required. Every utility that occupies right-of-way
within the village shall register on January 1 of each year with the village,
providing the utility's name, address and regular business telephone and
telecopy numbers, email contact, the name of one or more contact persons who
can act on behalf of the utility in connection with emergencies involving the
utility's facilities in the right-of-way and a 24-hour telephone number and
email contact for each such person. Evidence of insurance as required in this
chapter, in the form of a certificate of insurance shall also be required.
   (C)   Change of ownership or owner's identity or legal status.
      (1)   Notification of change. A utility shall notify the village no less
than 30 days prior to the transfer of ownership of any facility in the right-
of-way or change in identity of the utility. The new owner of the utility or
the facility shall have all the obligations and privileges enjoyed by the
former owner under the permit, if any, and applicable laws, ordinances, rules,
and regulations, including this chapter, with respect to the work and
facilities in the right-of-way.
      (2)   Amended permit. A new owner shall request that any current permit
be amended to show current ownership. If the new owner fails to have a new or
amended permit issued in its name, the new owner shall be presumed to have
accepted, and agreed to be bound by, the terms and conditions of the permit if
the new owner uses the facility or allows it to remain on the village's right-
of-way.
      (3)   Insurance and bonding. All required insurance coverage or bonding
must be changed to reflect the name of the new owner upon transfer.
   (D)   Insurance.
      (1)   Required coverages and limits. Unless otherwise provided by
franchise, license, or similar agreement, each utility occupying right-of-way
or constructing any facility in the right-of-way shall secure and maintain the
following liability insurance policies insuring the utility as named insured
and naming the village, and its elected and appointed officers, officials,
agents, and employees as additional insureds on the policies listed in this
chapter:
         (a)   Commercial general liability insurance, including premises-
operations, explosion, collapse, and underground hazard (commonly referred to
as "X", "C", and "U" coverages) and products- completed operations coverage
with limits not less than:
            1.   One million dollars for bodily injury or death to each person;
            2.   One million dollars for property damage resulting from any one
accident; and
            3.   Two million dollars for all other types of liability.
         (b)   Automobile liability for owned, non-owned and hired vehicles
with a combined single limit of $1,000,000 for personal injury and property
damage for each accident;
         (c)   Workers' compensation with statutory limits; and
         (d)   Employer's liability insurance with limits of not less than
$1,000,000 per employee and per accident.
      (2)   Contractors/subcontractors. If the utility has retained the
services of a contractor to perform work upon the utility's facilities with
village public right-of-way, the contractor shall also provide insurance that
is at least as broad as the as the required coverage for the utility.
      (3)   Excess or umbrella policies. The coverages required by this chapter
may be in any combination of primary, excess, and umbrella policies. Any excess
or umbrella policy must provide excess coverage over underlying insurance on a
following form basis such that when any loss covered by the primary policy
exceeds the limits under the primary policy, the excess or umbrella policy
becomes effective to cover such loss.
      (4)   Copies required. The utility and its contractors shall provide
copies of any of the policies required by this chapter to the village within
ten calendar days following receipt of a written request from the village. Work
within village right-of-way shall be suspended until evidence of proper
coverage has been provided to the village.
      (5)   Maintenance and renewal of required coverages. The insurance
policies required by this chapter shall contain the following endorsement:
It is hereby understood and agreed that this policy may not be canceled nor the
intention not to renew be stated until 45 days after receipt by the village, by
registered mail or certified mail,  return receipt requested, of a written
notice addressed to the Village Administrator of such intent to cancel or not
to renew.
Within ten days after receipt by the village of said notice, and in no event
later than ten days prior to said cancellation, the utility shall obtain and
furnish to the village evidence of replacement insurance policies meeting the
requirements of this chapter. No work shall be performed upon village right-of-
way without insurance in effect.
      (6)   Effect of insurance on utility's liability. The legal liability of
the utility to the village and any person for any of the matters that are the
subject of the insurance policies required by this chapter shall not be limited
by such insurance policies or by the recovery of any amounts thereunder.
      (7)   Insurance companies. All insurance provided pursuant to this
chapter shall be affected under valid and enforceable policies, issued by
insurers legally able to conduct business with the licensee in the State of
Illinois. All insurance carriers and surplus line carriers shall be rated "A-
" or better and of a class size "X" or higher by A.M. Best Company.
   (E)   Indemnification. By occupying or constructing facilities in the right-
of-way, a utility shall be deemed to agree to defend, indemnify and hold the
village and its elected and appointed officials and officers, employees, agents
and representatives harmless from and against any and all injuries, claims,
demands, judgments, damages, losses and expenses, including reasonable attorney
fees and costs of suit or defense, arising out of, resulting from or alleged to
arise out of or result from the negligent, careless or wrongful acts,
omissions, failures to act or misconduct of the utility or its affiliates,
officers, employees, agents, contractors or subcontractors in the construction
of facilities or occupancy of the rights-of-way, and in providing or offering
service over the facilities, whether such acts or omissions are authorized,
allowed or prohibited by this chapter or by  franchise, license, or similar
agreement; provided, however, that the utility's indemnity obligations
hereunder shall not apply to any injuries, claims, demands, judgments, damages,
losses or expenses arising out of or resulting from the negligence, misconduct
or breach of this chapter by the village, its officials, officers, employees,
agents or representatives.
(Ord. 21-06-02, passed 6-22-2021; Ord. 22-03-04, passed 3-22-2022  Penalty, see
§
156.999
§ 156.012 PERMIT REQUIRED, APPLICATIONS AND FEES.
   (A)   Permit required. No utility, entity, or person shall construct (as
defined in this chapter) any facility on, over, above, along, upon, under,
across, or within any village right-of-way as listed below without first filing
an application with the village, paying any applicable application fee as
determined from time to time by resolution of the Village Board of Trustees and
obtaining a permit from the village therefor, except as otherwise provided in
this chapter.
      (1)   Changes the location of the facility;
      (2)   Installs or alters a service line;
      (3)   Adds a new facility;
      (4)   Disrupts the right-of-way (as defined in this chapter);
      (5)   Obstructs and/or encroaches into the right-of-way (as defined by
this chapter); or
      (6)   Materially increases the amount of area or space occupied by the
facility on, over, above, along, under, across or within the right-of-way.
   (B)   Permit application. All applications for permits pursuant to this
chapter shall be filed on a form provided by the village. The applicant may
designate those portions of its application materials that it reasonably
believes contain proprietary or confidential information as "proprietary" or
"confidential" by clearly marking each page of such materials accordingly.
      (1)   Minimum general application requirements. The application shall be
made by the utility or its duly authorized representative and shall contain, at
a minimum, the following:
         (a)   The utility's name and address, telephone number and email
address;
         (b)   The applicant's name, address, telephone number and e-mail
address, and its interest in the work;
         (c)   The name, address, telephone number and e-mail address of all
professional consultants, if any, advising the applicant with respect to the
work within the right-of-way;
         (d)   A general description of the proposed work, purpose, intent and
use of the facility, with special emphasis on the impact to the right-of-way by
the proposed work;
         (e)   Evidence that the applicant has placed on file with the village
a written traffic control plan demonstrating the protective measures and
devices that will be employed consistent with the Illinois Manual on Uniform
Traffic Control Devices, to prevent injury or damage to persons or property and
to minimize disruptions to efficient pedestrian and vehicular traffic; and an
emergency contingency plan which shall specify the nature of potential
emergencies, including, without limitation, construction and hazardous
materials emergencies, and the intended response by the applicant. The intended
response shall include notification to the village and shall promote protection
of the safety and convenience of the public. Compliance with ICC regulations
for emergency contingency plans constitutes compliance with this chapter unless
the village finds that additional information or assurances are needed;
         (f)   Drawings, plans and specifications showing the work proposed,
including the certification of an engineer that such drawings, plans, and
specifications comply with applicable codes, rules, and regulations;
         (g)   Evidence of insurance as required in this chapter;
         (h)   Evidence of performance guarantee posting as required in this
chapter;
         (i)   Proposed landscape screening plan per requirements in this
chapter;
         (j)   A written request for any deviation from one or more provisions
of this chapter; and
         (k)   Any additional information as may be reasonably required by the
village.
      (2)   Supplemental application requirements for specific types of
utilities. In addition to the requirements previously outline in this chapter,
the permit application shall include the following items, as applicable to the
specific utility that is the subject of the permit application:
         (a)   Electric power, communications, telecommunications, cable
television service, video service or natural gas distribution system. Must
provide evidence that any "certificate of public convenience and necessity" or
other regulatory authorization that the applicant is required by law to obtain,
or that the applicant has elected to obtain, has been issued by the ICC or
other jurisdictional authority;
         (b)   Natural gas systems. Must provide the proposed pipe size,
design, construction class, and operating pressures;
         (c)   Water lines. Must indicate that all requirements of the Illinois
Environmental Protection Agency, Division of Public Water Supplies, have been
satisfied;
         (d)   Sanitary sewer lines. Must indicate that the land and water
pollution requirements of the Illinois Environmental Protection Agency,
Division of Water Pollution Control have been satisfied; or
         (e)   Petroleum products pipelines. Must provide the type(s) of
petroleum products, pipe size, maximum working pressure, and the design
standard to be followed.
         (f)   Disturbance of more than 1.0 acres of right-of-way. Must
indicate that a NPDES erosion control permit has been acquired from the IEPA.
      (3)   Village standards. The village standards for repair of village
right-of-way, roadways and facilities disturbed by any utility activities are
as set forth in the village Infrastructure Design Manual, latest edition.
   (C)   Applicant's duty to update information.
      (1)   Throughout the entire permit application review period and the
construction period authorized by the permit, any amendments to information
contained in a permit application shall be submitted by the applicant in
writing to the village for review and village approval two business days prior
to any work effected by the amendment.
      (2)   In the event that the locations of any facilities deviate in any
material respect from the locations identified in the plans, drawings and
specifications submitted with the permit application, the permittee shall
submit a revised set of drawings or plans to the village.
         (a)   The revised drawings or plans shall specifically identify where
the locations of the facilities deviate from the locations approved in the
permit.
         (b)   If any deviation from the permit also deviates from the
requirements of this chapter, it shall be treated as a request for deviation in
accordance with this chapter. If the village denies the request for a variance,
then the permittee shall modify the facility so that it conforms to the
requirements of this chapter and submit revised drawings or plans.
   (D)   Reimbursement of fees by applicant. Unless otherwise provided by
franchise, license, or similar agreement, all applications for permits pursuant
to this chapter shall be charged an application fee. However, in the event the
village determines that engineering or other outside review of the application
is necessary due to the size, scope, complexity of the proposed project from
review of the application and submittal documents, or if it involves or impacts
storm water management facilities or conflicts with other existing utilities,
the village may forward the permit application and the drawings, plans and
specifications to the Village Engineer's office, and/or other outside
consultants for review and if the Village Engineer deems it necessary, for
field observation and inspection of the work. The applicant shall be
responsible to reimburse the village for all of its out of pocket expenses in
reviewing applications and submittal documents, including, but not limited to,
design documents and for field observation fees charged to the village by the
Village Engineer's office, and/or other outside consultants, if any, charged to
the village and billed at their usual and customary rates charged
municipalities for similar services in assisting the village in reviewing
permit applications under this chapter. No application fee or additional review
fee is required to be paid by any electricity utility that is paying the
municipal electricity infrastructure maintenance fee pursuant to the
Electricity Infrastructure Maintenance Fee Act.
   (E)   Village review of permit applications. Completed permit applications,
containing all required documentation, shall be examined by the village within
a reasonable time after filing. If the application does not conform to the
requirements of applicable ordinances, codes, laws, rules, and regulations, the
village shall reject such application in writing, stating the reasons therefor.
If the village is satisfied that the proposed work conforms to the requirements
of this chapter and applicable ordinances, codes, laws, rules, and regulations,
the village shall issue a permit therefor as soon as practicable. In all
instances, it shall be the duty of the applicant to demonstrate, to the
satisfaction of the village, that the construction proposed under the
application shall be in full compliance with the requirements of this chapter.
      (1)   Telecommunications retailers; additional village review of
applications.
         (a)   Pursuant to Chapter 4 of the Telephone Company Act (ILCS Ch.
220, Act 65, §4), a telecommunications retailer shall notify the village that
it intends to commence work governed by this chapter for facilities for the
provision of telecommunications services. Such notice shall consist of plans,
specifications, and other documentation sufficient to demonstrate the purpose
and intent of the facilities and shall be provided by the telecommunications
retailer to the village not less than ten days prior to the commencement of
work requiring no excavation and not less than 30 days prior to the
commencement of work requiring excavation. The village shall specify the
portion of the right-of-way upon which the facility may be placed, used, and
constructed.
         (b)   In the event that the village fails to provide such
specification of location to the telecommunications retailer within either: a)
ten days after service of notice to the village by the telecommunications
retailer in the case of work not involving excavation for new construction; or
b) 25 days after service of notice by the telecommunications retailer in the
case of work involving excavation for new construction, the telecommunications
retailer may commence work without obtaining a permit under this chapter.
         (c)   Upon the provision of such specification by the village, where a
permit is required for work pursuant to this chapter, the telecommunications
retailer shall submit to the village an application for a permit and any and
all plans, specifications, and documentation available regarding the facility
to be constructed. Such application shall be subject to the requirements of
this chapter.
      (2)   Holders of state authorization under the Cable and Video
Competition Law of 2007. Additional village review of applications by a utility
that is a holder of a state issued authorization under the Cable and Video
Competition Law of 2007 shall be deemed granted 45 days after submission to the
village, unless otherwise acted upon by the village, provided the holder has
complied with applicable village codes, ordinances, and regulations.
   (F)   Effect of permit; authority granted; no property right or other
interest created. A permit from the village authorizes a permittee to undertake
only certain activities in accordance with this chapter on village rights-of-
way and does not create a property right or grant authority to the permittee to
impinge upon the rights of others who may have an interest in the rights-of-
way.
      (1)   Duration. No permit issued under this chapter shall be valid for a
period longer than six months unless construction is actually begun within that
period and is thereafter diligently pursued to completion.
      (2)   Preconstruction meeting required. No construction shall begin
pursuant to a permit issued under this chapter prior to attendance by the
permittee and all major contractors and subcontractors who will perform any
work under the permit at a preconstruction meeting. The preconstruction meeting
shall be held at a date, time and place designated by the village with such
village representatives in attendance as the village deems necessary. The
meeting shall be for the purpose of reviewing the work under the permit and
reviewing special considerations necessary in the areas where work will occur,
including, without limitation, presence, or absence of other utility facilities
in the area and their locations, procedures to avoid disruption of other
utilities, use of rights-of-way by the public during construction, and access
and egress by adjacent property owners.
      (3)   Compliance with all laws required. The issuance of a permit by the
village does not excuse the permittee from complying with other requirements of
the village and applicable statutes, laws, ordinances, rules, and regulations
of other jurisdictions having authority.
      (4)   Deviations. Unless a deviation request is granted, all permitted
work within the right-of-way shall comply with the requirements of this
chapter. All non-compliant facilities shall either be removed from the right-
of-way or modified so the facility is compliant.
      (5)   Inspections. Required inspections will be determined by the village
and communicated as part of the permit application approval. For any required
inspection and when construction is complete, the applicant shall notify the
village that the work is ready for inspection. The inspection will be conducted
by the village. Should the work be found unacceptable, the applicant shall have
30 days within which to upgrade the construction to meet the requirements of
this chapter. If, at the end of that time, the work is still unacceptable, the
village may complete the work and the applicant and/or owner shall reimburse
the village for costs incurred.
      (6)   Permit close out.
         (a)   Completion of permitted work. When the work is completed the
permit holder shall provide the village a complete set of as built plans with
depth information in the form of shape files with Z data or PDF drawn to scale.
The data should be georeferenced to the NAD_1983_StatePlane_
Illinois_East_FIPS_1201_Feet.
         (b)   Punch list inspection. Upon receipt of as-built plans, the
village shall inspect the completed work for compliance with this chapter
within ten days thereafter the permit holder shall complete, modify, repair,
replace all non-compliant work identified by the village.
   (G)   Security.
      (1)   Purpose. The permittee shall establish a performance guarantee in a
form and in an amount as set forth in this chapter. The performance guarantee
shall be continuously maintained in accordance with this chapter at the
permittee's sole cost and expense until the completion of the work authorized
under the permit. The performance guarantee shall serve as security for:
         (a)   The faithful performance by the permittee of all the
requirements of this chapter;
         (b)   Any expenditure, damage, or loss incurred by the village
occasioned by the permittee's failure to comply with any codes, rules,
regulations, orders, permits and other directives of the village issued
pursuant to this chapter; and
         (c)   The payment by permittee of all liens and all damages, claims,
costs, or expenses that the village may pay or incur by reason of any action or
nonperformance by permittee in violation of this chapter including, without
limitation, any damage to public property or restoration work the permittee is
required by this chapter to perform that the village must perform itself or
have completed as a consequence solely of the permittee's failure to perform or
complete, and all other payments due the village from the permittee pursuant to
this chapter or any other applicable law.
      (2)   Form. The permittee shall provide the performance guarantee to the
village in the form, at the permittee's election, of cash, a surety bond in a
form acceptable to the Village Attorney, or an unconditional letter of credit
in a form acceptable to the Village Attorney. The permittee shall be required
to deliver documents and other evidence to the Village Attorney evidencing that
the issuing surety, bank, or financial institution meets the minimum
requirements set forth in this chapter. Any surety bond or letter of credit
provided pursuant to this subchapter shall, at a minimum:
         (a)   Provide that it will not be canceled without 45 day prior notice
to the village and the permittee;
         (b)   Not require the consent of the permittee prior to the collection
by the village of any amounts covered by it; and
         (c)   Shall provide a location convenient to the village and within
the State of Illinois at which it can be drawn.
      (3)   Amount. The dollar amount of the performance guarantee shall be
sufficient to provide for the reasonably estimated cost to restore the right-
of-way and all public improvements to at least as good a condition as that
existing prior to the construction under the permit. The amount of the
performance guarantee shall also include the estimated cost to screen
facilities greater than 40 inches in height with vegetative landscaping and to
maintain and replace any failed landscaping for a period of two years (the
"two-year maintenance period"), as determined by the village, and may also
include reasonable, directly related costs that the village estimates are
likely to be incurred if the permittee fails to perform such restoration. Where
the construction of facilities proposed under the permit will be performed in
phases in multiple locations in the village, with each phase consisting of
construction of facilities in one location ora related group of locations, and
where construction in another phase will not be undertaken prior to substantial
completion of restoration in the previous phase or phases, the village may, in
the exercise of sound discretion, allow the permittee to post a single amount
of security which shall be applicable to each phase of the construction under
the permit. The amount of the performance guarantee for phased construction
shall be equal to the greatest amount that would have been required under the
provisions of this subchapter for any single phase.
      (4)   Withdrawals. The village, upon 14 days' advance written notice
clearly stating the reason for, and its intention to exercise withdrawal rights
under this subchapter, may withdraw an amount from the performance guarantee,
provided that the permittee has not reimbursed the village for such amount
within the 14 day notice period. Withdrawals may be made if the permittee:
         (a)   Fails to make any payment required to be made by the permittee
hereunder;
         (b)   Fails to pay any liens relating to the facilities that are due
and unpaid;
         (c)   Fails to reimburse the village for any damages, claims, costs,
or expenses which the village has been compelled to pay or incur by reason of
any action or nonperformance by the permittee; or
         (d)   Fails to comply with any provision of this chapter that the
village determines can be remedied by an expenditure of an amount within the
limits of the performance guarantee.
      (5)   Replenishment. Within 14 days after receipt of written notice from
the village that any amount has been withdrawn from the performance guarantee,
the permittee shall restore the performance guarantee to the amount specified
in this chapter.
      (6)   Rights not limited. The rights reserved to the village with respect
to the performance guarantee are in addition to all other rights of the
village, whether reserved by this chapter or otherwise authorized by law, and
no action, proceeding or exercise of right with respect to said security fund
shall affect any other right the village may have. Notwithstanding the
foregoing, the village shall not be entitled to a double monetary recovery with
respect to any of its rights which may be infringed or otherwise violated.
      (7)   Suitability of security. In the event the permittee elects to post
a surety bond as its security fund, the bond shall be issued by a surety
company or insurance company authorized by the Illinois Department of Insurance
to issue sureties in the State of Illinois. In the event the permittee elects
to post an irrevocable letter of credit from a bank or savings and loan
association as its security fund, the issuing bank or savings and loan
association shall be federally insured and shall have assets of not less than
$50,000,000 and a capital asset ratio of not less than 6% unless the corporate
authorities otherwise determine and deem it good and sufficient security.
      (8)   Security not required. The village may determine that it is
unnecessary to provide security for certain projects. It is at the village's
sole discretion to determine when security is required.
   (H)   Permit suspension, enforcement and revocation.
      (1)   Village right to revoke permit. The village may revoke or suspend a
permit issued pursuant to this chapter for one or more of the following
reasons:
         (a)   Fraudulent, false, misrepresenting, or materially incomplete
statements in the permit application;
         (b)   Noncompliance with this chapter;
         (c)   Permittee's physical presence or presence of permittee's
facilities on, over, above, along, upon, under, across, or within the rights-
of- way presents a direct or imminent threat to the public health, safety, or
welfare;
         (d)   Permittee's failure to construct the facilities substantially in
accordance with the terms of the permit and approved plans; or
         (e)   Unexpected or excessive collateral damage to public
improvements.
      (2)   Notice of revocation or suspension. The village shall send written
notice of its intent to revoke or suspend a permit issued pursuant to this
chapter. The revocation is effective immediately upon receipt by the offending
entity. The revocation intent notice shall state the reason or reasons for the
revocation or suspension and the alternatives available to permittee under this
chapter.
      (3)   Permittee alternatives upon receipt of notice of revocation or
suspension. Upon receipt of a written notice of revocation or suspension from
the village, the permittee shall have the following options:
         (a)   Immediately provide the village with evidence that no cause
exists for the revocation or suspension;
         (b)   Immediately correct, to the satisfaction of the village, the
deficiencies stated in the written notice, providing written proof of such
correction to the village within five working days after receipt of the written
notice of revocation; or
         (c)   Immediately remove the facilities located on, over, above,
along, upon, under, across, or within the rights-of-way and restore the rights-
of-way to the satisfaction of the village providing written proof of such
removal to the village within ten days after receipt of the written notice of
revocation.
      (4)   Extension of time period. The village may, in its discretion, for
good cause shown, extend the time periods provided in this chapter.
      (5)   Stop work order. In addition to the issuance of a notice of
revocation or suspension, the village may issue a stop work order immediately
upon discovery of any of the reasons for revocation set forth within this
chapter. Work shall not be resumed after the issuance of a stop work order
except on the written permission of the village, if the stop order is oral, it
shall be followed by a written stop order.
      (6)   Failure or refusal of the permittee to comply. The permittee shall
be liable in all events to the village for all costs of removal. If the
permittee fails to comply with the provisions of this chapter, the village at
the option of the village may:
         (a)   Correct the deficiencies;
         (b)   Upon not less than 20 days' notice to the permittee, remove the
subject property, facilities or equipment; or
         (c)   After not less than 30 days' notice to the permittee of failure
to cure the noncompliance, deem them abandoned and property of the village.
      (7)   Enforcement actions. The village may serve notice requiring removal
of any facility, obstruction, or encroachment within village right-of-way which
is in violation of this chapter. This notice may be served on the owner or
authorized agent, a tenant, architect, builder, contractor or other person who
commits or participates in any violation. The village may request that the
Village Attorney institute legal proceedings necessary to enforce this chapter
or to prevent or remedy any violations thereof. The village may also request
the assistance of the Village Police in enforcing this chapter. The owner or
tenant of any structure, premises or part thereof and any architect, builder,
contractor, agent or other person who commits, participates or assists in or
maintains any violation may each be found guilty of a separate offense and
subjected to the penalties outlined in this chapter.
(Ord. 21-06-02, passed 6-22-2021; Ord. 22-03-04, passed 3-22-2022)  Penalty,
see §
156.999
§ 156.013 GENERAL CONSTRUCTION STANDARDS.
   (A)   Standards and principles. All construction in the right-of-way shall
be consistent with applicable ordinances, codes, laws, rules and regulations,
and commonly recognized and accepted traffic control and construction
principles, sound engineering judgment and, where applicable, the principles
and standards set forth in the applicable IDOT publications, as amended from
time to time.
   (B)   Interpretation of municipal standards and principles. If a discrepancy
exists between or among differing principles and standards required by this
chapter, the village shall determine, in the exercise of sound engineering
judgment, which principles apply, and such decision shall be final. If
requested, the village, shall state which standard or principle will apply to
the construction, maintenance, or operation of a facility in the future.
   (C)   Traffic control.
      (1)   Minimum requirements. The village's minimum requirements for
traffic protection are contained in IDOT's Illinois Manual on Uniform Traffic
Control Devices and this code.
      (2)   Warning signs, protective devices, and flaggers. The utility is
responsible for providing and installing warning signs, protective devices, and
flaggers, when necessary, meeting applicable federal, state, and local
requirements for protection of the public and the utility's workers when
performing any work on the rights-of-way.
      (3)   Interference with traffic. All work shall be phased so that there
is minimum interference with pedestrian and vehicular traffic.
      (4)   Notice when access is blocked. At least 48 hours prior to beginning
work that will partially or completely block access to any residence, business
or institution, the utility shall notify the resident, business or institution
of the approximate beginning time and duration of such work; provided, however,
that in cases involving emergency repairs pursuant to this chapter, the utility
shall provide such notice as is practicable under the circumstances.
      (6)   Compliance. The utility shall take immediate action to correct any
deficiencies in traffic protection requirements that are brought to the
utility's attention by the village.
   (D)   Location of facilities.
      (1)   General requirements. In addition to location requirements
applicable to specific types of utility facilities, all facilities, regardless
of type, shall be subject to the general location requirements of this
subchapter.
         (a)   No interference with village facilities. No facilities shall be
placed in any location if the village determines that the proposed location
will require the relocation or displacement of any of the village's public
improvements or will otherwise interfere with the operation or maintenance of
any of the village's utility facilities.
         (b)   Minimum interference and impact. The proposed location shall
cause only the minimum possible interference with the use of the right-of-way
and shall cause only the minimum possible impact upon, and interference with
the rights and reasonable convenience of property owners who adjoin said right-
of-way.
         (c)   No interference with travel. No facility shall be placed in any
location that interferes with the usual travel on such right-of-way.
         (d)   No limitations on visibility. No facility shall be placed in the
vision triangle at an intersection or at any location so as to limit visibility
of or by users of the right-of-way.
         (e)   Size of utility facilities. The proposed installation shall use
the smallest suitable vaults, boxes, equipment enclosures, power pedestals,
and/or cabinets then in use by the facility owner, regardless of location, for
the application.
         (f)   No interference with drainage. No facilities shall be placed in
any location that results in a blockage or disruption of stormwater drainage
runoff.
         (g)   Underground utility lines shall comply with the minimum bury
depths established by the NFPA, NEC or applicable regulatory agency.
         (h)   All utility lines carrying potential contaminants shall be
located not less than two (2.0) feet below a village water line or water
service line, unless other protective measures are implemented.
      (2)   Parallel facilities located within street rights-of-way.
         (a)   Overhead parallel facilities. An overhead parallel facility may
be located within the right-of-way lines of a highway only if:
            1.   Lines are located as near as practicable to the right-of-way
line and as nearly parallel to the right-of-way line as reasonable pole
alignment will permit;
            2.   Where pavement is curbed, poles are as remote as practicable
from the curb with a minimum distance of two feet (0.6 m) behind the face of
the curb, where available;
            3.   Where pavement is uncurbed, poles are as remote from pavement
edge as practicable with minimum distance of four feet (1.2 m) outside the
outer shoulder line of the roadway and are not within the clear zone as defined
by IDOT;
            4.   No pole is located in the ditch line of a highway; and
            5.   Any ground mounted appurtenance is located within one foot
(0.3 m) of the right-of-way line or as near as possible to the right-of-way
line.
         (b)   Underground parallel facilities. An underground parallel
facility may be located within the right-of-way lines of a village street only
if:
            1.   The facility is located as near the right-of-way line as
practicable and not more than eight feet (2.4 m) from and parallel to the
right-of-way line;
            2.   A new facility may be located under the paved portion of a
village street only if other locations are impracticable or inconsistent with
sound engineering judgment (e.g., a new cable may be installed in existing
conduit without disrupting the pavement); and
            3.   In the case of an underground power or communications line,
the facility shall be located as near the right-of-way line as practicable and
not more than five feet (1.5 m) from the right-of-way line and any above ground
appurtenance shall be located within one foot (0.3 m) of the right-of-way line
or as near as practicable.
      (3)   Facilities crossing streets.
         (a)   No future disruption. The construction and design of crossing
facilities installed between the ditch lines or curb lines of village streets
may require the incorporation of materials and protections (such as encasement
or additional cover) to avoid settlement or future repairs to the roadbed
resulting from the installation of such crossing facilities.
         (b)   Culverts or drainage facilities. Crossing facilities shall not
be located inside culverts or drainage facilities.
         (c)   Ninety degree crossing required. Crossing facilities shall cross
at or as near to a 90 degree angle to the centerline of the street pavement as
practicable.
         (d)   Overhead power or communication facility. An overhead power or
communication facility may cross a highway only if:
            1.   It has a minimum vertical line clearance as required by ICC's
rules entitled, "Construction of Electric Power and Communication Lines";
            2.   Poles are located within one foot (0.3 m) of the right-of-way
line of the highway and outside of the clear zone as defined by IDOT; and
            3.   Overhead crossings at major intersections are avoided.
         (e)   Underground power or communication facility. An underground
power or communication facility may cross a village street only if:
            1.   The design materials and construction methods will provide
maximum maintenance free service life; and
            2.   Capacity for the utility's foreseeable future expansion needs
is provided in the initial installation.
         (f)   Markers. The village may require the utility to provide a marker
at each right-of-way line where an underground facility other than a power or
communication facility crosses a highway. Each marker shall identify the type
of facility, the utility, and an emergency phone number. Markers may also be
eliminated as provided in current federal regulations.
      (4)   Facilities to be located within particular rights-of-way. The
village may require that facilities be located within public utility easements
that are not street right-of-way when such a location is consistent with the
best interest of the village.
      (5)   Freestanding facilities.
         (a)   The village may restrict the location and size of any
freestanding facility located within a right-of-way.
         (b)   The village may require any freestanding facility greater than
40 inches in height and having any side greater than 40 inches in width and/or
depth located within a right-of-way to be screened from view with evergreen
vegetative landscaping such as Techny arborvitae, Austrian spruce, Norway
spruce, and as determined by the village after taking into account and
depending upon the suitability of the available space surrounding the
freestanding facility, the terrain, slope, location, access, surrounding uses,
safety, aesthetic and ongoing maintenance requirements and costs.
         (c)   Freestanding facilities greater than 24 inches in height shall
not be located within the visibility triangle of any street intersection or
within the visibility triangle of any driveway approach serving a multi-family,
commercial, or industrial use and the village street.
      (6)   Facilities installed aboveground. Aboveground facilities may be
installed only if:
         (a)   No other existing facilities in the area are located
underground;
         (b)   New underground installation is not technically feasible; and
         (c)   The proposed installation will be made at a location, and will
employ suitable design and materials, to provide the greatest protection of
aesthetic qualities of the area being traversed without adversely affecting
safety. Suitable designs include, but are not limited to, self-supporting
armless, single pole construction with vertical configuration of conductors and
cable. Existing utility poles and light standards shall be used wherever
practicable; the installation of additional utility poles is strongly
discouraged.
      (7)   Facility attachments to bridges or roadway structures.
         (a)   Where practical, facilities may be installed as attachments to
bridges or roadway structures. Other means of construction may include, but are
not limited to, underground, underwater, and cable supports, all of which are
completely separated from the bridge or roadway structure. Facilities
transmitting commodities that are volatile, flammable, corrosive, or energized,
especially those under significant pressure or potential, present high degrees
of risk and such installations are not permitted on bridges.
            1.   Attachment devices shall be made of metal.
            2.   Conduit all utilities shall be in encased in metal conduit or
appropriate equivalent to prevent sagging. Alternative conduit must be approved
by the village.
            3.   If sagging occurs the village reserves the right to cause the
utility that installed or currently owns it to replace with better material.
         (b)   A utility shall include in its request to accommodate a facility
installation on a bridge or roadway structure supporting data demonstrating the
impracticability of alternate routing. Approval or disapproval of an
application for facility attachment to a bridge or roadway structure will be
based upon the following considerations:
            1.   The type, volume, pressure, or voltage of the commodity to be
transmitted and an evaluation of the resulting risk to persons and property in
the event of damage to or failure of the facility;
            2.   The type, length, value, and relative importance of the
highway structure in the transportation system;
            3.   The alternative routings available to the utility and their
comparative practicability;
            4.   The proposed method of attachment;
            5.   The ability of the structure to bear the increased load of the
proposed facility;
            6.   The degree of interference with bridge maintenance and
painting;
            7.   The effect on the visual quality of the structure; and
            8.   The public benefit expected from the utility service as
compared to the risk involved.
      (7)   Appearance standards.
         (a)   The village may prohibit the installation of facilities in
locations in order to preserve visual quality.
         (b)   A facility may be constructed only if its construction does not
require extensive removal or alteration of trees or terrain features visible to
the right-of-way user or to adjacent residents and property owners, and if it
does not impair the aesthetic quality of the lands being traversed.
   (E)   Construction methods and materials.
      (1)   Standards and requirements for particular types of construction
methods are as follows:
         (a)   Boring or jacking.
            1.   Pits and shoring. Boring or jacking under rights-of-way shall
be accomplished from pits located at a minimum distance specified by the
village from the edge of the pavement. Pits for boring or jacking shall be
excavated no more than 48 hours in advance of boring or jacking operations and
backfilled within 48 hours after boring or jacking operations are completed.
While pits are open, they shall be clearly marked and protected by barricades.
Shoring shall be designed, erected, supported, braced, and maintained so that
it will safely support all vertical and lateral loads that may be imposed upon
it during the boring or jacking operation.
            2.   Wet boring. Wet boring shall not be permitted under the
roadway or pavement.
            3.   Borings with diameters greater than five inches. Borings over
five inches (0.15 m) in diameter shall be accomplished with an auger and
following pipe, and the diameter of the auger shall not exceed the outside
diameter of the following pipe by more than one inch (25 mm).
            4.   Borings with diameters five inches or less. Shall not be
allowed within established neighborhoods.
            5.   Conduits, casings, carrier pipes six inches in diameter or
smaller shall generally be constructed via horizontal directional drilling or
microtunneling within existing neighborhoods. Extensive open cut trench
installation for small diameter utility lines shall normally not be permitted
within established neighborhoods but is allowed in areas of new development.
            6.   Tree preservation. Any facility located within the drip line
of any tree designated by the village to be preserved or protected shall be
placed under or around the root system.
         (b)   Trenching. Trenching for facility installation, repair, or
maintenance on rights-of-way shall be done in accordance with the applicable
provisions of Section 20 of the Standard Specifications for Water & Sewer
Construction in Illinois and Article 810.04 of the IDOT Standard Specifications
for Road & Bridge Construction.
            1.   Length. The length of open trench shall be kept to the
practicable minimum consistent with requirements for pipe/line testing. Only
one-half of any intersection may have an open trench at any time unless special
permission is obtained from the village.
            2.   Open trench and excavated material. Open trench and windrowed
excavated material shall be protected as required by Chapter 6 of the Illinois
Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices. Where practicable, the excavated
material shall be deposited between the roadway and the trench as added
protection. Excavated material shall not be placed or allowed to remain on the
paved portion of the roadway. Where right-of-way width does not allow for
windrowing excavated material off the paved portion of the roadway, excavated
material shall be hauled to an off-site location for temporary storage.
            3.   Drip line of trees. The utility shall not trench within the
drip line of any tree designated by the village to be preserved.
         (c)   Backfilling.
            1.   Any pit, trench, or excavation created during the installation
of facilities shall be backfilled for its full width, depth, and length using
methods and materials in accordance with IDOT'S "Standard Specifications for
Road and Bridge Construction". When excavated material is hauled away or is
unsuitable for backfill, suitable granular backfill shall be used.
            2.   For a period of 18 months from the date construction of a
facility is completed, the utility shall be responsible to remove and restore
any backfilled area that has settled due to construction of the facility. If so
ordered by the village, the utility, at its expense, shall remove any pavement
and backfill material to the top of the installed facility, place and properly
compact new backfill material, and restore new pavement, sidewalk, curbs, and
driveways to the proper grades, as determined by the village.
            3.   Jetting of backfill within excavated areas shall not be
allowed. Mechanical compaction shall be required within all village right-of-
way.
         (d)   Pavement cuts. Pavement cuts for facility installation or repair
shall be permitted on a village street only if that portion of the street is
closed to traffic. If a deviation to the limitation set forth herein is
permitted under this chapter, the following requirements shall apply:
            1.   Controlled low strength material (CLSM) shall be utilized
under all Village of Mahomet street pavements having an average daily traffic
flow of 150 vehicles or more.
            2.   All pavement removal shall be accomplished via full depth saw
cutting. Restoration of pavement shall be accomplished as soon as practicable.
Permanent restoration is encouraged at the time of the cut. Temporary repair of
the pavement with cold mix asphalt shall be provided immediately. Any
subsequent failure of either the temporary repair or the restoration shall be
rebuilt immediately upon notification by the village that a failure has
occurred.
            3.   For all rights-of-way which have been reconstructed with a
concrete surface/base or full-depth hot mix asphalt in the last seven years or
resurfaced in the last three years, permits shall not be issued unless such
work is determined to be an emergency repair or other work considered necessary
and unforeseen before the time of the reconstruction or unless a pavement cut
is necessary for a JULIE locate.
            4.   Bituminous surface and hot mix asphalt surface pavements shall
be repaired with not less than ten-inch thickness full depth hot mix asphalt.
            5.   Portland Cement Concrete pavements shall be repaired with not
less than seven-inch thickness High Early Strength Portland Cement Concrete,
tied to adjacent pavement with minimum 30 inch by #4 epoxy coated tie bars,
drilled and grouted, at 30 inch centers.
         (e)   Encasement.
            1.   Encasement of a utility line may be required when crossing
arterial and collector streets as determined on a case by case basis by the
Village Engineer.
            2.   Casing pipe shall be designed to withstand the load of the
street and any other superimposed loads. The casing shall be continuous either
by one-piece fabrication or by welding or jointed installation approved by the
village.
            3.   Water service lines installed under roadway pavements shall
utilize horizontal directional drilling construction methods unless otherwise
approved by the village.
            4.   In the case of gas pipelines or petroleum products pipelines
with installations of more than 60 psig, encasement may be eliminated only if:
1) extra heavy pipe is used that precludes future maintenance or repairl; and
2) cathodic protection of the pipe is provided.
         (f)   Minimum cover of underground facilities. Cover shall be provided
and maintained at least in the amount specified in the following table for
minimum cover for the type of facility:
 
Type of Facility             Minimum Cover
Telecommunication lines      24 inches (0.6 m)
Storm sewer or drainage line 24 inches (0.6 m)
Electric lines               30 inches (0.8 m)
Gas or petroleum products    42 inches (1.1 m)
Water line                   48 inches (1.2 m)
Sanitary sewer               60 inches (1.5 m)
 
      (2)   Standards and requirements for particular types of facilities.
         (a)   Electric power or communication lines.
            1.   Code compliance. Electric power or communications facilities
within village rights-of-way shall be constructed, operated, and maintained in
conformity with the provisions of 83 Illinois Administrative Code Part 305
(formerly General Order 160 of the Illinois Commerce Commission) entitled
"Rules for Construction of Electric Power and Communication Lines", and the
National Electrical Safety Code.
            2.   Overhead facilities. Overhead power or communication
facilities shall use single pole construction and, where practicable, joint use
of poles by multiple utilities shall be required. Utilities shall make every
reasonable effort to design the installation so guys and braces will not be
needed. Deviations may be allowed if there is no feasible alternative and if
guywires are equipped with guy guards for maximum visibility.
            3.   Underground facilities.
               a.   Cable may be installed by trenching or plowing within new
development areas. Cable may be installed by trenching or plowing only in
limited circumstances within existing neighborhoods. Horizontal directional
drilling or microtunneling shall normally be utilized within existing
neighborhoods in order to minimize damage when crossing improved entrances and
side roads.
               b.   If a crossing is installed by boring and jacking,
encasement shall be provided between jacking or bore pits and beneath all
existing pavements. Encasement may be eliminated only if: a) the installation
is by horizontal directional drilling or microtunneling; or b) the installation
is by the open trench method which is only permitted prior to roadway pavement
construction.
               c.   Cable shall be grounded in accordance with the National
Electrical Safety Code.
            4.   Burial of service lines. All temporary service drops placed
between November 1 of the prior year and March 15 of the current year, also
known as snow drops, shall be buried by May 1 of the current year, weather
permitting, unless otherwise permitted by the village. Weather permitting,
utilities shall bury all temporary and permanent service lines, excluding snow
drops, within ten business days after placement.
         (b)   Gas transmission, distribution and service. Gas pipelines within
rights-of-way shall be constructed, maintained, and operated in a village
approved manner and in conformance with the Federal Code of the Office of
Pipeline Safety Operations, Department of Transportation, Part 192,
Transportation of Natural and Other Gas by Pipeline: Minimum Federal Safety
Standards (49 C.F.R. Chapter 192), IDOT's "Standard Specifications For Road And
Bridge Construction", and all other applicable laws, rules, and regulations.
         (c)   Petroleum products pipelines. Petroleum products pipelines
within rights-of-way shall conform to the applicable chapters of ANSI standard
code for pressure piping (liquid petroleum transportation piping systems ANSI-
B 31.4).
         (d)   Water lines, sanitary sewer lines, or storm water drain lines.
Water lines, sanitary sewer lines, and storm drain lines within rights-of-way
shall meet or exceed the recommendations of the current "Standard
Specifications for Water and Sewer Main Construction in Illinois".
         (e)   Ground mounted appurtenances. Ground mounted appurtenances to
overhead or underground facilities, when permitted within a right-of-way, shall
be provided with a vegetation free area extending one foot (305 mm) in width
beyond the appurtenance in all directions. The vegetation free area may be
provided by an extension of the mounting pad, or by heavy duty plastic or
similar material approved by the village. With the approval of the village,
shrubbery surrounding the appurtenance may be used in place of vegetation free
area. The housing for ground mounted appurtenances shall be painted a neutral
color to blend with the surroundings.
         (f)   Driveway approaches. Driveway approaches within a right-of-way
shall be installed according to the following design standards and construction
specifications.
            1.   Design standards.
               a.   Single- and two-family residential property driveway
approaches.
 
                         At Street Curb/Pavement Entrance Distance from
At Private Property Line Edge                    Radius   Property Line
                                                          Extended1, 3
Minimum Maximum          Minimum Maximum         Minimum  Minimum
Width   Width2           Width   Width2
                                                          Same as the minimum
                                                          setback for the main
10 ft.  30 ft.           10 ft.  30 ft.          None     structure as
                                                          required by the
                                                          served property
                                                          zoning.
 
 
Notes:
1   A minimum distance is required from any part of the driveway approach and
the property line extended through the public right-of-way except when a
driveway approach is shared to serve adjacent properties. Shared driveway
approaches may be a maximum of 44 feet wide at both the private property line
and the street curb/pavement edge.
2   A driveway approach width cannot exceed 50% of the lot frontage along the
street for which the driveway approach accesses.
3   The Village Engineer may authorize a minimum separation distance that is
less for driveway approaches located in cul-de-sacs or when other site or
roadway conditions warrant a reduction in driveway approach separation.
 
               b.   All other driveway approaches including multiple-family
residential, commercial, industrial, conservation, and agricultural. Must be
approved by the village as part of site development plan review when applicable
or must be approved on an individual basis. A proposed driveway approach will
be reviewed based the intended use of the land.
            2.   Construction specifications. Driveway approach surface within
street right-of-way must be installed over a compacted subgrade as follows:
               a.   Compacted Crushed Stone Base: CA7 crushed stone or
equivalent as approved by the village, minimum thickness: six inches;
               b.   Preferred surface material: Portland cement concrete,
minimum thickness: six inches; and
               c.   Alternative surface material: bituminous concrete or other
material. Any use of bituminous concrete or other material must be approved by
the village. When bituminous concrete is approved, installation must be three
to four inch minimum thickness of bituminous concrete surface, constructed over
a six inch compacted crushed stone base. Any other approved material and
related construction must be approved by the village.
               d.   Side slopes: maximum: three horizontal, one vertical.
               e.   Driveway approaches shall be formed and poured separately
from driveway, sidewalk, curb or road edge via expansion joint material or
other approved method or material.
               f.   The finished grade of the driveway approach edge which
meets the roadway curb, roadway surface and sidewalk shall be level with the
adjacent roadway surface, roadway curb or sidewalk.
            3.   Drainage and culvert requirements. In no event shall any
driveway interfere with the existing drainage along and upon the right-of-way.
In all cases where the driveway or proposed driveway does or may interfere with
the existing drainage with the right-of-way, culverts shall be installed in
accordance with the following specifications.
               a.   Minimum diameter: 12 inches; larger culverts may be
required by the village for a specific location to provide adequate drainage.
The total cost of the required culvert is the responsibility of the owner. The
village may allow smaller culverts if it can be shown that a smaller culvert is
sufficient for current and future anticipated flows.
               b.   Piping materials may be of the following:
                  i.   Galvanized, corrugated steel pipe, minimum gauge: 16;
                  ii.   Aluminum alloy pipe, minimum gauge: 16;
                  iii.   Reinforced concrete sewer and culvert pipe which is
properly joined;
                  iv.   Corrugated outside/ smooth inside polyethylene culvert
pipe; and
                  v.   Other materials approved by the village.
               c.   Flow line of the culvert shall match the flow line of the
ditch unless requested by the village to be lowered to accommodate existing
conditions and future grading and cleaning. Prior to installation of the
culvert pipe, the ditch shall be graded and shaped as designed or as approved
by the village. The village may direct that the flow line of the culvert be
placed below the flow line of the existing ditch to allow for future grading
and cleaning of existing ditches.
               d.   Culvert length, excluding any end treatments, shall extend
at least one foot beyond the driveway approach surface material but in no case
shall be less than 12 feet in length. Any end treatment or culvert pipe end
section shall extend beyond the intersection of the driveway side slopes and
the flow line of the ditch.
               e.   Unless site conditions warrant a different design, a
minimum of one-half inch of cover excluding the required surface material shall
be required over the culvert pipe.
               f.   All culverts shall be installed with proper end sections
that fit the side slope of the ditch. End section material must match the
material of the culvert pipe installed and shall be securely fastened to the
pipe or placed in a manner to prevent settlement or collapse and/or blockage of
flow. The end of the pipe shall be of the same cross-sectional shape as the
interior of the pipe and shall not be dented or bent so as to reduce the pipe
diameter, width or height at the location by more than 4% (one-half-inch in 12
inches). Pipes failing this requirement will have to be removed and replaced
prior to driveway construction. The use of alternative end treatments such as
headwalls or slopewalls shall be approved by the village. Some end treatments
may not be allowed in areas of high traffic, deep ditches or where existing
conditions prohibit.
            4.   Sidewalks. Sidewalks through all driveway approaches shall be
a minimum of six inches thick Portland Cement concrete and shall be constructed
in accordance with the Village Subdivision Ordinance. Where new driveway
approaches are constructed adjacent to existing sidewalks, any sidewalk not in
conformance with this section shall be removed and replaced and the sidewalk
width shall match the adjacent exiting sidewalk. Driveway approaches shall be
formed and poured separately from sidewalks.
            5.   No village guarantee. While requiring minimum standards for
driveway approach and culvert construction, the village does not guarantee that
these minimum standards are adequate for the intended use of the improvements.
            6.   The village reserves the right to deny direct driveway
approach access to any right-of-way within the village. Any property with
multiple right-of-way frontages may be required to have access off of an alley,
secondary frontage or off of the right-of-way frontage with the lowest roadway
classification.
      (3)   Materials.
         (a)   General standards. The materials used in constructing facilities
within rights-of-way shall be those meeting the accepted standards of the
appropriate industry, the applicable portions of IDOT's "Standard
Specifications for Road and Bridge Construction", the Standard Specification
for Water and Sewer Construction in Illinois, the requirements of the Illinois
Commerce Commission, or the standards established by other official regulatory
agencies for the appropriate industry/utility.
         (b)   Material storage on right-of-way. No material shall be stored on
the right-of-way without the prior written approval of the village. When such
storage is permitted, all pipe, conduit, wire, poles, cross arms, or other
materials shall be distributed along the right-of-way prior to and during
installation in a manner to minimize hazards to the public or which does not
create an obstacle to right-of-way maintenance or damage to the right-of-way
and other property. If material is to be stored on right-of-way, prior approval
must be obtained from the village.
         (c)   Hazardous materials. The plans submitted by the utility to the
village shall identify any hazardous materials that may be involved in the
construction of the new facilities or removal of any existing facilities.
      (4)   Operational restrictions. Construction operations on rights-of-way
may, at the discretion of the village, be required to be discontinued when such
operations would create hazards to traffic or the public health, safety, and
welfare. Such operations may also be required to be discontinued or restricted
when conditions are such that construction would result in extensive damage to
the right-of-way or other property. These restrictions may be waived by the
village when emergency work is required to restore vital utility services.
      (5)   Location of existing facilities. Any utility proposing to construct
facilities within the village shall contact JULIE and ascertain the presence
and location of existing aboveground and underground facilities within the
rights-of-way to be occupied by its proposed facilities. The village will make
its permit records available to a utility for the purpose of identifying
possible facilities. When notified of an excavation or when requested by the
village or by JULIE, a utility shall locate and physically mark its underground
facilities including service lines within 48 hours, excluding weekends and
holidays, in accordance with the Illinois Underground Facilities Damage
Prevention Act.
(Ord. 21-06-02, passed 6-22-2021; Ord. 22-03-04, passed 3-22-2022)  Penalty,
see §
156.999
§ 156.014 VEGETATION CONTROL.
   (A)   Electric utilities; compliance with state laws and regulations. An
electric utility shall conduct all tree trimming and vegetation control
activities in the right-of-way in accordance with applicable Illinois laws and
regulations, and additionally, with such local franchise or other agreement
terms with the village as permitted by law. The electric utility shall provide
appropriate traffic control per MUTCD. The electric utility shall not disrupt
or obstruct the right-of-way.
   (B)   Other utilities; tree trimming permit required. Tree trimming that is
done by any other utility with facilities in the right-of-way and that is not
performed pursuant to applicable Illinois laws and regulations specifically
governing same, shall not be considered a normal maintenance operation, but
shall require the application for, and the issuance of, a permit, in addition
to any other permit required under this chapter.
      (1)   Application for tree trimming permit. Applications for tree
trimming permits shall include assurance that the work will be accomplished by
competent workers with supervision who are experienced in accepted tree pruning
practices. Tree trimming permits shall designate an expiration date in the
interest of assuring that the work will be expeditiously accomplished.
   (C)   Damage to trees. Poor pruning practices resulting in damaged or
misshapen trees will not be tolerated and shall be grounds for cancellation of
the tree trimming permit and for assessment of damages. The village will
require compensation for trees extensively damaged and for trees removed
without authorization. The formula developed by the International Society of
Arboriculture will be used as a basis for determining the compensation for
damaged trees or unauthorized removal of trees. The village may require the
removal and replacement of trees if trimming or radical pruning would leave
them in an unacceptable condition.
   (D)   Specimen trees or trees of special significance. The village may
require that special measures be taken to preserve specimen trees or trees of
special significance. The required measures may consist of higher poles, side
arm extensions, covered wire or other means and methods.
   (E)   Chemical use.
      (1)   Except as provided in the following subchapter, no utility shall
spray, inject, or pour any chemicals on or near any trees, shrubs, or
vegetation in the village for any purpose, including the control of growth,
insects, or disease.
      (2)   Spraying of any type of brush killing chemicals will not be
permitted on rights-of-way unless the utility demonstrates to the satisfaction
of the village that such spraying is the only practicable method of vegetation
control.
(Ord. 21-06-02, passed 6-22-2021; Ord. 22-03-04, passed 3-22-2022)  Penalty,
see §
156.999
§ 156.015 REMOVAL, RELOCATION, OR MODIFICATIONS OF UTILITY FACILITIES.
   (A)   Notice. Within 60 days following written notice from the village, a
utility shall, at its own expense, protect, support, temporarily or permanently
disconnect, remove, relocate, change or alter the position of any utility
facilities within the rights-of-way whenever the corporate authorities have
determined that such removal, relocation, change or alteration, is reasonably
necessary for the construction, repair, maintenance, or installation of any
village improvement in or upon, or the operations of the village in or upon,
the rights-of-way.
   (B)   Removal of unauthorized facilities. Within 30 days following written
notice from the village, any utility that owns, controls, or maintains any
unauthorized facility or related appurtenances within the rights-of-way shall,
at its own expense, remove all or any part of such facilities or appurtenances
from the rights-of-way. A facility is unauthorized and subject to removal in
the following circumstances:
      (1)   Upon expiration or termination of the permittee's license or
franchise, unless otherwise permitted by applicable law;
      (2)   If the facility was constructed or installed without the prior
grant of a license or franchise, if required;
      (3)   If the facility was constructed or installed without prior issuance
of a required permit in violation of this chapter; or
      (4)   If the facility was constructed or installed at a location not
permitted by the permittee's license or franchise.
   (C)   Emergency removal or relocation of facilities. The village retains the
right and privilege to cut or move any facilities located within the rights-of-
way of the village, as the village may determine to be necessary, appropriate,
or useful in response to any public health or safety emergency. If
circumstances permit, the municipality shall attempt to notify the utility, if
known, prior to cutting or removing a facility and shall notify the utility, if
known, after cutting or removing a facility.
   (D)   Abandonment of facilities. Upon abandonment of a facility within the
rights-of-way of the village, the utility shall notify the village within 90
days. Following receipt of such notice the village may direct the utility to
remove all or any portion of the facility if the Village Administrator
determines that such removal will be in the best interest of the public health,
safety, and welfare. In the event that the village does not direct the utility
that abandoned the facility to remove it, by giving notice of abandonment to
the village, the abandoning utility shall be deemed to consent to the
alteration or removal of all or any portion of the facility by another utility
or person.
(Ord. 21-06-02, passed 6-22-2021; Ord. 22-03-04, passed 3-22-2022)  Penalty,
see §
156.999
§ 156.016 CLEANUP AND RESTORATION.
   (A)    The permittee shall remove all excess material and restore all turf
and terrain and other property within ten days after any portion of the rights-
of-way are disturbed, damaged, or destroyed due to construction or maintenance
by the permittee, all to the satisfaction of the village. The time period
provided in this chapter may be extended by the village for good cause shown.
   (B)   Restoration of entrances and side roads is required. Restoration of
roadway surfaces shall be made using materials and methods approved by the
village and as set forth in the Village Infrastructure Design Manual and
associated detail drawings.
   (C)   Such cleanup and repair may be required to consist of backfilling,
regrading, reseeding, resodding, or any other requirement to restore the right-
of-way to a condition substantially equivalent to that which existed prior to
the commencement of the project and the installation of vegetative landscape
screening if required under the provisions of this chapter.
   (D)   All public improvements shall be fully and completely restored. When
grass areas are disturbed the applicant or their agent shall do the following
for restoration of grass:
      (1)   Initial grading. Remove or break down all large clods sufficiently
enough to avoid trip or other hazards.
      (2)   Final grading. Remove or break down clumps of dirt sufficiently for
planting, hand rake the dirt out, apply seed starter, sow grass seed, place a
biodegradable straw mat and secure with biodegradable pins, and then water the
area sufficiently to begin germination.
(Ord. 21-06-02, passed 6-22-2021; Ord. 22-03-04, passed 3-22-2022)  Penalty,
see §
156.999
§ 156.017 MAINTENANCE AND EMERGENCY MAINTENANCE.
   (A)   General. Facilities on, over, above, along, upon, under, across, or
within rights-of-way are to be maintained by or for the utility in a manner
satisfactory to the village and at the utility's expense.
   (B)   Emergency maintenance procedures. Emergencies may justify
noncompliance with normal procedures for securing a permit:
      (1)   If an emergency creates a hazard on the traveled portion of the
right-of-way, the utility shall take immediate steps to provide all necessary
protection for traffic on the highway or the public on the right-of-way
including the use of signs, lights, barricades, or flaggers. If a hazard does
not exist on the traveled way, but the nature of the emergency is such as to
require the parking on the shoulder of equipment required in repair operations,
adequate signs and lights shall be provided. Parking on the shoulder in such an
emergency will only be permitted when no other means of access to the facility
is available.
      (2)   In an emergency, the utility shall, as soon as possible, notify the
village of the emergency, informing him or her as to what steps have been taken
for protection of the traveling public and what will be required to make the
necessary repairs. If the nature of the emergency is such as to interfere with
the free movement of traffic, the village police shall be notified immediately.
      (3)   In an emergency, the utility shall use all means at hand to
complete repairs as rapidly as practicable and with the least inconvenience to
the traveling public.
   (C)   Emergency repairs. The utility must file in writing with the village a
description of the repairs undertaken in the right-of-way within 48 hours after
an emergency repair.
(Ord. 21-06-02, passed 6-22-2021; Ord. 22-03-04, passed 3-22-2022)  Penalty,
see §
156.999
§ 156.018 DEVIATIONS, EXCEPTIONS OR RELIEF.
   (A)   Request for deviation. A utility or applicant requesting a deviation
from one or more of the provisions of this chapter must do so in writing to the
village as a part of the permit application. The request shall identify each
provision of this chapter from which a deviation is requested and the reasons
why a deviation should be granted.
   (B)   Authority to grant deviations. The village shall decide whether a
deviation is authorized for each provision of this chapter identified in the
deviation request on an individual basis.
   (C)   Conditions for granting of deviation. The village may authorize a
deviation only if the utility or applicant requesting the deviation has
demonstrated that:
      (1)   One or more conditions not under the control of the utility or
applicant (such as terrain features or an irregular right-of-way line) create a
special hardship that would make enforcement of the provision unreasonable,
given the public purposes to be achieved by the provision; and
      (2)   All other designs, methods, materials, locations, or facilities
that would conform with the provision from which a deviation is requested are
impracticable in relation to the requested approach.
   (D)   Additional conditions for granting of a deviation. As a condition for
authorizing a deviation, the village may require the utility or applicant
requesting the deviation to meet reasonable standards and conditions that may
or may not be expressly contained within this chapter, but which carry out the
purposes of this chapter.
   (E)   Right to appeal. Any utility or applicant aggrieved by any order,
requirement, decision, or determination, including denial of a deviation, made
by the village under the provisions of this chapter shall have the right to
appeal to the Village Board of Trustees. The application for appeal shall be
submitted in writing to the Village Clerk within 30 days after the date of such
order, requirement, decision, or determination. The Village Board of Trustees
shall commence their consideration of the appeal within 21 days after the
filing of the appeal. The Village Board of Trustees shall on a timely basis
decide the appeal.
(Ord. 21-06-02, passed 6-22-2021; Ord. 22-03-04, passed 3-22-2022)
§ 156.019 REQUIREMENTS TO REPAIR OR REMOVE.
   (A)    Any person performing any act that is in violation of the provisions
of this chapter which damages village infrastructure or public improvements
shall immediately notify the village of the location and extent of the damages.
   (B)   A person who damages village infrastructure or creates or maintains an
obstruction or encroachment and who fails to repair such damage or remove the
obstruction or encroachment from the public way within 48 hours or within the
time period as set by the village shall be liable for the cost of repair or
removal.
   (C)   The village may remove or cause the removal of unauthorized,
improperly constructed, abandoned, or unattended personal property and
facilities within the right-of-way and charge the cost of removal and disposal
to the person responsible for the deposit of such property in the right-of-way.
   (D)   The costs to be charged shall include, but not be limited to, labor
and overhead based on the personnel involved in administering this section. The
amount so charged shall be billed to the person responsible. The amount shall
be paid to the village within 30 days after the date of the bill.
(Ord. 21-06-02, passed 6-22-2021; Ord. 22-03-04, passed 3-22-2022)
§ 156.020 PAVEMENT DEGRADATION.
   (A)    The construction, installation, repair, or maintenance of a utility
facility within the right-of-way requiring excavation will require application
for an excavation permit.
   (B)   Any excavation performed for the purpose of constructing, installing,
repairing or maintaining a facility must comply with the following
requirements: All open cut trenches made either to existing pavements or
sidewalks or in future pavement areas shall be backfilled utilizing one of two
recommended methods: those being the use of controlled low strength materials
(CLSM) or, alternately, the placement of thin (six-inch maximum) mechanically
compacted lifts of CA6 or CA10 aggregate materials as approved by the village.
Water jetting of the aggregate backfill material will not be permitted. The
proper backfill material shall extend not less than two feet In each direction
from the edge of the pavement.
   (C)   For both the CLSM and granular backfill methods, the top 12 inches of
the excavation shall be filled with soil or granular material of similar
composition to that of the adjacent subgrade. The 12 inches of soil shall be
compacted to at least 95% of maximum dry density (AASHTO T99) with no more than
110% optimum moisture.
   (D)   When a trench is cut into an existing pavement or sidewalk, the
pavement shall be replaced in kind with a total thickness two inches greater
than existing to a maximum often inches. When restoring Portland Cement
concrete pavement, the entire slab into which the trench was cut shall be
removed and replaced. If the surface is either hot mix asphalt or oil and chip,
full depth hot mix asphalt shall be utilized for the pavement replacement.
Replacement pavement shall be installed no less than two feet in each direction
beyond the lateral edge of the excavation trench.
   (E)   All utility structures (i.e., shut-off valves, vault boxes, lids,
poles, lines, markers, and the like) that pose a threat to public safety shall
be replaced when directed by the village.
   (F)   Any pavement failures which may occur outside of the original restored
or repaired pavement or right-of-way area resulting from the utility activity
will be repaired by the responsible contractor or utility company.
   (G)   Any person which plans to install any underground utilities within a
present or proposed street or sidewalk right-of-way area is required to notify
the village a minimum of 24 hours prior to beginning work. The notification
shall include the exact location and nature of the work to be performed. In
emergency situations, the village shall be notified immediately upon the
responsible party's decision that excavation is required. Roadway or sidewalk
area repairs or restoration made without proper notification may require re-
excavation and replacement with approved backfill.
(Ord. 21-06-02, passed 6-22-2021; Ord. 22-03-04, passed 3-22-2022)  Penalty,
see §
156.999
§ 156.021 RELOCATIONS AND RESCISSION OF USE REQUESTED BY VILLAGE.
   (A)   General. The Village of Mahomet owns and maintains the public rights-
of-way. As such it is in the public interest for the village to allow the use
of its roadway rights-of-way by utility companies and other entities on a
permission-based basis. However, the rights of the village to utilize, operate
and maintain its facilities within its right-of-way shall be paramount.
   (B)   Relocations. The village, at any time, for any reasonable public
purpose, may require the removal, relocation, adjustment, or other modification
of any utility facility. When notified to do so utility companies shall
relocate, adjust or otherwise modify their facilities to accommodate the
proposed village activity. Said relocations, adjustments or modifications shall
be completed not less than 90 days after written notification to the utility by
the village. Said relocations, adjustments or modifications shall be at the
sole cost of the utility.
   (C)   Rescission of use. The village reserves the right, at any time, to
prohibit and rescind any use of the right-of-way, regardless of prior use or
custom and regardless of prior implied consent. The village, at any time, for
any reasonable public purpose, may require the removal, relocation, adjustment,
or other modification of any unauthorized use of the right-of-way by any
person. When notified to do so the person shall remove, relocate, adjust or
otherwise modify the unauthorized use to comply with the village directive.
Said relocations, adjustments or modifications shall be completed not less than
90 days after written notification by the village. Said relocations,
adjustments or modifications shall be at the sole cost of the person.
(Ord. 21-06-02, passed 6-22-2021; Ord. 22-03-04, passed 3-22-2022)
§ 156.999 PENALTY.
   (A)   General. Failure to comply with any of the requirements of this
chapter shall constitute a municipal ordinance offense. Any person violating
any provision of this chapter for which no specific penalty is prescribed shall
be subject to §
10.99.
   (B)   Parking. Penalties for parking violations under this section shall be
issued in accordance with §
70.99.
   (C)   Stormwater. Any person or owner determined by the village, or a court
having jurisdiction, to be in violation of any of the provisions of this
section related to stormwater management shall be penalized in accordance with
the penalties outlined in
Chapter 51.
   (D)   Utilities. Any person who violates, disobeys, omits, neglects, or
refuses to comply with any of the provisions of this chapter shall be subject
to fine in accordance with the penalty provisions of this code. There may be
times when the village will incur delay or other costs, including third party
claims, because the utility will not or cannot perform its duties under its
permit and this chapter. Unless the utility shows that another allocation of
the cost of undertaking the requested action is appropriate, the utility shall
bear the village's costs of damages and its costs of installing, maintaining,
modifying, relocating, or removing the facility that is the subject of the
permit. No other administrative agency or commission may review or overrule a
permit related cost apportionment of the village. Sanctions may be imposed upon
a utility that does not pay the costs apportioned to it.
(Ord. 21-06-02, passed 6-22-2021; Ord. 22-03-04, passed 3-22-2022)
TITLE XVI: BUILDING AND MAINTENANCE CODES
   Chapter
      
160.   BUILDING AND MAINTENANCE CODE
CHAPTER 160: BUILDING AND MAINTENANCE CODE
Section
General Provisions
   
160.001   Construction
   
160.002   Conflicts
   
160.003   Additions, amendments, insertions and deletions defined
   
160.004   References
Residential Building Code
   
160.020   Adoption of Residential Building Code
   
160.021   Additions, amendments, insertions and deletions
   
160.022   Purpose
   
160.023   Applicability of Code
   
160.024   Definitions
   
160.025   Duties and powers of the Building Official
   
160.026   Permits
   
160.027   Application for permit
   
160.028   Validity of permit
   
160.029   Expiration
   
160.030   Suspension or revocation
   
160.031   Placement of permit
   
160.032   Responsibility
   
160.033   Preliminary inspection
   
160.034   Submittal documents
   
160.035   Examination of documents
   
160.036   Temporary structures and uses
   
160.037   Fees
   
160.038   Permit valuation
   
160.039   Work without a permit
   
160.040   Inspections
   
160.041   Service utilities
   
160.042   Code Review and Appeals Board
   
160.043   Violations
   
160.044   Stop work order
   
160.045   Chapter 3: Building Planning
   
160.046   Chapter 4: Foundations
   
160.047   Chapter 5: Floors
   
160.048   Chapter 6: Wall Construction
   
160.049   Chapter 7: Wall Covering
   
160.050   Chapter 8: Roof-Ceiling Construction
   
160.051   Chapter 9: Roof Assemblies
   
160.052   Chapter 11: [RE] Energy Efficiency
   
160.053   Chapter 13: General Mechanical Systems and Requirements
   
160.054   Chapter 14: Heating and Cooling Equipment and Appliances
   
160.055   Chapter 20: Boilers and Water Heaters
   
160.056   Chapter 21: Hydronic Piping
   
160.057   Chapter 24: Fuel Gas
   
160.058   Chapters 29 through 32
   
160.059   Chapter 33: Private Drainage
   
160.060   Chapter 35: Electrical Definitions
   
160.061   Chapter 36: Services
   
160.062   Chapter 39: Power and Lighting Distribution
   
160.063   Appendices adopted
   
160.064   Appendices deleted
   
160.065   Chapter 16: Duct systems
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 160.001 CONSTRUCTION.
   The adoption by reference of the various codes and regulations under this
chapter shall not be deemed to exempt any building or structure, or the use or
occupancy thereof, from compliance with all applicable provisions of any other
ordinance or code of the village, including the Zoning Ordinance.
(Ord. 19-12-15, passed 12-17-2019)
§ 160.002 CONFLICTS.
   Except as otherwise specifically provided in this chapter, in the event
there is any conflict between or among the provisions of this chapter and any
other ordinance or code of the village or any applicable provision of the laws
of the state, the particular provision providing the most stringent standard or
requirement shall be deemed and construed to control and apply. In the event of
any conflict between any of the provisions of this chapter and the Village
Zoning Ordinance, the provisions of the Zoning Ordinance shall be deemed and
construed to control and apply.
(Ord. 19-12-15, passed 12-17-2019)
§ 160.003 ADDITIONS, AMENDMENTS, INSERTIONS AND DELETIONS DEFINED.
   (A)   As adopted by reference in this chapter, certain sections and
subsections of the various codes so adopted have been made subject to revision
as herein provided.
   (B)   Where the following words precede any such sections and subsections of
the various codes adopted by reference in this chapter, such words shall have
the following meanings.
   ADD. The provisions contained therein are added and made a part of the
section or subsection of such code as though fully set forth as, or as a part
of, the referenced section or subsection.
   AMEND. The provisions contained therein substitute and otherwise amend,
modify or change the referenced section or subsection to read as so provided.
   DELETE. The referenced section, subsection or provision thereof is deleted.
   INSERT. The word or phrase contained therein is inserted and substituted for
the word or phrase surrounded by brackets within the referenced section or
subsection.
(Ord. 19-12-15, passed 12-17-2019)
§ 160.004 REFERENCES.
   (A)   If, in any of the various codes adopted by reference in this chapter,
a reference is made to the ICC Electrical Code, such reference shall be deemed
to be the ICC Electrical Code - Administrative Provisions, which incorporates
by reference NFPA70, the National Electric Code, as adopted by this chapter.
   (B)   If, in any of the various codes adopted by reference in this chapter,
a reference is made to the International Plumbing Code, such reference shall be
deemed to be the State Plumbing Code as adopted by this chapter.
(Ord. 19-12-15, passed 12-17-2019)
RESIDENTIAL BUILDING CODE
§ 160.020 ADOPTION OF RESIDENTIAL BUILDING CODE.
   A certain document, at least one copy of which is and has remained on file
for a period of not less than 60 days prior to the adoption hereof and shall be
kept available for public use in the office of the Village Clerk, being marked
and designated as the “International Residential Code”, 2021 edition, as
published by the International Code Council, is hereby adopted as the
Residential Building Code of the Village, for regulating and governing the
conditions and maintenance of all property, buildings and structures; by
providing the standards for supplied utilities and facilities and other
physical things and conditions essential to ensure that structures are safe,
sanitary and fit for occupation and use; and the condemnation of buildings and
structures unfit for human occupancy and use and the demolition of such
structures as herein provided; providing for the issuance of permits and
collection of fees thereof; and each and all of the regulations, provisions,
conditions and terms of the Residential Building Code are hereby referred to,
adopted and made a part hereof as if fully set out in this subchapter, with
such additions, amendments, insertions and deletions, if any, as prescribed
herein.
(Ord. 19-12-15, passed 12-17-2019; Ord. 24-11-01, passed 11-26-2024)
§ 160.021 ADDITIONS, AMENDMENTS, INSERTIONS AND DELETIONS.
   The following sections of the Residential Building Code are hereby revised
as follows:
   DELETE: Chapter 1 of the Residential Building Code is deleted in its
entirety.
(Ord. 19-12-15, passed 12-17-2019)
Editor’s note:
   The following sections §
160.022 and §
160.023 are added to the Residential Building Code.
§ 160.022 PURPOSE.
   (A)   The purpose of this chapter is to establish minimum residential
construction requirements to safeguard the public safety, health and general
welfare through affordability, structural strength, means of egress facilities,
stability, sanitation, light and ventilation, and safety to life and property
from fire and other hazards attributed to the built environment and to provide
safety to fire fighters and emergency responders during emergency operations.
   (B)   Acknowledgment. Portions of this chapter sections and subsections were
directly adopted from sections in the 2021 International Residential Model
Code.
(Ord. 19-12-15, passed 12-17-2019; Ord. 24-11-01, passed 11-26-2024)
§ 160.023 APPLICABILITY OF CODE.
   (A)   The provisions of the IRC 2021 for one- and two-family dwellings shall
apply to the construction, alteration, movement, enlargement, replacement,
repair, equipment, use and occupancy, location, removal and demolition of
detached one- and two-family dwellings and townhouses not more than three
stories above grade plane in height with a separate means of egress and their
accessory structures. See §
152.046 relating to accessory structures.
      (1)   Exceptions.
         (a)   Live/work units located in townhouses and complying with the
requirements of Section 419 of the International Building Code shall be
permitted to be constructed in accordance with the 2021 IRC for one- and two-
family dwellings. If fire suppression is installed as described by Section
419.5 of the 2021 International Building Code where constructed under the 2021
IRC for one- and two-family dwellings shall conform to NFPA 13.
         (b)   Owner-occupied lodging houses with five or fewer guestrooms
shall be permitted to be constructed in accordance with the 2021 IRC for one-
and two-family dwellings where equipped with a fire sprinkler system in
accordance with NFPA 13.
   (B)   General. Where there is a conflict between a general requirement and a
specific requirement, the specific requirement shall be applicable. Where, in
any specific case, different sections of this code specify different materials,
methods of construction or other requirements, the most restrictive shall
govern.
   (C)   Other laws. The provisions of this code shall not be deemed to nullify
any provisions of local, state or federal law.
   (D)   Referenced codes and standards. The codes and standards referenced in
this chapter shall be considered part of the requirements of this chapter to
the prescribed extent of each such reference and as further regulated as
follows:
      (1)   Exception. Where enforcement of a code provision would violate the
conditions of the UL listing of the equipment or appliance, the conditions of
the listing and manufacturer's instructions shall apply.
      (2)   Conflicts. Where conflicts occur between provisions of this chapter
and referenced codes and standards, the provisions of this chapter shall apply.
      (3)   Provisions in referenced codes and standards. Where the extent of
the reference to a referenced code or standard includes subject matter that is
within the scope of this chapter, the provisions of this chapter, as
applicable, shall take precedence over the provisions in the referenced code or
standard.
   (E)   Appendices. Applicable appendices are established herein.
   (F)   Partial invalidity. In the event any part or provision of this chapter
is held to be illegal or void, this shall not have the effect of making void or
illegal any of the other parts or provisions.
   (G)   Existing structures. The legal occupancy of any structure existing on
the date of adoption of this chapter shall be permitted to continue without
change, except as is specifically covered in this chapter.
      (1)   Additions, alterations or repairs to any structure shall conform to
the requirements for a new structure without requiring the existing structure
to comply with this chapter unless otherwise stated.
      (2)   Additions, alterations, repairs and relocations shall not cause an
existing structure to become unsafe or adversely affect the performance of the
building.
(Ord. 19-12-15, passed 12-17-2019; Ord. 24-11-01, passed 11-26-2024)
§ 160.024 DEFINITIONS.
   The below definitions are added to the definitions contained in the 2021
International Residential Code.
   ACCESSORY BUILDINGS, STRUCTURES AND USES. A subordinate building or a
portion of the main building, the use of which is incidental to, or customarily
found in connection with, and (except as otherwise provided in this chapter)
located on the same lot as the use of the main building or principal use of the
land. Included but not limited to: detached buildings, decks, driveways,
patios, and swimming pools.
   ACCESSORY USE. A use which is incidental to, or customarily found in
connection with, (except as otherwise provided in Chapter 152) on the same lot
as the main use of the premises. When ACCESSORY is used in the text, it shall
have the same meaning as ACCESSORY USE.
   BASE FLOOD. A flood having a 1% probability of being equaled or exceeded in
any given year. BASE FLOOD is also known as the 100-YEAR FLOOD.
   BASE FLOOD ELEVATION (BFE). The elevation in relation to the mean sea level
(National Geodetic Survey Vertical Datum of 1988) of the crest of the base
flood. The BASE FLOOD ELEVATION at any location is as determined via the
procedures set forth in Table R301.2(1) herein.
   BUILDING INTEGRATED SOLAR SYSTEM. A solar energy system that is an integral
part of a principal or accessory building, rather than a separate mechanical
device, replacing or substituting for an architectural or structural component
of the building. Building integrated systems include, but are not limited to,
photovoltaic or hot water solar energy systems that are contained within
roofing materials, windows, skylights, and awnings.
   DRAINAGE FACILITY. Public storm sewers, quasi-public drain tiles, storm
water detention areas and the like.
   FEMA. Federal Emergency Management Agency.
   FLOOD. A general and temporary condition of partial or complete inundation
of normally dry land areas from the overflow, the unusual and rapid
accumulation, or the runoff of surface waters from any source.
   FLOOD FRINGE. That portion of the floodplain outside of the regulatory
floodway.
   FLOOD INSURANCE RATE MAP. A map prepared by the Federal Emergency Management
Agency that depicts the floodplain or Special Flood Hazard Area (SFHA) within a
community. This map includes insurance rate zones and may or may not depict
floodways and show base flood elevations.
   FLOOD INSURANCE STUDY. An examination, evaluation and determination of flood
hazards and, if appropriate, corresponding water surface elevations as prepared
by the Federal Emergency Management Agency.
   FLOODPLAIN. Synonymous with Special Flood Hazard Area (SFHA). Those lands
within the jurisdiction of the Village of Mahomet that are subject to
inundation by the base flood. The floodplains of the County of Champaign and
the Village of Mahomet are generally identified on the countywide Flood
Insurance Rate Map of Champaign County prepared by the Federal Emergency
Management Agency and dated October 2, 2013. FLOODPLAIN also includes those
areas of known flooding as identified by the community that are not necessarily
shown on the published Flood Insurance Rate Map of Champaign County.
   FLOODPROOFING. Any combination of structural or nonstructural additions,
changes or adjustments to structures which reduce or eliminate flood damage to
real estate, property, and their contents.
   FLOOD PROTECTION ELEVATION (FPE). The elevation of the base flood plus one
foot of freeboard above the base flood elevation at any given location in the
floodplain.
   FLOODWAY. That portion of the floodplain required to store and convey the
base flood. The floodway for the floodplains of the Sangamon River shall be as
delineated on the Countywide Flood Insurance Rate Map of Champaign County
prepared by FEMA and dated October 2, 2013. The floodways for each of the
remaining floodplains within the Village of Mahomet and Champaign County shall
be determined according to the best data available from federal, state or other
sources.
   IDNR/OWR. Illinois Department of Natural Resources/Office of Water
Resources.
   MISCELLANEOUS WATER. Water generated from systems independent of the water
or waste water systems of the structure.
   NFIP. National Flood Insurance Program.
   OFF-GRID SOLAR ENERGY SYSTEM. A photovoltaic solar energy system in which
the circuits energized by the solar energy system are not electronically
connected in any way to electric circuits that are served by an electric
utility company.
   PASSIVE SOLAR ENERGY SYSTEM. A solar energy system that captures solar light
or heat without transforming it to another form of energy or transferring the
energy via a heat exchanger.
   PHOTOVOLTAIC SYSTEM. A solar energy system that converts solar energy
directly into electricity.
   QUASI-PUBLIC DRAIN TILE. A tile installed for the benefit of multiple
properties routing sump pump water, roof drain water, and other miscellaneous
water to a storm water drainage facility. The tile is maintained by an entity
other than the village.
   REPETITIVE LOSS. Flood related damages sustained by a structure on two
separate occasions during a ten-year period for which the cost of repairs at
the time of each such flood event on the average equals or exceed 25% of the
market value of the structure before the damage occurred.
   RIVERINE SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD AREA. Any Special Flood Hazard Area subject to
overbank flooding from a river, creek, stream, ditch or any other identified
major channel with an upstream drainage area larger than one square mile in
area. This term does not include areas subject to flooding from lakes (except
public bodies of water), ponding areas, areas of sheet flow, or other areas not
subject to overbank flooding.
   ROOF MOUNT. A solar energy system mounted on a rack that is fastened to or
ballasted on a structure roof. Roof-mount systems are accessory to the
principal use.
   ROOF PITCH. The final exterior slope of a roof calculated by the rise over
the run, typically but not exclusively expressed in twelfths such as 3/12, 9/
12, 12/12.
   SOLAR ACCESS. Unobstructed access to direct sunlight on a lot or building
through the entire year, including access across adjacent parcel air rights,
for the purpose of capturing direct sunlight to operate a solar energy system.
   SOLAR CARPORT. A solar energy system of any size that is installed on a
carport structure that is accessory to a parking area, and which may include
electric vehicle supply equipment or energy storage facilities.
   SOLAR ENERGY. Radiant energy received from the sun that can be collected in
the form of heat or light by a solar collector.
   SOLAR ENERGY SYSTEM. A device, array of devices, or structural design
feature, the purpose of which is to provide for generation or storage of
electricity from sunlight, or the collection, storage, and distribution of
solar energy for space heating or cooling, daylight for interior lighting, or
water heating.
   SOLAR HOT AIR SYSTEM. (Also referred to as SOLAR AIR HEAT or SOLAR FURNACE).
A solar energy system that includes a solar collector to provide direct
supplemental space heating by heating and re-circulating conditioned building
air. The most efficient performance includes a solar collector to preheat air
or supplement building space heating, typically using a vertically mounted
collector on a south-facing wall.
   SOLAR HOT WATER SYSTEM. A system that includes a solar collector and a heat
exchanger that heats or preheats water for building heating systems or other
hot water needs, including residential domestic hot water and hot water for
commercial purposes.
   SOLAR MOUNTING DEVICES. Racking, frames, or other devices that allow the
mounting of a solar collector onto a roof surface.
   SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD AREA (SFHA). See FLOODPLAIN definition.
   SUBSTANTIAL DAMAGE. Damage of any origin sustained by a structure whereby
the cumulate percentage of damage subsequent to the adoption of this chapter
equals or exceeds 50% of the market value of the structure before the damage
occurred regardless of actual repair work performed. Volunteer labor and
materials must be included in this determination. The term includes REPETITIVE
LOSS BUILDINGS.
   SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVEMENT. Any reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, or
improvement of a structure subsequent to 1987, the cost of which equals or
exceeds 50% of the market value of the structure before the improvement or
repair is started or increases the floor area by more than 20%. SUBSTANTIAL
IMPROVEMENT is considered to occur when the first alteration of any wall,
ceiling, floor, or other structural part of the building commences, whether or
not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the structure. This term
includes structures which have incurred repetitive loss or substantial damage,
regardless of the actual repair work done. The term does not, however, include
any project for improvement of a structure to comply with existing state or
local health, sanitary or safety code specifications which are solely necessary
to assure safe living conditions, or any alterations of a structure listed on
the National Register of Historic Places, the Illinois Register of Historic
Places, or any other historical significance determination by federal, state,
or local historic preservation program approved by the U.S. Department of
Interior, provided the improvement will not preclude the continued designation
as a historic building or structure.
(Ord. 19-12-15, passed 12-17-2019; Ord. 23-03-03, passed 3-28-2023; Ord. 24-11-
01, passed 11-26-2024)
Editor’s note:
   The following sections §
160.024 through §
160.041 are added to the Residential Building Code.
§ 160.025 DUTIES AND POWERS OF THE BUILDING OFFICIAL.
   (A)   General. The Building Official is hereby authorized and directed to
enforce the provisions of this chapter. The Building Official shall have the
authority to render interpretations of this chapter and to adopt policies and
procedures in order to clarify the application of its provisions. Such
interpretations, policies and procedures shall be in conformance with the
intent and purpose of this chapter. Such policies and procedures shall not have
the effect of waiving requirements specifically provided for in this chapter.
   (B)   Applications and permits. The Building Official shall receive
applications, review construction documents and issue permits for the erection
and alteration of buildings and structures, inspect the premises for which such
permits have been issued and enforce compliance with the provisions of this
chapter.
   (C)   Notices and orders. The Building Official shall issue necessary
notices or orders to ensure compliance with this chapter.
   (D)   Inspections. The Building Official shall make the required
inspections, or the Building Official shall have the authority to accept
reports of inspection by approved agencies or individuals. Reports of such
inspections shall be in writing and be certified by a responsible officer of
such approved agency or by the responsible individual. The Building Official is
authorized to engage such expert opinion as deemed necessary to report upon
unusual technical issues that arise, subject to the approval of the appointing
authority.
   (E)   Identification. The Building Official shall carry proper
identification when inspecting structures or premises in the performance of
duties under this chapter.
   (F)   Right of entry. Where it is necessary to make an inspection to enforce
the provisions of this chapter, or where the Building Official has reasonable
cause to believe that there exists in a structure or upon a premises a
condition that is contrary to or in violation of this chapter that makes the
structure or premises unsafe, dangerous or hazardous, the Building Official or
designee is authorized to enter the structure or premises at reasonable times
to inspect or to perform the duties imposed by this chapter, provided that if
such structure or premises be occupied that credentials be presented to the
occupant and entry requested. If such structure or premises is unoccupied, the
Building Official shall first make a reasonable effort to locate the owner, the
owner's authorized agent, or other person having charge or control of the
structure or premises and request entry. If entry is refused, the Building
Official shall have recourse to the remedies provided by law to secure entry.
   (G)   Department records. The Building Official shall keep official records
of applications received, permits and certificates issued, fees collected,
reports of inspections, and notices and orders issued. Such records shall be
retained in the official records for the period required for the retention of
public records.
   (H)   Liability.
      (1)   The Building Official, members of the Code Review and Appeals Board
or employee charged with the enforcement of this chapter, while acting for the
village in good faith and without malice in the discharge of the duties
required by this chapter or other pertinent law or ordinance, shall not thereby
be rendered civilly or criminally liable personally and is hereby relieved from
personal liability for any damage accruing to persons or property as a result
of any act or by reason of an act or omission in the discharge of official
duties.
      (2)   Legal defense. Any suit or criminal complaint instituted against an
officer or employee because of an act performed by that officer or employee in
the lawful discharge of duties and under the provisions of this chapter shall
be defended by legal representatives of the jurisdiction until the final
termination of the proceedings. The Building Official or any subordinate shall
not be liable for cost in any action, suit or proceeding that is instituted in
pursuance of the provisions of this chapter.
   (I)   Approved materials and equipment. Materials, equipment and devices
approved by the Building Official shall be constructed and installed in
accordance with such approval. Used materials, equipment and devices shall not
be reused unless approved by the Building Official.
   (J)   Modifications. Where there are practical difficulties involved in
carrying out the provisions of this chapter, the Building Official shall have
the authority to grant modifications for individual cases, provided the
Building Official shall first find that special individual reason makes the
strict letter of this chapter impractical and the modification is in compliance
with the intent and purpose of this chapter and that such modification does not
lessen health, life, fire safety or structural requirements. The details of
action granting modifications shall be recorded and entered in the official
department records.
      (1)   Flood hazard areas. The Building Official shall not grant
modifications to any provisions required in flood hazard areas as established
in Table R301.2(1) herein unless a determination has been made that:
         (a)   There is good and sufficient cause showing that the unique
characteristics of the size, configuration or topography of the site render the
elevation standards of 2021 IRC Section R322 inappropriate;
         (b)   Failure to grant the modification would result in exceptional
hardship by rendering the lot undevelopable;
         (c)   The granting of modification will not result in increased flood
heights, additional threats to public safety, extraordinary public expense,
cause fraud on or victimization of the public, or conflict with existing laws
or ordinances;
         (d)   The modification is the minimum necessary to afford relief,
considering the flood hazard;
         (e)   Written notice specifying the difference between the design
flood elevation and the elevation to which the building is to be built, stating
that the cost of flood insurance will be commensurate with the increased risk
resulting from the reduced floor elevation and stating that construction below
the design flood elevation increases risks to life and property, has been
submitted to the applicant;
         (f)   A variance of the requirements of
Chapter 151 of the Mahomet Municipal Code has been granted by the Village of
Mahomet Zoning Board of Appeals.
      (2)   Alternative materials, design and methods of construction and
equipment.
         (a)   The provisions of this chapter are not intended to prevent the
installation of any material or to prohibit any design or method of
construction not specifically prescribed by this chapter, provided that any
such alternative has been approved. An alternative material, design or method
of construction shall be approved where the Building Official finds that the
proposed design is satisfactory and complies with the intent of the provisions
of this chapter, and that the material, method or work offered is, for the
purpose intended, not less than the equivalent of that prescribed in this
chapter. Compliance with the specific performance-based provisions of the
International Codes shall be an alternative to the specific requirements of
this chapter. Where the alternative material, design or method of construction
is not approved, the Building Official shall respond in writing, stating the
reasons why the alternative was not approved.
         (b)   Where there is insufficient evidence of compliance with the
provisions of this chapter, or evidence that a material or method does not
conform to the requirements of this chapter, or in order to substantiate claims
for alternative materials or methods, the Building Official shall have the
authority to require tests as evidence of compliance to be made at no expense
to the village. Test methods shall be as specified in this chapter or by other
recognized test standards. In the absence of recognized and accepted test
methods, the Building Official shall approve the testing procedures. Tests
shall be performed by an approved agency. Reports of such tests shall be
retained by the Building Official for the period required for retention of
public records.
(Ord. 19-12-15, passed 12-17-2019; Ord. 24-11-01, passed 11-26-2024)
§ 160.026 PERMITS.
   (A)   Permit required. A permit is required when any owner or owner's
authorized agent intends to perform or causes to be performed any such work
listed below. The owner or owner's authorized agent shall first make
application to the village and obtain the required permit to:
      (1)   Construct, enlarge, alter, repair, move, demolish or change the
occupancy of a building or structure;
      (2)   To erect, install, enlarge, alter, repair, remove, convert or
replace any electrical, gas, or mechanical system, the installation of which is
regulated by this chapter;
      (3)   Accessory structures;
      (4)   Window awnings supported by an exterior wall that project more than
48 inches (1,372 mm) from the exterior wall and do not require additional
support;
      (5)   Finish out a previously unfinished basement;
      (6)   Make a change of use within a structure or on a lot or tract of
land;
      (7)   Construct, install or alter a fence;
      (8)   Swimming pools. See §
152.046 relating to regulations of residential pools;
      (9)   Roof mounted solar systems.
   (B)   Work exempt from permit. Exemption from permit requirements of this
chapter shall not be deemed to grant authorization for any work to be done in
any manner in violation of the provisions of this chapter or any other laws or
ordinances of this jurisdiction. Permits shall not be required for the
following:
      (1)   Structures.
         (a)   One-story detached accessory structures, provided that the floor
area does not exceed 64 square feet;
         (b)   Retaining walls under two feet in height measured from the
bottom of the footing to the top of the wall;
         (c)   Painting, papering, tiling, carpeting, cabinets, counter tops
and similar finish work;
         (d)   Swings and playground equipment.
      (2)   Electrical.
         (a)   UL listed cord-and-plug connected temporary decorative lighting;
         (b)   Reinstallation of attachment plug receptacles but not the
outlets therefor;
         (c)   Replacement of branch circuit overcurrent devices of the
required capacity in the same location;
         (d)   Electrical wiring, devices, appliances, apparatus or equipment
operating at less than 25 volts and not capable of supplying more than 50 watts
of energy;
         (e)   Minor repair work, including the replacement of lamps or the
connection of approved portable electrical equipment to approved permanently
installed receptacles.
      (3)   Gas.
         (a)   Portable heating, cooking or clothes drying appliances;
         (b)   Replacement of any minor part that does not alter approval of
equipment or make such equipment unsafe;
         (c)   Portable-fuel-cell appliances that are not connected to a fixed
piping system and are not interconnected to a power grid.
      (4)   Mechanical.
         (a)   Portable heating appliances;
         (b)   Portable ventilation appliances;
         (c)   Portable cooling units;
         (d)   Steam, hot- or chilled-water piping within any heating or
cooling equipment regulated by this chapter;
         (e)   Replacement of any minor part that does not alter approval of
equipment or make such equipment unsafe;
         (f)   Portable evaporative coolers;
         (g)   Self-contained refrigeration systems containing 10 pounds (4.54
kg) or less of refrigerant or that are actuated by motors of one horsepower
(746 W) or less;
         (h)   Portable-fuel-cell appliances that are not connected to a fixed
piping system and are not interconnected to a power grid.
      (5)   Where equipment replacement and repairs must be performed in an
emergency situation, the permit application shall be submitted within the next
working business day to the Building Official.
      (6)   Application or notice to the Building Official is not required for
ordinary repairs to structures, replacement of lamps or the connection of
approved portable electrical equipment to approved permanently installed
receptacles. Such repairs shall not include the cutting away of any wall,
partition or portion thereof, the removal or cutting of any structural beam or
load-bearing support, or the removal or change of any required means of egress,
or rearrangement of parts of a structure affecting the egress requirements; nor
shall ordinary repairs include addition to, alteration of, replacement or
relocation of any water supply, sewer, drainage, drain leader, gas, soil,
waste, vent or similar piping, electric wiring or mechanical or other work
affecting public health or general safety.
      (7)   A permit shall not be required for the installation, alteration or
repair of generation, transmission, distribution, metering or other related
equipment that is under the ownership and control of public service agencies by
established right.
(Ord. 19-12-15, passed 12-17-2019; Ord. 23-03-03, passed 3-28-2023)
§ 160.027 APPLICATION FOR PERMIT.
   (A)   To obtain a permit, the applicant shall first file an application
therefor in writing on a form furnished by the village for that purpose. Such
application shall:
      (1)   Identify and describe the work to be covered by the permit for
which application is made;
      (2)   Describe the land on which the proposed work is to be done by legal
description, street address or similar description that will readily identify
and definitely locate the proposed building or work;
      (3)   Indicate the use and occupancy for which the proposed work is
intended;
      (4)   Be accompanied by construction documents and other information as
required in §
160.034;
      (5)   Provide valuation of the proposed work;
      (6)   Be signed by the property owner or the property owner's authorized
agent;
      (7)   Give such other data and information as required by the Building
Official.
   (B)   Action on application. The Building Official shall examine or cause to
be examined applications for permits and amendments thereto within a reasonable
time after filing. If the application or the construction documents do not
conform to the requirements of pertinent laws, the Building Official or their
designee shall notify the applicant in writing of portions that do not conform
stating the reasons therefor and specify a period to submit required
information. If the Building Official is satisfied that the proposed work
conforms to the requirements of this chapter and applicable laws and
ordinances, the Building Official shall issue a permit as soon as is practical.
   (C)   Determination of substantially improved or substantially damaged
existing buildings in flood hazard areas. For applications for reconstruction,
rehabilitation, addition, alteration, repair or other improvement of existing
buildings or structures located in a flood hazard area as established by Table
R301.2(1) herein, the Building Official shall examine or cause to be examined
the construction documents and shall make a determination with regard to the
value of the proposed work. For buildings that have sustained damage of any
origin, the value of the proposed work shall include the cost to repair the
building or structure to its predamaged condition. If the Building Official
finds that the value of proposed work equals or exceeds 50% of the market value
of the building or structure before the damage has occurred or the improvement
is started, the proposed work is a substantial improvement or restoration of
substantial damage and the Building Official shall require existing portions of
the entire building or structure to meet the requirements of 2021 IRC Section
R322. Where the building or structure has sustained substantial damage, repairs
necessary to restore the building or structure to its predamaged condition
shall be considered substantial improvements regardless of the actual repair
work performed.
   (D)   Time limitation of application. An application for a permit for any
proposed work shall be deemed to have been abandoned 180 days after the date of
filing unless such application has been pursued in good faith or a permit has
been issued; except that the Building Official is authorized to grant one or
more extensions of time for additional periods not exceeding 180 days each. The
extension shall be requested in writing and justifiable cause demonstrated.
(Ord. 19-12-15, passed 12-17-2019; Ord. 24-11-01, passed 11-26-2024)
§ 160.028 VALIDITY OF PERMIT.
   The issuance or granting of a permit shall not be construed to be a permit
for, or an approval of, any violation of any of the provisions of this chapter
or of any other ordinance of the village. Permits presuming to give authority
to violate or cancel the provisions of this chapter or other ordinances of the
jurisdiction shall not be valid. The issuance of a permit based on construction
documents and other data shall not prevent the Building Official from requiring
the correction of errors in the construction documents and other data. The
Building Official is authorized to prevent occupancy or use of a structure
which is in violation of this chapter or of any other ordinances of the
village.
(Ord. 19-12-15, passed 12-17-2019)
§ 160.029 EXPIRATION.
   (A)   Every permit issued shall become invalid unless the work authorized by
such permit is commenced within 180 days after its issuance, or if the work
authorized by such permit is suspended or abandoned for a period of 180 days
after the time the work is commenced.
   (B)   The Building Official is authorized to grant, in writing, one
extension of time, for period not more than 180 days. The extension shall be
requested in writing and justifiable cause demonstrated.
(Ord. 19-12-15, passed 12-17-2019)
§ 160.030 SUSPENSION OR REVOCATION.
   The Building Official is authorized to suspend or revoke a permit issued
under the provisions of this chapter wherever the permit is issued in error or
on the basis of incorrect, inaccurate or incomplete information, or in
violation of any ordinance or regulation or any of the provisions of this
chapter.
(Ord. 19-12-15, passed 12-17-2019)
§ 160.031 PLACEMENT OF PERMIT.
   The building permit or a copy shall be kept on the site of the work and
visible from the closest right of way until the completion of the project.
(Ord. 19-12-15, passed 12-17-2019)
§ 160.032 RESPONSIBILITY.
   It shall be the duty of every person who performs work for the installation
or repair of building, structure, electrical, gas, or mechanical systems, for
which this chapter is applicable, to comply with this chapter and the adopted
codes in this chapter.
(Ord. 19-12-15, passed 12-17-2019)
§ 160.033 PRELIMINARY INSPECTION.
   Before issuing a permit, the Building Official is authorized to examine or
cause to be examined buildings, structures and sites for which an application
has been filed.
(Ord. 19-12-15, passed 12-17-2019)
§ 160.034 SUBMITTAL DOCUMENTS.
   Submittal documents consisting of construction documents, and other data
shall be submitted with each application for a permit. The construction
documents shall be prepared by a registered design professional where required
by the state. Where special conditions exist, the Building Official is
authorized to require additional construction documents to be prepared by a
registered design professional.
   (A)   Exception. The Building Official is authorized to waive the submission
of construction documents and other data not required to be prepared by a
registered design professional if it is found that the nature of the work
applied for is such that reviewing of construction documents is not necessary
to obtain compliance with this chapter.
   (B)   Submittal size. Information on construction documents. Construction
documents shall be drawn upon suitable material. PDF copies of the plans and 11
inch by 17 inch copies are preferred. Any large plan sets submitted shall be on
paper no wider than 36 inches. Construction documents shall be of sufficient
clarity to indicate the location, nature and extent of the work proposed and
show in detail that it will conform to the provisions of this chapter and
relevant laws, ordinances, rules and regulations, as determined by the Building
Official.
   (C)   Manufacturer's installation instructions, as required by this chapter,
shall be available on the job site at the time of inspection.
   (D)   Braced wall design. For buildings and structures utilizing braced wall
design, and where required by the Building Official, braced wall lines shall be
identified on the construction documents. Pertinent information including, but
not limited to, bracing methods, location and length of braced wall panels and
foundation requirements of braced wall panels at top and bottom shall be
provided.
   (E)   Flood hazard areas. For buildings and structures located in whole or
in part in flood hazard areas as established by Table R301.2(1) herein,
construction documents shall include:
      (1)   Delineation of flood hazard areas, floodway boundaries and flood
zones and the design flood elevation, as appropriate;
      (2)   The elevation of the proposed lowest floor (including basement),
the height of the proposed lowest floor (including basement), and above the
highest adjacent grade;
      (3)   The elevation of the bottom of the lowest horizontal structural
member as are delineated on flood hazard maps identified in Table R301.2(1)
herein or otherwise delineated by the village;
      (4)   If design flood elevations are not included on the community's
Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM), the Building Official and the applicant shall
obtain and reasonably utilize any design flood elevation and floodway data
available from other sources;
      (5)   In addition to a construction permit, a floodplain development
permit shall be obtained from the village.
   (F)   Site plan or plot plan. The construction documents submitted with the
application for permit shall be accompanied by a site plan showing the size and
location of new construction and existing structures on the site and distances
from lot lines. In the case of demolition, the site plan shall show
construction to be demolished and the location and size of existing structures
and construction that are to remain on the site. The Building Official is
authorized to waive or modify the requirement for a site plan where the
application for permit is for alteration or repair or where otherwise
warranted.
(Ord. 19-12-15, passed 12-17-2019)
§ 160.035 EXAMINATION OF DOCUMENTS.
   (A)   The Building Official shall examine or cause to be examined
construction documents for code compliance.
   (B)   Approval of construction documents. Where the Building Official issues
a permit, the construction documents shall be approved in writing. A set of the
reviewed construction documents shall be retained by the Building Official. It
shall be the responsibility of the property owner or their duly authorized
representative to keep the approved plans on site and shall be available for
inspection by the Building Official or designee.
   (C)   Previous approvals. This chapter shall not require changes in the
construction documents, construction or designated occupancy of a structure for
which a lawful permit has been heretofore issued or otherwise lawfully
authorized, and the construction of which has been pursued in good faith within
180 days after the effective date of this chapter and has not been abandoned.
   (D)   Phased approval. The Building Official is authorized to issue a permit
for the construction of foundations or any other part of a building or
structure before the construction documents for the whole building or structure
have been submitted, provided that adequate information and detailed statements
have been filed complying with pertinent requirements of this chapter. The
holder of such permit for the foundation or other parts of a building or
structure shall proceed at the holder's own risk with the building operation
and without assurance that a permit for the entire structure will be granted.
   (E)   Amended construction documents. Work shall be installed in accordance
with the approved construction documents, and any changes made during
construction that are not in compliance with the approved construction
documents shall be resubmitted for approval as an amended set of construction
documents.
   (F)   Retention of construction documents. One set of approved construction
documents shall be retained by the Building Official for a period of not less
than 180 days from date of completion of the permitted work, or as required by
law.
(Ord. 19-12-15, passed 12-17-2019)
§ 160.036 TEMPORARY STRUCTURES AND USES.
   (A)   General. The Building Official is authorized to issue a permit for
temporary structures and uses. Such permits shall be limited as to time of
service but shall not be permitted for more than 180 days. The Building
Official is authorized to grant extensions for demonstrated cause.
   (B)   Conformance. Temporary structures and uses shall conform to the
structural strength, fire safety, means of egress, light, ventilation and
sanitary requirements of this chapter as necessary to ensure the public health,
safety and general welfare.
   (C)   Temporary power. The Building Official is authorized to give
permission to temporarily supply and use power in part of an electric
installation before such installation has been fully completed and the
certificate of completion has been issued. The part covered by the temporary
certificate shall comply with the requirements specified for temporary
lighting, heat or power in NFPA 70 Article 590.
   (D)   Termination of approval. The Building Official is authorized to
terminate such permit for a temporary structure or use and to order the
temporary structure or use to be discontinued.
(Ord. 19-12-15, passed 12-17-2019)
§ 160.037 FEES.
   (A)   Payment. A permit shall not be valid until the fees prescribed by law
have been paid, nor shall an amendment to a permit be released until the
additional fee, if any, has been paid.
   (B)   Document review by village staff shall not proceed until the
application fee has been paid. No document shall be presented for approval
until the application fee has been paid.
   (C)   Schedule of permit fees.
      (1)   For buildings, structures, electrical, gas, and mechanical systems
or alterations requiring a permit, a fee for each permit shall be paid as
required.
      (2)   Building permit fees shall be established from time to time by
resolution of the Village Board of Trustees.
   (D)   Related fees. The payment of the fee for the construction, alteration,
removal or demolition for work done in connection to or concurrently with the
work authorized by a building permit shall not relieve the applicant or holder
of the permit from the payment of other fees that are prescribed by law.
   (E)   Refunds. No refund shall be made in the event of permit revocation or
building project abandonment or discontinuance. The Building Official is
authorized to establish a refund policy.
(Ord. 19-12-15, passed 12-17-2019)
§ 160.038 PERMIT VALUATION.
   Permit valuation shall include total value of the work for which a permit is
being issued, such as electrical, gas, mechanical, plumbing equipment and
other permanent systems, including materials and labor.
(Ord. 19-12-15, passed 12-17-2019)
§ 160.039 WORK WITHOUT A PERMIT.
   Any person who commences work which requires a permit before obtaining the
necessary permits shall be subject to a penalty fee. Building Official has the
authority to waive any penalty fee.
(Ord. 19-12-15, passed 12-17-2019)
§ 160.040 INSPECTIONS.
   (A)   Types of inspections. For on-site construction, from time to time the
Building Official, upon notification from the permit holder or his or her
agent, shall make or cause to be made any necessary inspections and shall
either approve that portion of the construction as completed or shall notify
the permit holder or his or her agent wherein the same fails to comply with
this chapter and the adopted codes.
      (1)   Foundation inspection. Inspection of the foundation shall be made
after poles or piers are set or trenches or basement areas are excavated, and
any required forms erected, and any required reinforcing steel is in place and
supported prior to the placing of concrete. The foundation inspection shall
include excavations for thickened slabs intended for the support of bearing
walls, partitions, and structural support.
      (2)   Rough inspection.
         (a)   Inspection of plumbing, mechanical, gas and electrical systems
shall be made prior to covering or concealment, before fixtures or appliances
are set or installed, and prior to framing inspection.
         (b)   Exception. Backfilling of ground-source heat pump loop systems
tested in accordance with 2021 IRC Section M2105.1 prior to inspection shall be
permitted.
      (3)   Floodplain inspection. For construction in flood hazard areas as
established by Table R301.2(1) herein, upon placement of the lowest floor,
including basement, and prior to further vertical construction, the Building
Official shall require submission of documentation, prepared and sealed by a
registered design professional, of the elevation of the lowest floor, including
basement, as required in 2021 IRC Section R322 and in compliance with Mahomet
Municipal Code
Chapter 151.
         (a)   Elevation documentation. If located in a flood hazard area, the
documentation of elevations required in 2021 IRC Section R322.1.10 shall be
submitted to the Building Official prior to the final inspection.
         (b)   All construction in floodplain shall comply first with
Chapter 151 and subsequently with this chapter the most restrictive will
prevail.
      (4)   Frame and masonry inspection. Inspection of framing and masonry
construction shall be made after the roof, masonry, framing, firestopping,
draft stopping, and bracing are in place and after the foundation and rough
inspections are approved.
      (5)   Fire-resistance-rated construction inspection. Where fire-
resistance-rated construction is required between dwelling units or due to
location on property, the Building Official shall require an inspection of such
construction after lathing or gypsum board or gypsum panel products are in
place, but before any plaster is applied, or before board or panel joints and
fasteners are taped and finished.
      (6)   Other inspections. In addition to inspections listed above, the
Building Official shall have the authority to make or require any other
inspections to ascertain compliance with this chapter and other laws enforced
by the Building Official.
      (7)   Final inspection. Final inspection shall be made after the
permitted work is complete and prior to occupancy.
   (B)   Inspection agencies. The Building Official is authorized to accept
reports of approved agencies, provided such agencies satisfy the requirements
as to qualifications and reliability.
   (C)   Inspection requests. It shall be the duty of the permit holder or
their agent to notify the Building Official that such work is ready for
inspection. It shall be the duty of the person requesting any inspections
required by this chapter to provide access to and means for inspection of such
work.
   (D)   Approval required. Work shall not be done beyond the point indicated
in each successive inspection without first obtaining the approval of the
Building Official. The Building Official upon notification, shall make the
requested inspections and shall either indicate the portion of the construction
that is satisfactory as completed, or shall notify the permit holder or an
agent of the permit holder wherein the same fails to comply with this chapter
and the adopted codes. Any portions that do not comply shall be corrected and
such portion shall not be covered or concealed until authorized by the Building
Official.
(Ord. 19-12-15, passed 12-17-2019; Ord. 24-11-01, passed 11-26-2024)
§ 160.041 SERVICE UTILITIES.
   (A)   Connection of service utilities. A person shall not make connections
from a utility, source of energy, fuel or power to any building or system that
is regulated by this chapter for which a permit is required until approved by
the Building Official.
   (B)   Temporary connection. The Building Official shall have the authority
to authorize the temporary connection of the building or system to the utility,
source of energy, fuel or power.
   (C)   Authority to disconnect service utilities. The Building Official shall
have the authority to authorize disconnection of utility service to the
building, structure or system regulated by this chapter and the referenced
codes and standards set forth herein in case of emergency where necessary to
eliminate an immediate hazard to life or property or where such utility
connection has been made without the approval required by this chapter. The
Building Official shall notify the serving utility and where possible the owner
or the owner's authorized agent and occupant of the building, structure or
service system of the decision to disconnect prior to taking such action. If
not notified prior to disconnection, the owner, the owner's authorized agent or
occupant of the building, structure or service system shall be notified in
writing as soon as practical thereafter.
(Ord. 19-12-15, passed 12-17-2019)
§ 160.042 CODE REVIEW AND APPEALS BOARD.
   (A)   Created. There is hereby created a Code Review and Appeals Board.
   (B)   Board composition and appointment. The Code Review and Appeals Board
shall have seven members and one nonvoting ex officio member. The members of
the Committee shall be appointed by the Mayor with the consent of the Trustees.
      (1)   The nonvoting ex officio member shall be the Village Administrator
or their designee.
      (2)   Although not mandatory, the composition of the Code Review and
Appeals Board shall strive to include persons with the following expertise by
experience, training or education.
         (a)   Architect;
         (b)   Structural engineer;
         (c)   Electrician;
         (d)   Mechanical technician;
         (e)   Residential homebuilder;
         (f)   Commercial builder/developer.
      (3)   At least one member shall be a village resident.
      (4)   At least one member shall be the Cornbelt Fire District Fire Chief
or their designee.
      (5)   A member shall not vote or otherwise rule on any appeal in which
the member:
         (a)   Is engaged as a contractor or material dealer;
         (b)   Is in the preparation of plans or specifications;
         (c)   Has any personal interest.
   (C)   Terms and qualifications. The terms of the seven regular appointed
members of the Code Review and Appeals Board shall be for terms of three years.
All terms shall expire on May 30 in their final year.
   (D)   Chair and Vice Chair. The Code Review and Appeals Board shall elect
from its members a Chair and Vice Chair. The Vice Chair shall perform the
duties of the Chair when the Chair is absent or otherwise unable to perform
those duties. The term of the position of Chair and Vice Chair shall be limited
to three years and no Chair or Vice Chair shall serve consecutive terms.
   (E)   Rules and by-laws. The Code Review and Appeals Board may adopt
additional rules and by-laws consistent with other provisions of this chapter.
   (F)   Duties. The Code Review and Appeals Board shall:
      (1)   Carry on a continuing review of and shall advise the Board of
Trustees regarding all construction and maintenance codes adopted and enforced
by the village.
      (2)   Hear appeals by persons or entities directly or materially affected
by a code violation or decisions involving codes as it applies to construction
or maintenance activities to which an adopted code is in place.
      (3)   Issue, amend, and withdraw administrative rules which implement,
interpret and clarify the requirements of this chapter. Persons shall comply
with these administrative rules to the same extent they are required to comply
with this chapter. The administrative rules shall implement, interpret and
clarify the requirements of this chapter and shall not amend the chapter or its
policies.
         (a)   At least 14 days prior to its effective date, the Code Review
and Appeal Board shall send a copy of the administrative rules to the Board of
Trustees for review.
         (b)   Upon written request of any two Board of Trustees members prior
to the effective date of the administrative rule, the rule shall be subject to
Board of Trustees review. After such a written request, the administrative rule
shall not be effective until considered and acted upon by the Board of
Trustees. The administrative rule shall go into effect after such action unless
disapproved by a majority or the Board of Trustees members or withdrawn by the
Code Review and Appeal Board. The administrative rule shall go into effect
after such action unless disapproved by a majority of the Board of Trustees
members or withdrawn by the Code Review and Appeal Board.
         (c)   The form and legality of each administrative rule shall be
approved by the Village Attorney prior to its effective date.
         (d)   The Code Review and Appeal Board shall publish all of its rules
in pamphlet form on or before the effective date of the rules.
         (e)   Prior to the effective date of an administrative rule, a copy
shall be filed with the Village Clerk and Village Administrator, and a copy
shall be sent to the Board of Trustees.
      (4)   Perform such other duties as may from time to time be assigned by
the Board of Trustees.
(Ord. 19-12-15, passed 12-17-2019)
§ 160.043 VIOLATIONS.
   (A)   Unlawful acts. It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or
corporation to erect, construct, alter, extend, repair, move, remove, demolish
or occupy any building, structure or equipment regulated by this chapter, or
cause same to be done, in conflict with or in violation of any of the
provisions of this chapter.
   (B)   Notice of violation. The Building Official is authorized to serve a
notice of violation or stop work order on the person responsible for the
erection, construction, alteration, extension, repair, moving, removal,
demolition or occupancy of a building or structure in violation of the
provisions of this chapter, or in violation of a detail statement or a plan
approved thereunder, or in violation of a permit or certificate issued under
the provisions of this chapter. Such order shall direct the discontinuance of
the illegal action or condition and the abatement of the violation.
   (C)   Prosecution of violation. If the notice of violation is not complied
with in the time prescribed by such notice, the Building Official is authorized
to request the Village Attorney to institute the appropriate proceeding at law
or in equity to restrain, correct or abate such violation, or to require the
removal or termination of the unlawful occupancy of the building or structure
in violation of the provisions of this chapter or of the stop work order or
direction made pursuant thereto.
   (D)   Violation penalties. Any person who violates a provision of this
chapter or fails to comply with any of the requirements thereof or who erects,
constructs, alters or repairs a building or structure in violation of the
approved construction documents or directive of the Building Official, or of a
permit or certificate issued under the provisions of this chapter, shall be
subject to penalties as prescribed by law.
(Ord. 19-12-15, passed 12-17-2019)
§ 160.044 STOP WORK ORDER.
   (A)   Notice to owner or the owner's authorized agent. Upon notice from the
Building Official that work on any building or structure is being executed
contrary to the provisions of this chapter or in an unsafe and dangerous
manner, such work shall be immediately stopped. The stop work order shall be in
writing and shall be given to the owner of the property involved, or to the
owner's authorized agent or to the person performing the work and shall state
the conditions under which work will be permitted to resume.
   (B)   Unlawful continuance. Any person who shall continue any work in or
about the structure after having been served with a stop work order, except
such work as that person is directed to perform to remove a violation or unsafe
condition, shall be subject to penalties or fines as prescribed by the Village
of Mahomet Municipal Code and the state laws.
(Ord. 19-12-15, passed 12-17-2019)
§ 160.045 CHAPTER 3: BUILDING PLANNING.
   The following sections of the Residential Building Code are hereby revised
as follows:
   (A)   ADD: Table R301.2(1) Climatic and Geographic Design Criteria.
 
Ground Snow Wind Design                                      Seismic Design
Load        Speed (mph) Topographic Special Wind Windborne   Category
                        Effects     Region       Debris Zone
20          115         No          No           No          B
 
 
Subject to Damage From         Winter Ice Barrier          Air
           Frost Line          Design Underlayment Flood   Freezing Mean Annual
Weathering Depth      Termite  Temp   Required     Hazards Index    Temp

Severe     32"        Moderate -5     Yes          1975    1265     52
                      to Heavy
 
   (B)   Table R301.2(1) Climatic and Geographic Design Criteria.
      (1)   ADD: The protection standard is the base flood. The lowest floor
and all electrical, heating, ventilating, plumbing and air conditioning
equipment shall be located at or above the flood protection elevation except
that water and sewer pipes, electric lines, telecommunication lines and other
utility service facilities may be located below the flood protection elevation
provided that they are water proofed and protected from damage by hydrostatic
and hydrodynamic forces. The best available base flood data are listed below.
Whenever a party disagrees with the best data available, the party shall
finance the detailed Engineering study needed to replace the existing data with
better data and submit it to the Village of Mahomet, FEMA, and the IDNR/OWR for
approval prior to any development of the site.
      (2)   The base flood elevation for the floodplains of the Sangamon River
shall be as delineated on the 100-year profiles in the Countywide Flood
Insurance Study of Champaign County, Illinois prepared by the Federal Emergency
Management Agency, dated October 2, 2013.
      (3)   The base flood elevation for each floodplain delineated as an “AH
Zone” or “AO Zone” shall be that elevation (or depth) delineated on the Flood
Insurance Rate Map of Champaign County, Illinois, dated October 2, 2013.
      (4)   The base flood elevation for each of the remaining floodplains
delineated as an “A Zone” on the Flood Insurance Rate Map of Champaign County,
Illinois shall be determined according to the best data available from federal,
state or other sources. Should no other data exist, an engineering study must
be financed by the applicant to determine base flood elevations.
      (5)   The base flood elevation for the floodplains for any river, creek,
stream, ditch, or other identified major channel with an upstream drainage area
larger than one square mile in areas not designated on the Flood Insurance Rate
Map of Champaign County shall be determined according to the best data
available from federal, state or other sources. Should no other data exist, an
engineering study must be financed by the applicant to determine base flood
elevations.
   (C)   301.2.4 Floodplain Construction. ADD: Buildings and structures
constructed in whole or in part in flood hazard areas shall comply with the
applicable provisions of
Chapter 151 of the Mahomet Municipal Code.
   (D)   R302.3 Two-family dwellings. AMEND: Dwelling units in two-family
dwellings shall be constructed the same as R302.2 Townhouses.
   (E)   R302.4 Dwelling unit rated penetrations. AMEND: Penetrations of wall
or floor-ceiling assemblies required to be fire-resistance rated in accordance
with section R302.2 or R302.3 and roof/ceiling assemblies in accordance with
section R302.3 Exception 2 shall be protected in accordance with this section.
   (F)   R302.4.3 Ducts and air transfer openings. ADD: Penetrations by ducts
and air transfer openings of a fire-resistance rated floor/ceiling and/or roof/
ceiling assembly shall be protected by a listed fire damper or ceiling
radiation damper.
   (G)   R302.5.1 Opening protection. DELETE: equipped with a self-closing or
automatic-closing device.
   (H)   R307. DELETE: Toilet, Bath and Shower Spaces.
   (I)   R308.4.7 Glazing at the bottom stair landing. ADD: Glazing located
perpendicular to the stair run at the bottom of the stairway and where the
glazing is less than 60 inches (1,524mm) above the landing and within 60 inches
(1,524mm) horizontally of the bottom tread nosing shall be considered a
hazardous location.
   (J)   R309.3 Flood Hazard Areas. AMEND: For buildings located in flood
hazard areas as established by Table R301.2(1), garage floors shall be:
      (1)   Elevated to or above the base flood elevation as determined in
accordance with Section R322.01;
      (2)   Garage floors are at or above grade on not less than one side;
      (3)   Below the flood protection elevation, the garage must be built of
materials not susceptible to flood damage.
   (K)   Left blank on purpose.
   (L)   Left blank on purpose.
   (M)   R313 Automatic Fire Sprinkler Systems.
      (1)   R313.1 Townhouse automatic fire sprinkler systems.
         (a)   AMEND: When an automatic residential fire sprinkler system is
installed in townhouses it shall comply with the following.
            1.   Exception: An automatic residential fire sprinkler system
shall not be required where additions or alterations are made to existing
townhouses that do not have an automatic residential fire sprinkler system
installed.
         (b)   AMEND: R313.1.1 Design and installation. Automatic residential
fire sprinkler systems for townhouses shall be designed and installed in
accordance with NFPA 13D.
      (2)   R313.2 One- and two-family dwellings automatic fire systems.
         (a)   AMEND: When an automatic residential fire sprinkler system is
installed in one- and two-family dwellings it shall comply with the following.
         (b)   R313.2.1. AMEND: Automatic residential fire sprinkler systems
shall be designed and installed in accordance with NFPA 13D.
   (N)   R317.3.2 Fastenings for wood foundations. ADD: Wood foundations are
not allowed in the Village of Mahomet.
   (O)   Left blank on purpose.
   (P)   R319.1 Address identification. AMEND: Buildings shall be provided with
approved address identification. The address identification shall be legible
and placed in a position that is visible from the street or road fronting the
property. Address identification characters shall contrast with their
background. Address numbers shall be Arabic numbers or alphabetical letters.
Numbers shall not be spelled out. Each character shall be no larger than 6
inches and not less than 2.5 inches in height with a stroke width of not less
than 0.5 inch. Where required by the Fire Code Official, address identification
shall be provided in additional approved locations to facilitate emergency
response. Where access is by means of a private road and the building address
cannot be viewed from the public way, a monument, pole or other sign or means
shall be used to identify the structure. Address identification shall be
maintained.
   (Q)   R322.1.4 Establishing the Design Flood Elevation.
      (1)   AMEND: 1. One foot above the Base Flood Elevation (i.e. at the
flood protection elevation) determined per
Chapter 151 of the Mahomet Municipal Code and Table R301.2(1).
      (2)   DELETE: 2.
   (R)   R322.1.4.1 Determination of design flood elevations. ADD: 3. The
design flood elevation shall be determined in accordance with the requirements
of
Chapter 151 of the Mahomet Municipal Code and Table R301.2(1).
   (S)   R327.1. AMEND: General. See §
152.046(G) the Mahomet Municipal Code.
   (T)   R327.2. ADD: Natural topography. Natural topography that prevents
direct access to the pool or spa area shall include but not be limited to
cliffs and natural rock formations. A natural barrier approved by the governing
body shall be acceptable provided that the degree of protection is not less
than the protection afforded by the requirements of §
152.046(G) of the Mahomet Municipal Code.
   (U)   R332.3. DELETE: Coastal High Hazard Areas.
   (V)   (1)   R324.7 Access and pathways. Roof access, pathways and spacing
requirements shall be provided in accordance with Sections R324.7.1 through
R324.7.2.5.
         (a)   Exceptions:
            1.   Detached garages and accessory structures to one and two-
family dwellings and town houses, such as parking shade structures, carports,
solar trellises, and similar structures.
            2.   Roof access, pathways and spacing requirements need not be
provided where an alternative ventilation method approved by the code official
has been provided or where the code official has determined that vertical
ventilation techniques will not be employed.
      (2)   R324.7.1 Roof access points. Roof access points shall be located in
areas that do not require the placement of ground ladders over openings such as
windows or doors, and located at strong points of building construction in
locations where the access point does not conflict with overhead obstructions
such as tree limbs, wires or signs.
      (3)   R324.7.2 Solar photovoltaic systems. Solar photovoltaic systems
shall comply with Sections R324.7.2.1 through R324.7.2.5.
      (4)   R324.7.2.1 Size of solar photovoltaic array. Each photovoltaic
array shall be limited to 150 feet by 150 feet (45,720 by 45,720 mm). Multiple
arrays shall be separated by a clear access pathway not less than three feet
(914 mm) in width.
      (5)   R324.7.2.2 Hip roof layouts. Panels and modules installed on
dwellings with hip roof layouts shall be in a manner that provides a clear
access pathway not less than three feet (914 mm) in width from the eave to the
ridge on each roof slope where panels and modules are located. The access
pathway shall be located at a structurally strong location on the building
capable of supporting the live load of fire fighters accessing the roof.
         (a)   Exception:
            1.   These requirements shall not apply to roofs with slopes of two
units vertical in 12 units horizontal (16.6 percent) and less.
      (6)   R324.7.2.3 Single ridge roofs. Panels and modules installed on
dwellings with a single ridge shall be located in a manner that provides two,
three-foot-wide (914 mm) access pathways from the eave to the ridge on each
roof slope where panels or modules are located.
         (a)   Exception:
            1.   This requirement shall not apply to roofs with slopes of two
units vertical in 12 units horizontal (16.6 percent) and less.
      (7)   R324.7.2.4 Roofs with hips and valleys. Panels and modules
installed on dwellings with roof hips or valleys shall not be located less than
18 inches (457 mm) from a hip or valley where panels or modules are to be
placed on both sides of a hip or valley. Where panels are to be located on one
side only of a hip or valley that is of equal length, the 18-inch (457 mm)
clearance does not apply.
         (a)   Exception:
            1.   These requirements shall not apply to roofs with slopes of two
units vertical in 12 units horizontal (16.6 percent) and less.
      (8)   R324.7.2.5 Allowance for smoke ventilation operations. Panels and
modules installed on dwellings shall not be located less than three feet (914
mm) below the roof ridge to allow for fire department smoke ventilation
operations.
         (a)   Exception:
            1.   Where an alternative ventilation method approved by the code
official has been provided or where the code official has determined that
vertical ventilation techniques will not be employed, clearance from the roof
ridge is not required.
(Ord. 19-12-15, passed 12-17-2019; Ord. 23-03-03, passed 3-28-2023; Ord. 24-11-
01, passed 11-26- 2024)
§ 160.046 CHAPTER 4: FOUNDATIONS.
   The following sections of the Residential Building Code are hereby revised
as follows:
   (A)   R401.3 Drainage. AMEND: Surface drainage shall be diverted to a storm
sewer conveyance or other approved point of collection that does not create a
hazard. Lots shall be graded to drain surface water away from foundation walls
as per the Infrastructure Design Manual of the Subdivision Ordinance. See also
Chapter 33 of this code.
   (B)   R402.1 Wood foundations. ADD: Wood foundations are not allowed in the
Village of Mahomet.
   (C)   403.1.1. DELETE: Footings for wood foundations shall be in accordance
with the details set forth in Section R403.2 and Figures R403.1(2) and R403.1
(3).
   (D)   Left blank on purpose.
   (E)   R403.1.6 Foundation anchorage. ADD: Exceptions:
      (1)   3. Foundation anchorage spaced as required to provide equivalent
anchorage to 1/2-inch-diameter (12.7 mm) anchor bolts.
      (2)   4. All accessory structures over 60 square feet other than detached
garages shall be secured to the ground at all corners to prevent lateral
movement and uplift, which may consist of screw in anchors, steel posts on
inside corners, anchor bolts to concrete floor or any approved ground anchoring
system.
   (F)   Left blank on purpose.
   (G)   Left blank on purpose.
   (H)   Table R403.3(2). DELETE: Air-freezing Index for U.S. Locations by
County.
   (I)   Figure R403.3(2). DELETE: Air-freezing Index an Estimate of the 100-
Year Return Period.
   (J)   Figure R403.3(3). DELETE: Insulation Placement for Frost-protected
Footings Adjacent to Unheated Slab-on-Ground Structure.
   (K)   Figure R403.3(4). DELETE: Insulation Placement for Frost-Protected
Footings Adjacent to Heated Structure.
   (L)   R403.1.7.4 Alternate clearances. AMEND: Alternate clearances are
permitted, subject to the approval of the Building Official. The Building
Official is permitted to require an investigation and recommendation of a
qualified engineer to demonstrate that the intent of this section has been
satisfied. Such an investigation shall include consideration of material,
height of slope, slope gradient, load intensity and erosion characteristics of
slope material.
   (M)   R404.1.8. AMEND: Rubble stone masonry are not allowed in the Village
of Mahomet.
   (N)   R404.2. DELETE: Wood foundation walls.
   (O)   Table R404.2.3. DELETE: Plywood Grade and Thickness for Wood
Foundation Construction (30 pcf equivalent-fluid weight soil pressure).
   (P)   Figure R403.1(2). DELETE: Permanent Wood Foundation Basement Wall
Section.
   (Q)   Figure R403.1(3). DELETE: Permanent Wood Foundation Crawl Space
Section.
   (R)   R405.2. DELETE: Wood foundations.
   (S)   R406.3. DELETE: Damp proofing for wood foundations.
   (T)   R406.3.4. DELETE: Backfill.
   (U)   R408.7 Flood Resistance. DELETE: The exception.
(Ord. 19-12-15, passed 12-17-2019; Ord. 24-11-01, passed 11-26-2024)
§ 160.047 CHAPTER 5: FLOORS.
   The following sections of the Residential Building Code are hereby revised
as follows:
   (A)   R504 Pressure Preservative Treated Wood Floors (On Ground). ADD: Wood
floors on the ground are prohibited.
   (B)   R506.2.2 Base. DELETE: Exception.
   (C)   R507 Exterior Decks.
      (1)   ADD: R507.11 Flood Resistance. For exterior decks located in flood
hazard areas established in Table R301.2(1):
      (2)   ADD: Exterior decks shall be anchored to prevent floatation,
collapse or lateral movement under conditions of the base flood.
      (3)   ADD: Exterior decks shall be constructed in a flood resistant
manner in accordance with Section R322 of this code.
(Ord. 19-12-15, passed 12-17-2019; Ord. 24-11-01, passed 11-26-2024)
§ 160.048 CHAPTER 6: WALL CONSTRUCTION.
   The following sections of the Residential Building Code are hereby revised
as follows:
   (A)   R601 General. ADD: R601.3 Flood Resistance Walls constructed for
buildings located in flood hazard areas shall comply with Section R322 of this
code.
   (B)   R602.1.9. AMEND: Particle board. Particle board cannot be used.
   (C)   Table R602.3(3) Requirements for Wood Structural Panel Wall Sheathing
Used to Resist Wind Pressures a, b, c. DELETE: Row 1.
 
Minimum Nail                Minimum Wood     Minimum Nominal
                Penetration Structural Panel Panel Thickness Maximum Wall Stud
Size            (inches)    Span Rating      (inches)        Spacing

6d Common       1.5         24/0             3/8             16
(2.0" x 0.113")
8d Common       1.75        24/16            7/16            16
(2.5" x 0.131")                                              24
 
 
Panel Nail Spacing                      Ultimate Design Wind Speed Vult
                                        (mph)
Edges (inches o.c.) Field (inches o.c.) Wind Exposure Category
                                        B   C   D
6                   12                  140 115 110
6                   12                  170 140 135
6                   12                  140 115 110
 
   (D)   Table R602.3(4). DELETE: Allowable Spans for Particle Board Wall
Sheathing a.
   (E)   Table R602.7.4.
      (1)   ADD: Maximum Spans for Headers over Openings in Walls Size of
Header.
      (2)   Max. Span of Headers in Nonbearing Walls:
         (a)   2-2 x 4 < 6'
         (b)   2-2 x 6 8'
         (c)   2-2 x 8 10'
         (d)   2-2 x 10 12'
         (e)   2-2 x 12 16'
      (3)   1 Nominal 4-inch-thick single headers may be substituted for double
members.
   (F)   Table R602.7.5. AMEND: Minimum Number of Full Height Studs at Each End
of Headers in Exterior Walls Max. Header Span Minimum Number of Studs.
      (1)   <4' 1 12' 2 16' 3
   (G)   Table R602.10.4 Bracing Methods. AMEND: PBS particle board sheathing
is not allowed.
   (H)   R603.1 General. AMEND: Elements shall be straight and free of any
defects that would significantly affect structural performance. Cold-formed
steel wall framing members shall be in accordance with the requirements of this
section. Cold-formed steel wall framing is limited to single story residential
buildings.
   (I)   R605. AMEND: Particle board. Particle board cannot be used as
sheathing.
   (J)   R606.4.2. AMEND: Rubble stone masonry wall. Rubble stone masonry walls
are prohibited.
   (K)   Table R602.12.4 is amended by adding 2 rows as set forth below:
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/a9ca1b11a123a719de15c1f9e2aa74391beab565/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2413.png]
 
(Ord. 19-12-15, passed 12-17-2019; Ord. 20-12- 02, passed 12-15-2020)
§ 160.049 CHAPTER 7: WALL COVERING.
   The following section of the Residential Building Code is hereby revised as
follows:
   Table R703.3(1). AMEND: Siding Minimum Attachment and Minimum Thickness.
DELETE: Particle Board row of the table.
(Ord. 19-12-15, passed 12-17-2019)
§ 160.050 CHAPTER 8: ROOF-CEILING CONSTRUCTION.
   The following section of the Residential Building Code is hereby revised as
follows:
   R802.11 Roof Tie uplift resistance. AMEND: All raters be connected to the
supporting wall assembly. Trusses shall be attached to supporting wall
assemblies by connections capable of resisting uplift forces.
(Ord. 19-12-15, passed 12-17-2019; Ord. 24-11-01, passed 11-26-2024)
§ 160.051 CHAPTER 9: ROOF ASSEMBLIES.
   The following section of the Residential Building Code is hereby revised as
follows:
   R903.4.1 Secondary (emergency overflow) drains or scuppers. AMEND: Where
roof drains are required, overflow drains having the same size as the roof
drains shall be installed with the inlet flow line located two inches (51 mm)
above the low point of the roof, or overflow scuppers having three times the
size of the roof drains and having a minimum opening height of four inches (102
mm) shall be installed in the adjacent parapet walls with the inlet flow
located two inches (51 mm) above the low point of the adjacent roof. The
installation and sizing of overflow drains, leaders and conductors shall comply
with the currently adopted Residential Building Code and Village of Mahomet
Storm Water Code. Overflow drains shall discharge to an approved location and
shall not be connected to roof drain lines.
(Ord. 19-12-15, passed 12-17-2019; Ord. 24-11-01, passed 11-26-2024)
§ 160.052 CHAPTER 11: [RE] ENERGY EFFICIENCY.
   N1101.1 AMEND: Buildings shall be designed and constructed in accordance
with the most current Illinois Energy Conservation Code. Buildings shall comply
with the most current Illinois Energy Conservation Code. The remainder of
Chapter 11 is deleted.
(Ord. 19-12-15, passed 12-17-2019; Ord. 24-11-01, passed 11-26-2024)
§ 160.053 CHAPTER 13: GENERAL MECHANICAL SYSTEMS AND REQUIREMENTS.
   The following sections of the Residential Building Code are hereby revised
as follows:
   (A)   M1301.1.1 Flood Resistant Installation. ADD: M1301.1.2 All mechanical
appliances, equipment and systems shall comply with the applicable provisions
of Chapter 151 of the Mahomet Municipal Code.
   (B)   M1307.6 Plumbing connections. AMEND: Potable water and drainage system
connections to equipment and appliances regulated by this code shall be in
accordance with State of Illinois Plumbing Code.
(Ord. 19-12-15, passed 12-17-2019)
§ 160.054 CHAPTER 14: HEATING AND COOLING EQUIPMENT AND APPLIANCES.
   The following sections of the Residential Building Code are hereby revised
as follows:
   (A)   M1401.5 Flood Hazard. ADD: All heating and cooling appliances,
equipment, and systems shall comply with the applicable provisions of
Chapter 151 of the Mahomet Municipal Code.
   (B)   M1411.3.2 Drain pipe materials and sizes. AMEND: Components of the
condensate disposal system shall be ABS, cast iron, copper, cross-linked
polyethylene, CPVC, galvanized steel, PE-RT, polyethylene, polypropylene or PVC
pipe or tubing. Components shall be selected for the pressure and temperature
rating of the installation. Joints and connections shall be made in accordance
with the applicable provisions of the State of Illinois Plumbing Code
Condensate waste and drain line size shall be not less than 3/4-inch (19 mm)
nominal diameter from the drain pan connection to the place of condensate
disposal. Where the drain pipes from more than one unit are manifolded together
for condensate drainage, the pipe or tubing shall be sized in accordance with
an approved method.
(Ord. 19-12-15, passed 12-17-2019)
§ 160.055 CHAPTER 20: BOILERS AND WATER HEATERS.
   The following section of the Residential Building Code is hereby revised as
follows:
   M2001.4 Flood Resistant Installation.  ADD: All boilers, water heaters, and
their control systems shall comply with the applicable provisions of
Chapter 151 of the Mahomet Municipal Code.
(Ord. 19-12-15, passed 12-17-2019)
§ 160.056 CHAPTER 21: HYDRONIC PIPING.
   The following section of the Residential Building Code is hereby revised as
follows:
   M2105.22.1 Flood Hazard. ADD: All hydronic piping systems within a flood
hazard area shall be water proofed to prevent contamination by flood waters.
Hydronic piping systems that are connected to or which utilize ground water
shall    be constructed in such manner as to prevent backflow of flood waters
into the ground water.
(Ord. 19-12-15, passed 12-17-2019)
§ 160.057 CHAPTER 24: FUEL GAS.
   The following section of the Residential Building Code is hereby revised as
follows:
   (A)   G2403. ADD: General definitions.
      (1)   Design Flood Elevation: The design flood elevation shall be the
flood protection elevation as established by
Chapter 151 of the Mahomet Municipal Code (i.e. one foot above the base flood
elevation).
      (2)   Flood Hazard Area: All lands subject to inundation by the base
flood, as established by
Chapter 151 of the Mahomet Municipal Code and Table R301.2(1) of this code.
(Ord. 19-12-15, passed 12-17-2019)
§ 160.058 CHAPTERS 29 THROUGH 32.
   Chapters 29 through 32 of the Residential Building Code are hereby deleted
in their entirety.
(Ord. 19-12-15, passed 12-17-2019)
§ 160.059 CHAPTER 33: PRIVATE DRAINAGE.
   The following sections of the Residential Building Code are hereby revised
as follows:
   (A)   AMEND: General.
      (1)   Scope. The provisions of this chapter shall govern the materials,
design, construction and installation of storm water, ground water and
miscellaneous water drainage.
      (2)   Requirements.
         (a)   There shall be no discharge from private property that creates
or contributes to a public hazard or public nuisance.
         (b)   No sump pump outlets or storm water drainage systems shall be
connected into a sanitary sewer system.
         (c)   No person shall hereafter construct, build, establish, replace
or maintain any sump pump which discharges onto a public right-of-way, or other
public property maintained by the village without obtaining written permission
from the Village Administrator.
         (d)   Failure to obtain written permission from the Administrator for
a dry weather water outlet discharge onto a public street, public sidewalk, or
other public property shall be deemed a violation of the Village of Mahomet
Residential Code.
   (B)   Downspouts and roof drains. Downspouts and roof drains shall discharge
onto the ground no closer than five feet to a property line or be connected to
a subsoil drain.
   (C)   Subsoil drain pipe.
Subsoil Drain Pipe
Material Standard
Subsoil Drain Pipe
Material                                Standard
Cast iron pipe                          ASTM A 74; ASTM A 888; CISPI 301
Polyethylene (PE) plastic pipe          ASTM F 405; CSA B182.1; CSA B182.6; CSA
                                        B182.8
Polyvinyl chloride (PVC) plastic pipe   ASTM D 2729; ASTM D3034; ASTM F 891;
(type sewer pipe, SDR 35, PS25, PS50 or CSA B182.2; CSA B182.4
PS100)
Stainless steel drainage systems, Type  ASME A112.3.1
316L
Vitrified clay pipe                     ASTM C4; ASTM C 700ASTM C4; ASTM C 700
Corrugated PVC pipe with a smooth       ASTM F-949
interior
Corrugated PE pipe with a smooth        ASTM M-294
interior
 
      (1)   ADD:
         (a)   Corrugated PVC pipe with a smooth interior: ASTM F-949;
         (b)   Corrugated PE pipe with a smooth interior: ASTM M-294.
   (D)   Subsoil drains. Subsoil drains shall be open-jointed, horizontally
split or perforated pipe conforming to one of the standards listed in Subsoil
Drain Pipe table. Such drains shall be not less than four inches (102 mm) in
diameter. Where the building is subject to backwater, the subsoil drain shall
be protected by an accessibly located backwater valve. Subsoil drains shall
discharge to a trapped area drain, sump, dry well or approved location above
ground. The subsoil sump shall not be required to have either a gas-tight cover
or a vent.
   (E)   Sumps with pumping systems.
      (1)   Pumping system. The sump pump pit and discharge piping shall
conform to:
         (a)   Pump capacity and head. The sump pump shall be of a capacity and
head appropriate to anticipated use requirements.
         (b)   Sump pit. The sump pit shall be not less than 18 inches in
diameter and 24 inches deep, unless otherwise approved. The pit shall be
accessible and located so that all drainage flows into the pit by gravity. The
sump pit shall be constructed of tile, steel, plastic, cast-iron, concrete or
other approved material, with a removable cover adequate to support anticipated
loads in the area of use. The pit floor shall be solid and provide permanent
support for the pump.
         (c)   Electrical. Electrical outlets shall meet the requirements of
E3902.5 Exception 2.
      (2)   Sump pump discharge shall be connected to a drainage facility.
         (a)   Exception. When no drainage facilities are present; sump pumps,
footing drains, downspouts, and other sources of water independent of water/
waste systems shall discharge not less than ten feet away from the nearest
property line.
      (3)   Maintenance.
         (a)   Sump pump discharge pipe shall be maintained by the property
owner.
            1.   The owner or owner's agent is responsible for making a water
tight connection to the drainage facilities.
         (b)   Where a sump pump discharge line or drainage tiles are provided,
a property owners association shall provide for the operation and maintenance
of the drainage facilities.
         (c)   Connections to public or quasi-public drainage piping must be
inspected by the Village Building Inspector or designee of the Village
Administrator.
(Ord. 19-12-15, passed 12-17-2019; Ord. 24-11-01, passed 11-26-2024)
§ 160.060 CHAPTER 35: ELECTRICAL DEFINITIONS.
   The following section of the Residential Building Code is hereby revised as
follows:
   ADD definition: Floodproofing. Constructed so that the item is water tight
and able to fully resist hydrostatic and hydrodynamic forces.
(Ord. 19-12-15, passed 12-17-2019)
§ 160.061 CHAPTER 36: SERVICES.
The following sections of the Residential Building Code are hereby revised as
follows:
   E3607.7 Grounding to metal water piping. AMEND: Use of the metal piping
system utilized for the supply of potable water from a municipal potable water
supply as the primary/only grounding method is strictly prohibited. See § 52.02
(J) for additional information.
(Ord. 19-12-15, passed 12-17-2019; Ord. 24-11-01, passed 11-26-2024)
§ 160.062 CHAPTER 39: POWER AND LIGHTING DISTRIBUTION.
   The following sections of the Residential Building Code are hereby revised
as follows:
   (A)   E3902.3 Outdoor Receptacles.
      (1)   ADD: Outdoor receptacles in flood hazard areas shall be placed
above the flood protection elevation.
   (B)   E3902.5 Unfinished basement receptacles.
      (1)   Exceptions:
         (a)   ADD: A receptacle supplying only a permanently installed fire
alarm or burglar alarm system. Receptacles installed in accordance with this
exception shall not be considered as meeting the requirement of Section E3901.9
(210.8(A)(5) Exception).
         (b)   ADD: 2. Each permanently installed mechanical device is to be
supplied power on a dedicated circuit with a single receptacle circuit without
GFCI or AFCI apparatuses.
   (C)   E3902.20. AMEND: Arc-fault circuit-interrupter protection.
      (1)   Bedrooms only.
(Ord. 19-12-15, passed 12-17-2019; Ord. 24-11-01, passed 11-26-2024)
§ 160.063 APPENDICES ADOPTED.
   The following appendices to the Residential Building Code are hereby adopted
as follows:
   (A)   Appendix AA: Sizing and Capacities of Gas Piping.
   (B)   Appendix AB: Sizing of Venting Systems Serving Appliances Equipped
with Draft Hoods, Category I Appliances, and Appliances Listed for Use with
Type B Vents.
   (C)   Appendix AC: Exit Terminals of Mechanical Draft and Direct-Vent
Venting Systems.
   (D)   Appendix AD: Recommended Procedure for Safety Inspection of an
Existing Appliance Installation.
   (E)   Appendix AE: Manufactured Housing Used as Dwellings. Adopt the title
of this section for references purposes.
      (1)   ADD: Mobile homes installation, tie down, installers acts as per
Illinois state laws.
      (2)   (210 ILCS 115/) Mobile Home Park Act.
      (3)   (210 ILCS 120/) Illinois Mobile Home Tiedown Act.
      (4)   (430 ILCS 120/) Illinois Manufactured Home Installers Act.
   (F)   Appendix AF: Passive Radon Gas Controls.
      (1)   Adopt the title and add Illinois radon mitigation laws.
      (2)   Nuclear Safety (420 ILCS 52/) Radon Resistant Construction Act.
      (3)   Title 32: Energy Chapter II: Illinois Emergency Management Agency,
Subchapter B: Radiation Protection, Part 422 Regulations for Radon Service
Providers, Section 422.160 Mitigation Standard for New Residential
Construction.
   (G)   Appendix AI: Private Sewage Disposal. DELETE: Text and replace with
"See Section 53.017 Building sewers and private sewers."
   (H)   Appendix AJ: Existing Buildings and Structures.
      (1)   DELETE: AJ102.4.
      (2)   AJ107.2 Water closets. Where any water closet is replaced with a
newly manufactured water closet, the replacement water closet shall comply with
the requirements of Illinois Plumbing code.
   (I)   Appendix AN: Venting Methods.
   (J)   Appendix AW: 3D-Printed Building Construction.
(Ord. 19-12-15, passed 12-17-2019; Ord. 24-11-01, passed 11-26-2024)
§ 160.064 APPENDICES DELETED.
   The following appendices to the Residential Building Code are hereby
deleted:
   (A)   Appendix AG: Piping Standards for Various Applications;
   (B)   Appendix AH: Patio Covers;
   (C)   Appendix AK: Sound Transmission;
   (D)   Appendix AL: Permit Fees;
   (E)   Appendix AM: Home Day Care—R-3 Occupancy;
   (F)   Appendix AO: Automatic Vehicular Gates;
   (G)   Appendix AP: Sizing of Water Piping System;
   (H)   Appendix AQ: Tiny Houses;
   (I)   Appendix AR: Light Straw-Clay Construction;
   (J)   Appendix AS: Strawbale Construction;
   (K)   Appendix AT: Solar-Ready Provisions Detached One- and Two-Family
Dwellings, Multiple Single-Family Dwellings (Townhouses);
   (L)   Appendix AU COB Construction (Monolithic Adobe);
   (M)   Appendix AX: Energy Residential Building Provisions.
(Ord. 19-12-15, passed 12-17-2019; Ord. 24-11-01, passed 11-26-2024)
§ 160.065 CHAPTER 16: DUCT SYSTEMS.
   The following sections of the 2021 International Residential Building Code,
Chapter 16: Duct Systems are hereby revised as follows:
   (A)   M1601.1.1 Above-ground duct systems.
      (1)   DELETE: 5. The use of gypsum products to construct return air ducts
or plenums is permitted, provided that the air temperature does not exceed
125°F (52°C) and exposed surfaces are not subject to condensation.
      (2)   AMEND: 7. Stud wall cavities and the spaces between solid floor
joists to be used as air plenums shall comply with the following conditions.
      (3)   AMEND: 7.1. These cavities or spaces shall not be used as a plenum
for supply air or return air.
      (4)   ADD: 7.1.1 Return air must be ducted with metal or flex ducting.
      (5)   ADD: 7.1.2 When return air ducting and electrical wiring, switches
or receptacles conflict metal ducting is required.
(Ord. 22-12-01, passed 12-20-2022; Ord. 24-11-01, passed 11-26-2024)
TABLE OF SPECIAL ORDINANCES
[RESERVED]
PARALLEL REFERENCES
References to Illinois Compiled Statutes
References to Ordinances
REFERENCES TO ILLINOIS COMPILED STATUTES
ILCS Reference Code Section
ILCS Reference                    Code Section
Ch. 5, Act 70, § 1.01            10.04
Ch. 5, Act 70, § 1.02            10.04
Ch. 5, Act 70, § 1.03            10.04
Ch. 5, Act 70, § 1.04            10.04
Ch. 5, Act 70, § 1.05            10.02
Ch. 5, Act 70, § 1.07            10.02
Ch. 5, Act 70, § 1.08            10.02
Ch. 5, Act 70, § 1.09            10.04
Ch. 5, Act 70, § 1.10            10.02
Ch. 5, Act 70, § 1.11            10.04
Ch. 5, Act 70, § 1.12            10.02
Ch. 5, Act 70, § 1.15            10.02
Ch. 5, Act 70, § 1.16            10.02
Ch. 5, Act 70, § 1.17            10.02
Ch. 5, Act 70, § 1.20            10.02
Ch. 5, Act 70, § 1.24            10.02
Ch. 5, Act 70, § 1.28            10.02
Ch. 5, Act 70, § 1.29            10.02
Ch. 5, Act 70, § 2               10.04
Ch. 20, Act 1605, §§ 1 et seq.  133.15
Ch. 30, Act 405                   53.002
Ch. 35, Act 145, §§ 1 et seq.   32.20
Ch. 40, Act 5, §§ 3-101 et seq. 33.20
Ch. 40, Act 5, § 3-105           33.21
Ch. 40, Act 5, § 3-106           33.21
Ch. 40, Act 5, § 3-108.3         33.21
Ch. 50, Act 45, §§ 1 et seq.    32.22
Ch. 65, Act 5                     10.02;
                                  33.04
Ch. 65, Act 5, §§ 1-1 et seq.   110.003
Ch. 65, Act 5, § 1-1-2           10.02
Ch. 65, Act 5, § 1-2-1           10.99;
                                  151.01
Ch. 65, Act 5, § 1-2-1.1         10.99
Ch. 65, Act 5, § 1-2-4           90.06
Ch. 65, Act 5, § 1-2-9           93.53
Ch. 65, Act 5, § 3.1-30-10       31.01
Ch. 65, Act 5, §§ 8-11-1 et seq.32.04
Ch. 65, Act 5, § 8-11-2          32.02
Ch. 65, Act 5, § 11-12-12        151.01
Ch. 65, Act 5, § 11-30-2         151.01
Ch. 65, Act 5, § 11-30-8         151.01
Ch. 65, Act 5, § 11-31-2         151.01
Ch. 65, Act 5, § 11-40-3         93.35
Ch. 65, Act 5, § 11-40-3.1       93.35
Ch. 65, Act 5, § 11-80-2         70.01
Ch. 210, Act 115                  160.063
Ch. 210, Act 120                  160.063
Ch. 220, Act 5, § 3-105          32.02
Ch. 220, Act 5, § 9-222          32.02
Ch. 220, Act 5, § 16-102         32.02
Ch. 220, Act 5, § 16-104         32.03
Ch. 220, Act, § 21-201(v)        156.007
Ch. 220, Act 5, § 21-401         32.22 ;
                                  156.007
Ch. 220, Act 5, § 21-401(b)(6)   32.22
Ch. 220, Act 5, § 21-801         32.22
Ch. 220, Act 5, § 21-801(b)      32.22
Ch. 220, Act 65, § 4          156.012
Ch. 225, Act 440, §§ 1 et seq.  152.074;
                                  152.077
Ch. 230, Act 10, §§ 1 et seq.   133.16
Ch. 230, Act 15                   115.06
Ch. 230, Act 15, §§ 1 et seq.   133.15
Ch. 230, Act 25, §§ 1 et seq.   133.15
                                  113.01;
Ch. 230, Act 40, §§ 1 et seq.   133.15;
                                  133.16
Ch. 230, Act 40, § 5             133.16
Ch. 235, Act 5, §§ 1-1 et seq.  110.002;
                                  110.003
Ch. 235, Act 5, § 4-2            110.03
Ch. 235, Act 5, § 6-27.1         110.066
Ch. 415, Act 5, § 3.360          131.30;
                                  133.05
Ch. 415, Act 55, §§ 1 et seq.   52.002;
                                  52.026
Ch. 415, Act 105                  156.010
Ch. 420, Act 52                   160.063
Ch. 430, Act 120                  160.063
Ch. 605, Act 5, §§ 1-101 et seq.156.007
Ch. 625                           131.19
Ch. 625, Act 5, §§ 1-100 et seq.111.001;
                                  111.040
Ch. 625, Act 5, §§ 1-101 et seq.70.02 ;
                                  71.04
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-101.05       93.35
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-102          93.35
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-102.1        93.35
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-126          93.35
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-146          133.05
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-188          10.02
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 4-202          93.38
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 4-203          93.39
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 4-204          93.35;
                                  93.39
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 4-205          93.40
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 4-208          93.40
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 4-209          93.40
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 8-104          111.059
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 8-108          111.059
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-208         70.01
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-501.1    135.06
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-1004.5      93.35
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 20-204         70.01
Ch. 720, Act 5, §§ 1-1 et seq.  110.065
Ch. 720, Act 550, § 3            133.31
Ch. 720, Act 570, §§ 201 et seq.133.31
Ch. 765, Act 205, §§ 0.01 et seq154.049
Ch. 765, Act 205, § 2            151.27
Ch. 820, Act 305, §§ 1 et seq.  50.16
                                  
 
REFERENCES TO ORDINANCES
Ord. No. Date Passed Description
Ord. No.         Date Passed Description
87-3-1           - -         151.32
                9-10-1962   153.01-
                             153.03
                             93.15-
                3-12-1973   93.20;
                             93.99
                             35.01;
74-1             1-14-1974   50.50-
                             50.54;
                             50.99
81-11            7-13-1981   91.30;
                             91.31
85-12-1          12-9-1985   112.01 -
                             112.07
86-5-1           5-3-1986    31.01
                3-9-1987    50.01;
                             50.99
88-2-1           2-8-1988    34.01
88-7-1           7-11-1988   91.02;
                             91.99
88-12-02         12-21-1988  31.02
88-12-03         12-21-1988  31.03
                             93.35;
89-8-1           8-15-1989   93.36;
                             93.39;
                             93.40
                             35.01;
89-12-1          12-19-1989  90.01-
                             90.06;
                             90.99
93-11-1          11-23-1993  32.20
94-7-1           7-26-1994   91.01;
                             91.99
98-3-2           3-24-1998   91.15;
                             91.99
                             32.01-
98-7-1           7-28-1998   32.08;
                             32.99
00-8-6           8-29-2000   31.04
                             152.001-
                             152.006;
                             152.020-
                             152.029;
                             152.031
                             ; 
                             152.032
                             ; 
                             152.045-
                             152.052;
                             152.065-
                             152.078;
                7-23-2002   152.090;
                             152.091;
                             152.105-
                             152.108;
                             152.120;
                             152.121;
                             152.135-
                             152.142;
                             152.155-
                             152.158;
                             152.170-
                             152.174;
                             152.999;
                             Ch. 152, App. A
02-07-07         7-23-2002   32.20
02-12-03         12-17-2002  151.32
03-09-02         9-23-2003   35.01
03-09-02, 1-1    9-23-2003   130.01
03-09-02, 2-1    9-23-2003   130.15
03-09-02, 2-2    9-23-2003   130.16
03-09-02, 2-3    9-23-2003   130.17
03-09-02, 2-4    9-23-2003   130.18
03-09-02, 3-1    9-23-2003   131.01
03-09-02, 3-2    9-23-2003   131.02
03-09-02, 3-3    9-23-2003   131.03
03-09-02, 3-4    9-23-2003   131.04
03-09-02, 4-1    9-23-2003   132.01
03-09-02, 4-2    9-23-2003   132.02
03-09-02, 4-3    9-23-2003   132.03
03-09-02, 4-4    9-23-2003   132.04
03-09-02, 4-5    9-23-2003   132.05
03-09-02, 4-6    9-23-2003   132.06
03-09-02, 4-7    9-23-2003   132.15
03-09-02, 4-8    9-23-2003   132.16
03-09-02, 4-9    9-23-2003   132.17
03-09-02, 4-10   9-23-2003   132.18
03-09-02, 4-11   9-23-2003   132.19
03-09-02, 4-12   9-23-2003   132.20
03-09-02, 5-1    9-23-2003   131.15
03-09-02, 5-2    9-23-2003   131.16
03-09-02, 5-3    9-23-2003   131.17
03-09-02, 5-4    9-23-2003   131.18
03-09-02, 5-5    9-23-2003   131.19
03-09-02, 6-1    9-23-2003   133.01
03-09-02, 6-2    9-23-2003   133.02
03-09-02, 6-3    9-23-2003   133.03
03-09-02, 6-4    9-23-2003   133.04
03-09-02, 6-5    9-23-2003   133.15
03-09-02, 6-5(a) 9-23-2003   133.16
03-09-02, 6-6    9-23-2003   133.17
03-09-02, 6-7    9-23-2003   133.18
03-09-02, 6-8    9-23-2003   133.30
03-09-02, 6-9    9-23-2003   133.31
03-09-02, 6-10   9-23-2003   133.05
03-09-02, 7-1    9-23-2003   131.30
03-09-02, 7-2    9-23-2003   131.31
03-09-02, 7-3    9-23-2003   131.32
03-09-02, 7-4    9-23-2003   131.33
03-09-02, 8-1    9-23-2003   134.01
03-09-02, 8-2    9-23-2003   134.02
03-09-02, 8-3    9-23-2003   134.03
03-09-02, 8-6    9-23-2003   134.04
03-09-02, 10     9-23-2003   130.02
03-09-03         9-23-2003   35.01
04-02-05         2-24-2004   32.21
                             35.01;
04-12-01         12-21-2004  93.35-
                             93.40
05-08-02         8-23-2005   95.01-
                             95.07
06-01-05         1-24-2006   33.01-
                             33.07
                             35.01;
                             110.001-
                             110.003;
                             110.015-
                             110.031;
07-05-01         5-22-2007   110.045-
                             110.050;
                             110.060-
                             110.065;
                             110.075-
                             110.083;
                             110.999
07-10-01         10-16-2007  31.05
                             70.01-
07-12-03         12-18-2007  70.14;
                             70.99
08-05-04         5-28-2008   35.01
08-06            6-24-2008   30.01;
                             30.99
                             92.01-
                             92.08;
08-07-01         7-22-2008   92.20-
                             92.32;
                             92.99
08-07-02         7-22-2008   35.01
08-10-01         10-28-2008  31.06
09-04-02         4-28-2009   152.005
                             35.01;
09-05-02         5-26-2009   93.01-
                             93.04;
                             93.99
09-12-03         12-22-2009  133.16
                             50.35-
10-05-01         5-25-2010   50.40;
                             50.99
11-03-01         3-22-2011   Adopting Ordinance
                             111.001-
                             111.004;
                             111.015-
                             111.021;
                             111.035-
                             111.040;
11-06-01         6-28-2011   111.055-
                             111.059;
                             111.075-
                             111.086;
                             111.100-
                             111.106;
                             111.999
                             110.017;
11-12-01         12-13-2011  110.023;
                             110.027
11-12-02         12-20-2011  33.20-
                             33.23
                             152.002;
12-01-01         1-24-2012   152.027;
                             152.028;
                             152.031
12-08-02         8-28-2012   152.091
13-04-01         4-30-2013   31.07
                             110.017;
                             110.023;
13-07-01         7-9-2013    110.045;
                             110.061;
                             110.062
                             94.01-
13-07-02         7-23-2013   94.08;
                             94.99;
                             Ch. 94, App. A
                             151.01-
                             151.13;
13-09-1          9-10-2013   151.25-
                             151.32;
                             151.99
                             110.017;
14-06-03         6-24-2014   110.023;
                             110.027;
                             110.078
15-02-01         3-24-2015   152.171
15-04-02         4-29-2015   35.01
15-09-01         9-22-2015   32.04
                             113.01-
15-11-07         11-24-2015  113.10;
                             133.15;
                             133.16
15-11-08         11-24-2015  110.017;
                             110.023 
                             154.001-
                             154.007;
                             154.015,
                             154.016;
15-12-01         12-15-2015  154.025 
                             154.065;
                             154.080-
                             154.089;
                             154.115-
                             154.123
15-12-02         12-15-2015  51.01-
                             51.22
16-04-01         4-26-2016   110.003;
                             110.066
16-12-01         12-20-2016  31.09
17-02-01         2-28-2017   31.08
                             110.017;
17-04-03         4-25-2017   110.023;
                             110.045
                             93.55-
17-06-06         6-27-2017   93.58;
                             93.99
                             93.70-
17-08-02         8-22-2017   93.76;
                             93.99
                             152.002;
                             152.020 
                             152.033;
                             152.046;
                             152.050;
17-09-02         9-26-2017   152.053;
                             152.066;
                             152.068;
                             152.070-
                             152.073;
                             152.077;
                             152.090
                             152.002;
                             152.027;
17-11-06         11-28-2017  152.028;
                             152.032;
                             152.046;
                             152.054
17-11-07         11-28-2017  34.15-
                             34.19
                             155.01-
18-01-01         1-23-2018   155.05;
                             155.20-
                             155.29
18-02-03         2-27-2018   32.22
18-02-05         2-27-2018   152.171
18-02-06         2-27-2018   31.10
                             52.001;
                             52.002;
                             52.015-
                             52.026;
                             52.055-
                             52.057;
                             52.070-
                             52.077;
                             52.090;
                             52.091;
                             52.110-
                             52.115;
                             52.130-
                             52.138;
                             52.999;
                             53.001-
                             53.004;
                             53.015-
                             53.018;
                             53.030-
                             53.035;
                             53.045-
                             53.047;
                             53.060-
                             53.073;
                             53.085-
                             53.087;
18-04-01         4-24-2018   53.100;
                             53.999;
                             54.001;
                             54.010-
                             54.021;
                             54.035-
                             54.038;
                             54.045-
                             54.052;
                             54.060-
                             54.067;
                             54.070-
                             54.073;
                             54.080-
                             54.082;
                             54.095-
                             54.098;
                             54.110-
                             54.112;
                             54.125;
                             54.126;
                             54.140;
                             54.999;
                             55.001-
                             55.005;
                             55.020;
                             55.035;
                             55.036;
                             55.050
                             110.017;
18-04-02         4-24-2018   110.019;
                             110.045
18-07-01         7-24-2018   96.01-
                             96.27
19-03-02         3-26-2019   55.002
                             113.01,
19-09-01         9-24-2019   113.02,
                             113.10
                             35.01,
19-12-01         12-17-2019  114.01 
                             114.03,
                             114.99
                             110.017,
19-12-14         12-17-2019  110.020,
                             110.023
                             160.001-
19-12-15         12-17-2019  160.004,
                             160.020-
                             160.064
20-03-04         3-17-2020   55.002-
                             55.004
                             110.003,
                             110.017,
20-07-02         7-28-2020   110.023,
                             110.061,
                             110.084
                             152.026,
                             152.055,
20-07-05         7-28-2020   152.090,
                             152.107,
                             152.108
20-09-03         9-22-2020   152.046,
                             152.056
20-09-04         9-22-2020   92.05
                             115.01-
20-09-05         9-22-2020   115.13,
                             115.99
                             97.01 -
20-10-01         10-20-2020  97.11,
                             97.99
                             152.002,
                             152.005,
                             152.026,
                             152.027,
                             152.028,
20-12-01         12-15-2020  152.029,
                             152.033,
                             152.035,
                             152.046,
                             152.048,
                             152.055,
                             152.090
20-12-02         12-15-2020  160.048
20-12-03         12-15-2020  115.06
21-02-01         2-23-2021   115.07,
                             115.12
21-03-01         3-23-2021   110.023,
                             110.027
                             55.001,
21-04-02         4-27-2021   55.002,
                             55.003,
                             55.004
21-05-07         5-25-2021   110.017,
                             110.020
                             156.001 -
21-06-02         6-22-2021   156.021,
                             156.999
                             71.01 
21-07-01         7-27-2021   71.03,
                             71.99
22-03-02         3-22-2022   110.017,
                             110.045
22-03-03         3-22-2022   113.02,
                             113.03
                             156.001 
22-03-04         3-22-2022   156.021,
                             156.999
22-06-01         6-28-2022   95.01,
                             95.02
                             110.003,
                             110.017,
                             110.023,
22-10-01         10-25-2022  110.027,
                             110.061,
                             110.062,
                             110.075
22-10-02         10-25-2022  113.02
22-11-03         11-22-2022  152.021
                             152.066,
22-11-04         11-22-2022  152.068,
                             152.069
22-11-08         11-22-2022  31.11
22-12-01         12-20-2022  160.065
23-02-01         2-28-2023   135.01-
                             135.09
                             160.024,
23-03-03         3-28-2023   160.026,
                             160.045
23-03-04         3-28-2023   110.017
23-04-01         4-25-2023   55.001–
                             55.004
23-09-02         9-26-2023   31.11
23-10-01         10-24-2023  135.01-
                             135.09
23-11-01         11-28-2023  54.050
                             110.003,
                             110.017,
24-01-01         1-23-2024   110.023,
                             110.027,
                             110.045
24-01-02         1-23-2024   113.02
24-02-01         2-27-2024   50.35–
                             50.40
24-10-01         10-22-2024  93.45–
                             93.53
                             160.020,
                             160.022–
                             160.025,
                             160.027,
                             160.040,
24-11-01         11-26-2024  160.045–
                             160.047,
                             160.050–
                             160.052,
                             160.059,
                             160.061–
                             160.065
25-01-03         1-28-2025   71.04
                             50.01–
                             50.05;
25-01-04         1-28-2025   50.15–
                             50.30;
                             50.99
                             116.01–
25-02-01         2-25-2025   116.18,
                             116.99
25-04-01         4-22-2025   32.23
25-08-01         8-26-2025   110.017
25-11-01         11-25-2025  71.04
                            
 
 
