VILLAGE CODE
of
MANHATTAN, ILLINOIS
1990
Code current through:
Ord. 1493-25, passed 5-22-2025
 
Published by:
American Legal Publishing
525 Vine Street * Suite 310 * Cincinnati, Ohio 45202
1-833-226-3439 * www.amlegal.com
PREFACE
   This code of the Village of Manhattan, as supplemented, contains ordinances
up to and including ordinance 1493-25, passed 5-22-2025. Ordinances of the
Village adopted after said ordinance supersede the provisions of this code to
the extent that they are in conflict or inconsistent therewith. Consult the
Village office in order to ascertain whether any particular provision of the
code has been amended, superseded or repealed.
      American Legal Publishing
      Cincinnati, Ohio
ORDINANCES PENDING REVIEW FOR CODIFICATION
Listed ordinances have been passed, but they are pending review by the
publisher, and they may not amend the code of ordinances. Additionally,
ordinances listed in this section may not show the original ordinances in their
entirety. Please contact the office of the clerk if there are any questions
concerning any listed ordinances.
 
 
 
THE VILLAGE OF MANHATTAN
WILL COUNTY, ILLINOIS
 
 
ORDINANCE NUMBER _1494-25
 
 
 
AN ORDINANCE REPEALING ORDINANCE
NUMBER 1304-19 AND SECTION 1-15 OF THE
VILLAGE OF MANHATTAN CODE
WILL COUNTY, ILLINOIS (INVESTMENT POLICY)
 
 
 
 
MICHAEL ADRIEANSEN, Village President
Rebecca Bouck, Village Clerk
 
Village Board
ROBERT DILLING
JUSTIN YOUNG
TOM DOYLE
LUCINDA NEIGHBORS
CLINT BOONE
JENNIFER BAHENA
 
 
 
 
Published in pamphlet form by authority of the
President and the Board of Trustees of the Village of Manhattan
on this the 1st day of July, 2025
 
ORDINANCE NO. _1494-25
 
AN ORDINANCE REPEALING ORDINANCE
NUMBER 1304-19 AND SECTION 1-15 OF THE
VILLAGE OF MANHATTAN CODE
WILL COUNTY, ILLINOIS (DISBURSEMENTS)
 
WHEREAS, the Village of Manhattan (the "Village"), is a home rule municipality
pursuant to the provisions of the Constitution of the State of Illinois of
1970, Article VII, Section 6 and the laws of the State of Illinois; and
 
WHEREAS, the Corporate Authorities of the Village of Manhattan, Will County,
Illinois (the “Corporate Authorities”), have the authority to adopt ordinances
and resolutions and to promulgate rules and regulations that pertain to its
government and affairs and protect the public health, safety, and welfare of
its citizens; and
 
WHEREAS, on October 1, 2019, the Village Board adopted Ordinance Number 1304-
19, adopting an investment policy.
 
   NOW, THEREFORE, BE IT ORDAINED by the Village President and Board of
Trustees of the Village of Manhattan, Will County, Illinois in open meeting
assembled pursuant to the Village’s Home Rule powers as follows:  
 
Section One – Recitals.
   The Corporate Authorities hereby find that the recitals contained in the
preamble are true and correct, and incorporate them   into this Ordinance.
 
Section Two – Repeal
   Ordinance Number 1304-19 passed on October 1, 2019 and Section 1-15 of the
Village of Manhattan Code are hereby repealed.
 
Section Three – Publication; Effective Date.
   The Village Clerk is hereby authorized and directed to publish this
Ordinance in pamphlet form. This Ordinance shall be in full force and effect
from and after its passage, approval and publication in pamphlet form as
provided by law.
 
Section Four – Saving Clause.
   In the event that any provision or provisions, portion or portions, or
clause or clauses of this Ordinance shall be declared to be invalid or
unenforceable by a Court of competent jurisdiction, such adjudication shall in
no way affect or impair the validity or enforceability of any of the remaining
provisions, portions, or clauses of this Ordinance that may be given effect
without such invalid or unenforceable provision or provisions, portion or
portions, or clause or clauses.
 
                                  YES NO ABSENT PRESENT
Jennifer Bahena                   X             X
Clint Boone                       X             X
Robert Dilling                    X             X
Thomas Doyle                      X             X
Lucinda Neighbors                        X
Justin Young                      X             X
Michael Adrieansen (if necessary)        X
TOTAL                             5   0  2      5
   PASSED AND APPROVED by the Village of Manhattan Board of Trustees on the 1ST
day of    JULY         , 2025:
 
 
      ___________________________________
      Michael Adrieansen
      Village President
 
 
ATTEST:
 
___________________________________
Shelly Lewis
Village Clerk
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
THE VILLAGE OF MANHATTAN
WILL COUNTY, ILLINOIS
 
 
ORDINANCE NUMBER __1495-25
 
 
 
AN ORDINANCE AMENDING SECTION 1-9-5 OF
THE VILLAGE OF MANHATTAN CODE
WILL COUNTY, ILLINOIS
(DEPOSIT OF FUNDS)
 
 
 
 
MICHAEL ADRIEANSEN, Village President
Rebecca Bouck, Village Clerk
 
Village Board
ROBERT DILLING
JUSTIN YOUNG
TOM DOYLE
LUCINDA NEIGHBORS
CLINT BOONE
JENNIFER BAHENA
 
 
 
 
Published in pamphlet form by authority of the
President and the Board of Trustees of the Village of Manhattan
on this the 1st day of July, 2025
 
ORDINANCE NO. __1495-25
 
AN ORDINANCE AMENDING SECTION 1-9-5 OF
THE VILLAGE OF MANHATTAN CODE
WILL COUNTY, ILLINOIS (DEPOSITORIES)
 
WHEREAS, the Village of Manhattan (the "Village"), is a home rule municipality
pursuant to the provisions of the Constitution of the State of Illinois of
1970, Article VII, Section 6 and the laws of the State of Illinois; and
 
WHEREAS, the Corporate Authorities of the Village of Manhattan, Will County,
Illinois (the “Corporate Authorities”), have the authority to adopt ordinances
and resolutions and to promulgate rules and regulations that pertain to its
government and affairs and protect the public health, safety, and welfare of
its citizens; and
 
WHEREAS, 30 ILCS 235 of the Illinois Compiled Statutes, commonly known as the
Public Funds Investment Act, requires local governments to adopt investment
policies; and
 
WHEREAS, the Village is required by the Illinois Municipal Code to maintain a
list of authorized financial institutions (65 ILCS 5/3.1-35-50); and
 
WHEREAS, the Corporate Authorities of the Village have determined that it is
necessary, expedient, and in the best interests of the Village to approve and
desire to adopt an investment policy.
 
   NOW, THEREFORE, BE IT ORDAINED by the Village President and Board of
Trustees of the Village of Manhattan, Will County, Illinois in open meeting
assembled pursuant to the Village’s Home Rule powers as follows:  
 
Section One – Recitals.
   The Corporate Authorities hereby find that the recitals contained in the
preamble are true and correct, and incorporate them   into this Ordinance.
 
Section Two – Section 1-9-5
   Section 1-9-5 of the Village of Manhattan Municipal Code is hereby deleted
in its entirety and amended to read:
   1-9-5 Deposit of Funds
The Finance Director/Treasurer will maintain a list and is hereby authorized to
deposit Village monies, in accordance with 65 ILCS 5/3.1-35-50, in such
financial institutions   as may be selected from time to time as provided by
law.
 
Section Three – Publication; Effective Date.
   This Ordinance shall be in full force and effect from and after its passage,
approval and publication in pamphlet form as provided by law.
Section Four – Conflict Clause.
   All ordinances, resolutions, motions, or parts thereof, conflicting with any
of the provisions of this Ordinance, are hereby repealed, but only to the
extent necessary to avoid the conflict.
 
Section Five – Saving Clause.
   In the event that any provision or provisions, portion or portions, or
clause or clauses of this Ordinance shall be declared to be invalid or
unenforceable by a Court of competent jurisdiction, such adjudication shall in
no way affect or impair the validity or enforceability of any of the remaining
provisions, portions, or clauses of this Ordinance that may be given effect
without such invalid or unenforceable provision or provisions, portion or
portions, or clause or clauses.
 
                                  YES NO ABSENT PRESENT
Jennifer Bahena                   X             X
Clint Boone                       X             X
Robert Dilling                    X             X
Thomas Doyle                      X             X
Lucinda Neighbors                        X
Justin Young                      X
Michael Adrieansen (if necessary)        X      X
TOTAL                             5   0  2      5
 
   PASSED AND APPROVED by the Village of Manhattan Board of Trustees on the
1ST    day of    JULY         , 2025:
 
 
      ___________________________________
      Michael Adrieansen
      Village President
 
 
ATTEST:
 
___________________________________
Shelly Lewis
Village Clerk
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
THE VILLAGE OF MANHATTAN
WILL COUNTY, ILLINOIS
 
 
ORDINANCE NUMBER _1496-25
 
 
 
AN ORDINANCE AMENDING SECTION 1-9-2 OF
THE VILLAGE OF MANHATTAN CODE
WILL COUNTY, ILLINOIS (DISBURSEMENTS)
 
 
 
 
MICHAEL ADRIEANSEN, Village President
Rebecca Bouck, Village Clerk
 
Village Board
ROBERT DILLING
JUSTIN YOUNG
TOM DOYLE
LUCINDA NEIGHBORS
CLINT BOONE
JENNIFER BAHENA
 
 
 
 
Published in pamphlet form by authority of the
President and the Board of Trustees of the Village of Manhattan
on this the 1st day of July, 2025
 
ORDINANCE NO. _1496-25
 
AN ORDINANCE AMENDING SECTION 1-9-2 OF
THE VILLAGE OF MANHATTAN CODE
WILL COUNTY, ILLINOIS (DISBURSEMENTS)
 
WHEREAS, the Village of Manhattan (the "Village"), is a home rule municipality
pursuant to the provisions of the Constitution of the State of Illinois of
1970, Article VII, Section 6 and the laws of the State of Illinois; and
 
WHEREAS, the Corporate Authorities of the Village of Manhattan, Will County,
Illinois (the “Corporate Authorities”), have the authority to adopt ordinances
and resolutions and to promulgate rules and regulations that pertain to its
government and affairs and protect the public health, safety, and welfare of
its citizens; and
 
WHEREAS, certain financial institutions require those authorized to disburse
funds to be listed and provided by corporate resolution; and
 
WHEREAS, the Corporate Authorities of the Village recognize the need to limit
the authority to disburse Village Funds, while at the same time allowing for
reasonable convenience and efficiency.
 
   NOW, THEREFORE, BE IT ORDAINED by the Village President and Board of
Trustees of the Village of Manhattan, Will County, Illinois in open meeting
assembled pursuant to the Village’s Home Rule powers as follows:  
 
Section One – Recitals.
   The Corporate Authorities hereby find that the recitals contained in the
preamble are true and correct, and incorporate them   into this Ordinance.
 
Section Two – Section 1-9-2
   Section 1-9-2 of the Village of Manhattan Municipal Code is hereby deleted
in its entirety and amended to read:
   1-9-2 DISBURSEMENTS
All checks drawn upon the village treasury shall require the signature of any
two persons authorized to disburse monies, as may be selected from time to time
as provided by law, for Village accounts and funds.
 
Section Three – Publication; Effective Date.
   The Village Clerk is hereby authorized and directed to publish this
Ordinance in pamphlet form. This Ordinance shall be in full force and effect
from and after its passage, approval and publication in pamphlet form as
provided by law.
Section Four – Conflict Clause.
   All ordinances, resolutions, motions, or parts thereof, conflicting with any
of the provisions of this Ordinance, are hereby repealed, but only to the
extent necessary to avoid the conflict.
 
Section Five – Saving Clause.
   In the event that any provision or provisions, portion or portions, or
clause or clauses of this Ordinance shall be declared to be invalid or
unenforceable by a Court of competent jurisdiction, such adjudication shall in
no way affect or impair the validity or enforceability of any of the remaining
provisions, portions, or clauses of this Ordinance that may be given effect
without such invalid or unenforceable provision or provisions, portion or
portions, or clause or clauses.
 
                                  YES NO ABSENT PRESENT
Jennifer Bahena                   X             X
Clint Boone                       X             X
Robert Dilling                    X             X
Thomas Doyle                      X             X
Lucinda Neighbors                        X
Justin Young                      X             X
Michael Adrieansen (if necessary)        X
TOTAL                             5   0  2      5
 
   PASSED AND APPROVED by the Village of Manhattan Board of Trustees on the
1ST    day of    JULY         , 2025:
 
 
      ___________________________________
      Michael Adrieansen
      Village President
 
 
ATTEST:
 
___________________________________
Rebecca Bouck
Village Clerk
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
THE VILLAGE OF MANHATTAN
WILL COUNTY, ILLINOIS
 
 
ORDINANCE NUMBER _1497-25
 
 
 
AN ORDINANCE IMPLEMENTING A MUNICIPAL GROCERY RETAILERS’ OCCUPATION TAX AND A
MUNICIPAL GROCERY SERVICE OCCUPATION TAX IN THE VILLAGE OF MANHATTAN, WILL
COUNTY, ILLINOIS
 
 
 
 
MICHAEL ADRIEANSEN, Village President
Rebecca Bouck, Village Clerk
 
Village Board
ROBERT DILLING
JUSTIN YOUNG
TOM DOYLE
LUCINDA NEIGHBORS
CLINT BOONE
JENNIFER BAHENA
 
 
 
 
Published in pamphlet form by authority of the
President and the Board of Trustees of the Village of Manhattan
on this the    5    day of    August      , 2025
 
ORDINANCE NO. 1497-25
 
AN ORDINANCE IMPLEMENTING A MUNICIPAL GROCERY RETAILERS’ OCCUPATION TAX AND A
MUNICIPAL GROCERY SERVICE OCCUPATION TAX IN THE VILLAGE OF MANHATTAN, WILL
COUNTY, ILLINOIS
 
   WHEREAS, the Corporate Authorities of the Village of Manhattan, Will County,
Illinois, have the authority to adopt ordinances and to promulgate rules and
regulations that pertain to its government and affairs and protect the public
health, safety, and welfare of its citizens; and
   WHEREAS, the Illinois Municipal Code, 65 ILCS 5/1-2-1, provides that the
corporate authorities of each municipality may pass all ordinances and make all
rules and regulations proper or necessary, to carry into effect the powers
granted to municipalities, with such fines or penalties as may be deemed
proper; and
   WHEREAS, the Village of Manhattan is a home rule Illinois municipality
pursuant to the Constitution of the State of Illinois of 1970, as amended; and
   WHEREAS, Section 8-11-24(a) of the Illinois Municipal Code (65 ILCS 5/8-11-
24(a)) provides that, beginning on January 1, 2026, all Illinois municipalities
may impose a tax “upon all persons engaged in the business of selling groceries
at retail in the municipality on the gross receipts from those sales made in
the course of that business” (the “Municipal Grocery Retailers’ Occupation
Tax”) (65 ILCS 5/8-11-24(a)); and
   WHEREAS, if imposed, the Municipal Grocery Retailers’ Occupation Tax must be
“at the rate of 1% of the gross receipts from these sales” (65 ILCS 5/8-11-24
(a)); and
   WHEREAS, any Municipal Grocery Retailers’ Occupation Tax shall be
administered, collected and enforced by the Illinois Department of Revenue; and
   WHEREAS, Section 8-11-24(b) of the Illinois Municipal Code (65 ILCS 5/8-11-
24(b)) requires any municipality imposing a Municipal Grocery Retailers’
Occupation Tax under Section 8-11-24(a) of the Illinois Municipal Code (65 ILCS
5/8-11-24(a)) to also impose a Service Occupation Tax “at the same rate upon
all persons engaged, in the municipality, in the business of making sales of
service, who, as an incident to making those sales of service, transfer
groceries” (the “Municipal Grocery Service Occupation Tax”) (65 ILCS 5/8-11-24
(b)); and
   WHEREAS, the Corporate Authorities of the Village believe that it is
appropriate, necessary, and in the best interests of the Village of Manhattan
and its residents, that the Village of Manhattan levy both a Municipal Grocery
Retailers’ Occupation Tax, as authorized by Section 8-11-24(a) of the Illinois
Municipal Code (65 ILCS 5/8-11-24(a)), and a Municipal Grocery Service
Occupation Tax, as authorized by Section 8-11-24(b) of the Illinois Municipal
Code (65 ILCS 5/8-11-24(b)).
 
 
 
   NOW, THEREFORE, BE IT ORDAINED BY THE CORPORATE AUTHORITIES OF THE VILLAGE
OF MANHATTAN, WILL COUNTY, ILLINOIS IN OPEN MEETING ASSEMBLED PURSUANT TO THE
VILLAGE’S HOME RULE AND STATUTORY POWERS, AS FOLLOWS:
Section One – Recitals.
   The Corporate Authorities hereby find that all of the recitals contained in
the preamble to this Ordinance are true, correct, and complete and are hereby
incorporated by reference hereto and made a part hereof.
Section Two – Municipal Grocery Retailers’ Occupation Tax Imposed.
   A tax is hereby imposed upon all persons engaged in the business of selling
groceries at retail within the Village of Manhattan at a rate of one percent
(1%) of the gross receipts from such sales made in the course of such business
while this Ordinance is in effect. The imposition of this tax is in accordance
with and subject to the provisions of Section 8-11-24 of the Illinois Municipal
Code (65 ILCS 5/8-11-24).
Section Three – Municipal Grocery Service Occupation Tax Imposed.
   A tax is hereby imposed upon all persons engaged, within the Village of
Manhattan, in the business of making sales of service, who, as an incident to
making those sales of service, transfer groceries. The rate of this tax shall
be the same rate identified in Section 2, above. The imposition of this tax is
in accordance with and subject to the provisions of Section 8-11-24 of the
Illinois Municipal Code (65 ILCS 5/8-11-24).
Section Four – Tax to be Collected by IDOR.
   The taxes hereby imposed, and all civil penalties that may be assessed as an
incident thereto, shall be collected and enforced by the Department of Revenue
of the State of Illinois. The Department of Revenue shall have full power to
administer and enforce the provisions of this Ordinance.
Section Five – Certified Copy of Ordinance to be Transmitted to IDOR.
   As required under Section 8-11-24 of the Illinois Municipal Code (65 ILCS 5/
8-11-1.3), the Clerk is hereby directed to file a certified copy of this
Ordinance with the Illinois Department of Revenue on or before October 1, 2025.
Section Six– Other Actions Authorized.
   All officers, employees, and/or agents of the Village are hereby authorized
and directed to undertake any and all actions, including the execution and
delivery of any and all documents, necessary and expedient to effectuate the
intent of this Ordinance.
Section Seven – Publication; Effective Date.
   The Village Clerk is hereby authorized and directed to publish this
Ordinance in pamphlet form. This Ordinance shall be in full force and effect
from and after its passage, approval and publication in pamphlet form as
provided by law. The taxes imposed by this Ordinance shall take effect on the
latest of: (i) January 1, 2026; (ii) the first day of July next following the
adoption and filing of this Ordinance with the Department of Revenue, if filed
on or before the preceding April 1st; or, (iii) the first day of January next
following the adoption and filing of this Ordinance with the Department of
Revenue, if filed on or before the preceding October 1st.
Section Eight – Conflict Clause.
   All ordinances, resolutions, motions, or parts thereof, conflicting with any
of the provisions of this Ordinance, are hereby repealed, but only to the
extent necessary to avoid the conflict.
Section Nine – Saving Clause.
   In the event that any provision or provisions, portion or portions, or
clause or clauses of this Ordinance shall be declared to be invalid or
unenforceable by a Court of competent jurisdiction, such adjudication shall in
no way affect or impair the validity or enforceability of any of the remaining
provisions, portions, or clauses of this Ordinance that may be given effect
without such invalid or unenforceable provision or provisions, portion or
portions, or clause or clauses.
Section Ten – Recording.
   This ordinance shall be entered into the minutes and upon the journals of
the Board of Trustees of the Village of Manhattan.
 
[Intentionally Omitted]
   DECIDED pursuant to a Roll Call Vote as follows:
 
                                  YES NO ABSENT PRESENT
Robert Dilling                    X             X
Justin Young                      X             X
Tom Doyle                                X
Lucinda Neighbors                 X             X
Clint Boone                           X         X
Jennifer Bahena                   X             X
Michael Adrieansen (if necessary)               X
TOTAL                             4   1  1      6
 
   PASSED AND APPROVED by the Village of Manhattan Board of Trustees on the 5TH
day of    AUGUST         , 2025:
 
 
      ___________________________________
      Michael Adrieansen
      Village President
 
 
ATTEST:
 
 
___________________________________
Rebecca Bouck
Village Clerk
 
 
 
 
 
ADOPTING ORDINANCE
ORDINANCE NO. 589
   AN ORDINANCE ADOPTING THE VILLAGE CODE OF MANHATTAN, ILLINOIS
   BE IT ORDAINED by the President and Board of Trustees of the Village of
Manhattan, Illinois, an Illinois Municipal Corporation:
   SECTION 1: From and after the date of passage of this Ordinance, the Village
Code of the Village of Manhattan, Illinois, containing all ordinances of a
general nature in effect at the time of such codification, shall be accepted in
all courts without question as the Official Code and Law of the Village as
enacted by the President and Board of Trustees.
   SECTION 2: There is hereby adopted, as a method of perpetual codification,
the loose-leaf type of binding, whereby each newly adopted ordinance of a
general and permanent nature amending, altering, adding or deleting provisions
of the Official Village Code is identified by the proper catchline and is
inserted in the proper place in each of the official copies. Each such new
provision shall become effective upon the passage of the ordinance and
publication as provided by law. Each such new provision shall then be inserted
in the Code as soon thereafter as may be practicable. Three (3) copies of the
Code shall be maintained in the office of the Village Clerk, certified as to
correctness and available for inspection at any and all times that said office
is regularly open.
   SECTION 3: All ordinances of a general nature included in this Official
Village Code shall be considered as a continuation of said ordinance provision
and the fact that some provisions have been deliberately eliminated by the
governing body shall not serve to cause any interruption in the continuous
effectiveness of ordinances included in said Official Village Code. All
ordinances of a special nature, including, but not limited to tax levy
ordinances, bond ordinances, franchises, vacating ordinances and annexation
ordinances shall continue in full force and effect unless specifically repealed
or amended by a provision of the Village Code. Such ordinances are not intended
to be included in the Official Village Code. Ordinances 577 through 588 and
Resolutions 192 through 196 shall continue in full force and effect and are
intended to be included in the Official Code.
   SECTION 4: It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to
change or amend by additions or deletions, any part or portion of such Code, or
to insert or delete pages or portions thereof, or to alter or tamper with such
Code in any manner whatsoever which will cause the law of the Village to be
misrepresented thereby.
   Any person, firm or corporation violating this Section shall be punished as
provided in Section
1-4-1 of the Village Code of Manhattan, Illinois.
   SECTION 5: All ordinances or parts of ordinances in conflict herewith are,
to the extent of such conflict, hereby repealed.
   SECTION 6: This Ordinance and the Code adopted by the same shall be in full
force and effect from and after its passage and approval in accordance with
law, as printed and published in pamphlet form by order of the President and
Board of Trustees.
PASSED THIS 19th DAY OF October, 1993, WITH  6  MEMBERS VOTING AYE,  0  VOTING
NAY, AND WITH  0  MEMBERS ABSENT, THE VILLAGE PRESIDENT DOYLE VOTING  AYE : THE
VILLAGE TRUSTEES VOTING AS FOLLOWS: FORSYTHE  AYE , MCINERNEY  AYE , KRAAI  AYE
, GALLAGHER  AYE , FITZGERALD  AYE , PEDERSEN  AYE .
    /s/ Mattie Becker
   VILLAGE CLERK
APPROVED THIS  19th  DAY OF  October , 1993.
ATTEST:
/s/ James M. Doyle
VILLAGE PRESIDENT
TITLE 1
ADMINISTRATIVE
CHAPTER 1
OFFICIAL VILLAGE CODE
SECTION:
1-1-1: Title
1-1-2: Acceptance
1-1-3: Amendments
1-1-4: Code Alterations
1-1-1: TITLE:
Upon the adoption by the Board of Trustees, this Village Code is hereby
declared to be and shall hereafter constitute the official Code of the Village.
This Village Code of ordinances shall be known and cited as the MANHATTAN
VILLAGE CODE and it is hereby published by authority of the Board of Trustees
and shall be kept up to date as provided in Section
1-1-3  of this Chapter. Any reference to the number of any section contained
herein shall be understood to refer to the position of the same number, its
appropriate chapter and title heading, and to the general penalty clause
relating thereto, as well as to the section itself, when reference is made to
this Village Code by title in any legal document. (1990 Code)
1-1-2: ACCEPTANCE:
The Village Code, as hereby presented in printed form, shall hereafter be
received without further proof in all courts and in all administrative
tribunals of this State as the ordinances of the Village of general and
permanent effect, except the excluded ordinances enumerated in Section
1-2-1 of this Code. (1990 Code)
1-1-3: AMENDMENTS:
Any ordinance amending the Village Code shall set forth the title, chapter and
section number of the section or sections to be amended, and this shall
constitute sufficient compliance with any statutory requirement pertaining to
the amendment or revision by ordinance of any part of this Village Code. All
such amendments or revisions by ordinance shall be immediately forwarded to the
codifiers and the said ordinance material shall be prepared for insertion in
its proper place in each copy of this Village Code. Each such replacement page
shall be properly identified and shall be inserted in each individual copy of
the Village Code. (1990 Code)
1-1-4: CODE ALTERATIONS:
It shall be deemed unlawful for any person to alter, change, replace or deface
in any way any section or any page of this Village Code in such a manner that
the meaning of any phrase or order may be changed or omitted. Replacement pages
may be inserted according to the official instructions when so authorized by
the Village Board. The Village Clerk shall see that the replacement pages are
properly inserted in the official copies maintained in the office of the Clerk.
Any person having in his custody an official copy of the Village Code shall
make every effort to maintain said Code in an up-to-date and efficient manner.
He shall see to the immediate insertion of new or replacement pages when such
are delivered to him or made available to him through the office of the Village
Clerk. Said Code books, while in actual possession of officials and other
interested persons, shall be and remain the property of the Village and shall
be returned to the office of the Clerk when directed to do so by order of the
Village Board. (1990 Code)
CHAPTER 2
SAVING CLAUSE
SECTION:
1-2-1: Repeal of General Ordinances
1-2-2: Public Utility Ordinances
1-2-3: Court Proceedings
1-2-4: Severability Clause
1-2-1: REPEAL OF GENERAL ORDINANCES:
All general ordinances of the Village passed prior to the adoption of this
Village Code are hereby repealed, except such as are included in this Village
Code or are by necessary implication herein reserved from repeal (subject to
the saving clauses contained in the following sections), and excluding the
following ordinances which are not hereby repealed: tax levy ordinances;
appropriation ordinances; ordinances relating to boundaries and annexations;
franchise ordinances and other ordinances granting special rights to persons or
corporations; contract ordinances and ordinances authorizing the execution of a
contract or the issuance of warrants; salary ordinances; ordinances
establishing, naming or vacating streets, alleys or other public places;
improvement ordinances; bond ordinances; ordinances relating elections;
ordinances relating to the transfer or acceptance of real estate by or from the
Village; and all special ordinances. (1990 Code)
1-2-2: PUBLIC UTILITY ORDINANCES:
No ordinance relating to railroads or railroad crossings with streets and other
public ways, or relating to the conduct, duties, service or rates of public
utilities shall be repealed by virtue of the adoption of this Village Code or
by virtue of the preceding Section, excepting as the Village Code may contain
provisions for such matters, in which case this Village Code shall be
considered as amending such ordinance or ordinances in respect to such
provisions only. (1990 Code)
1-2-3: COURT PROCEEDINGS:
No new ordinance shall be construed or held to repeal a former ordinance
whether such former ordinance is expressly repealed or not, as to any offense
committed against such former ordinance or as to any act done, any penalty,
forfeiture or punishment so incurred, or any right accrued or claim arising
under the former ordinance, or in any way whatever to affect any such offense
or act so committed or so done, or any penalty, forfeiture or punishment so
incurred or any right accrued or claim arising before the new ordinance takes
effect, save only that the proceedings thereafter shall conform to the
ordinance in force at the time of such proceeding, so far as practicable. If
any penalty, forfeiture or punishment be mitigated by any provision of a new
ordinance, such provision may be, by consent of the party affected, applied to
any judgment announced after the new ordinance takes effect.
This Section shall extend to all repeals, either by express words or
implication, whether the repeal is in the ordinance making any new provisions
upon the same subject or in any other ordinance.
Nothing contained in this Chapter shall be construed as abating any action now
pending under or by virtue of any general ordinance of the Village herein
repealed and the provisions of all general ordinances contained in this Code
shall be deemed to be continuing provisions and not a new enactment of the same
provision; nor shall this Chapter be deemed as discontinuing, abating,
modifying or altering any penalty accrued or to accrue, or as affecting the
liability of any person, firm or corporation, or as waiving any right of the
Village under any ordinance or provision thereof in force at the time of the
adoption of this Village Code. (1990 Code)
1-2-4: SEVERABILITY CLAUSE:
If any section, subsection, subdivision, paragraph, sentence, clause or phrase
of this Village Code or any part thereof is for any reason held to be
unconstitutional or invalid or ineffective by any court of competent
jurisdiction, such decision shall not affect the validity or effectiveness of
the remaining portions of this Code, or any part thereof. The Village Board of
Trustees hereby declares that it would have passed each section, subsection,
subdivision, paragraph, sentence, clause or phrase thereof irrespective of the
fact that any one or more sections, subsections, subdivisions, paragraphs,
sentences, clauses or phrases be declared unconstitutional, invalid or
ineffective. (1990 Code)
CHAPTER 3
DEFINITIONS
SECTION:
1-3-1: Construction of Words
1-3-2: Definitions, General
1-3-3: Catchlines
1-3-1: CONSTRUCTION OF WORDS:
Whenever any word in any section of this Village Code importing the plural
number is used in describing or referring to any matters, parties or persons,
any single matter, party or person shall be deemed to be included, although
distributive words may not have been used. When any subject matter, party or
person is referred to in this Village Code by words importing the singular
number only, or the masculine gender, several matters, parties or persons and
females as well as males and bodies corporate shall be applied to any section
of this Village Code which contains any express provision excluding such
construction or where the subject matter or context may be repugnant thereto.
The word "ordinance" contained in the ordinances of the Village has been
changed in the content of this Village Code to "Title", "Chapter", "Section"
and/or "subsection" or words of like import for organizational and
clarification purposes only. Such change to the Village's ordinances is not
meant to amend passage and effective dates of such original ordinances. (1990
Code)
1-3-2: DEFINITIONS, GENERAL:
Whenever the following words or terms are used in this Code, they shall have
the meanings herein ascribed to them, unless the context makes such meaning
repugnant thereto:
   AGENT: A person acting on behalf of another.
   BOARD: Unless otherwise indicated, the Board of Trustees of the Village.
   CODE: The Municipal Code of Manhattan and amendments thereto.
   COUNTY: The County of Will, State of Illinois.
   DATUM and BENCH MARK: The datum and bench mark for the Village is hereby
established and declared to be: 115.5 feet below the top of the water table at
the northeast corner of the Manhattan State Bank, located on Lot 1, Block 6,
Original Town. All grades hereafter established, fixed and referred to shall be
measured from the datum and bench mark hereby established.
   EMPLOYEES: Whenever reference is made in this Code to a Village employee by
title only, this shall be construed as though followed by the words, "of the
Village of Manhattan".
   FEE: A sum of money charged by the Village for the carrying on of a
business, profession or occupation.
   FISCAL YEAR: The fiscal year of the Village shall begin on the May 1 of each
year.
   LICENSE: The permission granted for the carrying on of a business,
profession or occupation.
   NUISANCE: Anything offensive or obnoxious to the health and welfare of the
inhabitants of the Village, or any act or thing repugnant to, or creating a
hazard to, or having a detrimental effect on the property of another person or
to the community.
   OCCUPANT: As applied to a building or land, shall include any person who
occupies the whole or any part of such building or land whether alone or with
others.
   OFFENSE: Any act forbidden by any provision of this Code or the omission of
any act required by the provisions of this Code.
   OFFICERS: Whenever reference is made in this Code to a Village officer by
title only, this shall be construed as though followed by the words "of the
Village of Manhattan".
   OFFICIAL TIME: All official business of the Village shall be conducted under
the Central Daylight Saving Time, which shall conform with time schedules of
other cities and villages in adjoining territory.
   OPERATOR: The person who is in charge of any operation, business or
profession.
   OWNER: As applied to a building or land, shall include any part owner, joint
owner, tenant in common, joint tenant or lessee of the whole or of a part of
such building or land.
   PERSON: Any public or private corporation, firm, partnership, association,
organization, government or any other group acting as a unit, as well as a
natural person.
   PERSONAL PROPERTY: Shall include every description of money, goods,
chattels, effects, evidence of rights in action and all written instruments by
which any pecuniary obligation, right or title to property is created,
acknowledged, transferred, increased, defeated, discharged or diminished and
every right or interest therein.
   PETTY OFFENSE: Any offense for which sentence to a fine only is provided;
said fine not to exceed five hundred dollars ($500.00).
   RETAILER: Unless otherwise specifically defined, shall be understood to
relate to the sale of goods, merchandise, articles or things in small
quantities direct to the consumer.
   STATE: The State of Illinois.
   STREET: Shall include alleys, lanes, courts, boulevards, public ways, public
squares, public places and sidewalks.
   TENANT: As applied to a building or land, shall include any person who
occupies the whole or any part of such buildings or land, whether alone or with
others.
   VILLAGE: The Village of Manhattan, County of Will, State of Illinois.
   VILLAGE PRESIDENT: The President of the Village may be referred to as
"Mayor" or "President" of the Village.
   WHOLESALER and WHOLESALE DEALER: Unless otherwise specifically defined,
shall be understood to relate to the sale of goods, merchandise, articles or
things in quantity to persons who purchase for the purpose of resale.
   WRITTEN, IN WRITING: May include printing and any other mode of representing
words and letters, but when the written signature of any person is required by
law to any official or public writing or bond required by law, it shall be in
the proper handwriting of such person, or in case he is unable to write, by his
proper mark. (1990 Code)
1-3-3: CATCHLINES:
The catchlines of the several sections of the Village Code are intended as mere
catchwords to indicate the content of the section and shall not be deemed or
taken to be titles of such sections, nor be deemed to govern, limit, modify or
in any manner affect the scope, meaning or intent of the provisions of any
division or section hereof, nor unless expressly so provided, shall they be so
deemed when any of such sections, including the catchlines, are amended or re-
enacted. (1990 Code)
CHAPTER 4
GENERAL PENALTY
SECTION:
1-4-1: Penalties
1-4-2: Application Of Provisions
1-4-3: Liability Of Officers
1-4-1: PENALTIES:
   A.   Whenever in this code or in any ordinance of the village any act is
prohibited or is made or declared to be unlawful or an offense or whenever in
such code or ordinance the doing of any act is required or the failure to do
any act is declared to be unlawful, where no other specific penalty is provided
or not listed in section
1-13-4 of this title, the violation of such provision of this code or any
ordinance shall be punished by a fine of not less than seventy five dollars
($75.00) unless otherwise specified nor more than seven hundred fifty dollars
($750.00), or such other amount as provided by law/ordinance, for any one
offense. The revocation of a license or permit shall not be considered a
recovery or penalty so as to bar any other penalty being enforced.
   B.   In addition, a penalty imposed may include, or consist of, a
requirement that the subject accused perform some reasonable public service
work such as, but not limited to, the picking up of litter in public parks or
along public highways or the maintenance of public facilities.
   C.   No imprisonment as authorized by 65 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/1-2-
9 for failure to pay any fine, penalty or cost shall exceed six (6) months for
one offense. 65 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/1-2-1.1. (Ord. 1181, 7-15-2014)
1-4-2: APPLICATION OF PROVISIONS:
   A.   The penalty provided in this chapter shall be applicable to every
section of this code the same as though it were a part of each and every
separate section. A separate offense shall be deemed committed upon each day
such duty or obligation remains unperformed or such act continues, unless
otherwise specifically provided in this code.
   B.   In all cases where the same offense is made punishable or is created by
different clauses or sections of this code, the prosecuting officer may elect
under which to proceed; but not more than one recovery shall be had against the
same person for the same offense; provided, that the revocation of a license or
permit shall not be considered a recovery or penalty so as to bar any other
penalty being enforced. (Ord. 1181, 7-15-2014)
1-4-3: LIABILITY OF OFFICERS:
No provision of this code designating the duties of any officer or employee
shall be so construed as to make such officer or employee liable for any fine
or penalty provided for a failure to perform such duty, unless the intention of
the board of trustees to impose such fine or penalty on such officer or
employee is specifically and clearly expressed in the section creating the
duty. (Ord. 1181, 7-15-2014)
CHAPTER 5
VILLAGE PRESIDENT AND BOARD OF TRUSTEES
SECTION:
1-5-1: Village President
1-5-2: Board Of Trustees
1-5-3: Meetings Of The Board
1-5-4: Voting Requirements
1-5-5: Department Trustees
1-5-6: Order Of Business
1-5-7: Rules Of Order
1-5-8: Public Comment At Board Meetings
1-5-9: Audio And Video Recordings Of Board Meetings
1-5-1: VILLAGE PRESIDENT:
   A.   Election And Term Of Office: The President of the Board of Trustees
shall be elected for a term of four (4) years as provided by statute. (1928
Code §1; amd. 1990 Code)
   B.   Bond, Oath, Salary: Before entering upon the duties of his office, the
President shall give a bond with sureties to be approved by the Board of
Trustees conditioned upon the faithful performance of his duties, in the sum of
three thousand dollars ($3,000.00). He shall take the oath of office prescribed
by statute, and shall receive such compensation as may be set from time to time
by the Board of Trustees. (1928 Code §4)
   C.   Duties: The President of the Board of Trustees shall be the Chief
Executive Officer of the Village, and shall perform all such duties as may be
required of him by statute or ordinance of the Village. He shall have
supervision over all of the executive officers of the Village, and shall have
the power and authority to inspect all books and records kept by any officer of
the Village at any reasonable time. (1928 Code §2)
   D.   Appointment Of Officers, Designation, Duties: The President shall
appoint by and with the advice and consent of the Board of Trustees all
officers of the Village whose appointment or election is not otherwise provided
for. Any vacancies occurring in appointive offices shall be filled in the same
manner.
Whenever there is a dispute as to the respective duties or powers of any
appointive officer of the Village, this dispute shall be settled by the
President after consultation with the Village Attorney; and the President shall
have the power to delegate to any such officer any duty which is to be
performed when no specific officer has been directed to perform that duty.
(1928 Code §3)
1-5-2: BOARD OF TRUSTEES:
   A.   Election, Function: The Board of Trustees, consisting of six (6)
members, shall be elected to office as provided by statute. The Board shall be
the Legislative Department of the Village government, and shall perform such
duties and have such powers as may be authorized by statute. (1928 Code §5)
   B.   Oath, Salary: Members of the Board of Trustees shall take such oath as
may be prescribed by statute, and shall receive such compensation as may from
time to time be provided by Village ordinance. (1928 Code §6)
1-5-3: MEETINGS OF THE BOARD:
   A.   Regular Meetings: The regular meetings of the Board, to include dates,
times and places will be announced, posted and advertised at the beginning of
each calendar year. Any change to the regular schedule must be announced,
posted and advertised as required by law. Village Board meetings shall be held
at five thirty (5:30) P.M. on the first and third Tuesdays of each month.
Provided that if such meetings should fall on a legal holiday, the meeting
shall be held on the next secular day.
   B.   Special Meetings: Special meetings may be called by any three (3)
members of the Board or by the President, provided that, a written notice of
such special meeting shall be given to each member of the Board and to the
President at least twenty-four (24) hours before the time set for such
meetings. The Village Clerk may serve these notices and shall preside at the
meeting in the absence of the President.
   C.   President To Preside: The President shall preside at all meetings of
the Board of Trustees. The Village President shall only be required to vote
where:
      1.   The vote of the Board of Trustees has resulted in a tie;
      2.   Three (3) Trustees then holding office have voted in favor of an
ordinance, resolution, or motion even though there is no tie vote;
      3.   A vote greater than a majority of the corporate authorities is
required in order to adopt any ordinance, resolution, or motion; or
      4.   When required by law.
   D.   Quorum: A majority of the Trustees shall constitute a quorum to do
business, but no ordinance shall be passed except on the favorable vote of a
majority of the elected members.
   E.   Failure To Attend: (Rep. by Ord. 1155, 8-20-2013, eff. 9-1-2013)
   F.   Village Clerk to Keep Records: The Village Clerk shall keep a record
book of all the proceedings which take place in regular or special meetings of
the Board.
(1928 Code § 7-11) (amd. Ord. 1155, 8-20-2013, eff. 9-1-2013; 1302-19, 9-17-
2019; Ord. 1313, 12-17-2019; Ord. 1354-21, 6-1-2021; Ord. 1493-25, 5-22-2025)
1-5-4: VOTING REQUIREMENTS:
Every member of the Board of Trustees who shall be present when a question is
stated from the Chair shall vote thereon unless excused by the Board or unless
he is directly interested in the question, in which case he shall not vote.
(1928 Code §18)
1-5-5: DEPARTMENT TRUSTEES:
   A.   Appointment: The Village President, with the advice and consent of the
Board of Trustees, shall appoint the Finance Department Trustee, the Technology
Trustee, the Public Works Department Trustee, the Public Safety/Emergency
Preparedness Department Trustee, the Community Development Trustee, and the
Community Affairs Trustee. (Ord. 1154, 7-2-2013)
   B.   Finance Trustee:
      1.   There is hereby established a position within the Village which
shall be known as the Finance Trustee who shall be a member of the Board of
Trustees. The Finance Trustee shall serve as a liaison between the Corporate
Authorities and the Village Administrator and the Finance Director with respect
to matters and policies concerning:
         a.   The finances and revenue of the Village;
         b.   The accounts and records of the Village and all officers, boards
or departments required to keep or make accounts, records or reports;
         c.   The management and control of all monies collected and paid out
by the Village and collection of money due the Village;
         d.   The Village Treasurer and the auditing of all Village accounts
and accounts of all special boards;
         e.   The bonding of all of the officers and employees, who have care
and custody of any Village funds.
      2.   The Finance Trustee shall make such reports to the Corporate
Authorities as may be necessary to keep them informed on all matters pertaining
to that department, including any failure to make payments or receive money due
to the Village and to make such recommendations in relation to any subject
matters as he or she may deem proper for action by the Corporate Authorities.
   C.   Community Affairs:
      1.   There is hereby established a position within the Village which
shall be known as the Community Affairs Trustee who shall be a member of the
Board of Trustees. The Community Affairs Trustee shall serve as a liaison
between the Village Administrator and the Corporate Authorities with respect to
matters and policies relating to:
         a.   Various community events;
         b.   Senior citizens;
         c.   Handicapped;
         d.   Sanitary condition of the Village;
         e.   Garbage, refuse and debris;
         f.   Dumping;
         g.   Weeds.
      2.   The Community Affairs Trustee shall make such reports to the
Corporate Authorities as may be necessary to keep them informed on all matters
pertaining to community affairs and shall make records in relation to any such
matters as he or she deems proper for action by the Corporate Authorities.
   D.   Public Works Department:
      1.   There is hereby established a position within the Village which
shall be known as the Public Works Department Trustee who shall be a member of
the Board of Trustees. The Public Works Department Trustee shall serve as a
liaison between the Village Administrator and Utilities and Street
Superintendent and the Corporate Authorities with respect to matters and
policies relating to:
         a.   The care, maintenance and repair of all streets, alleys and storm
sewers and the construction of all street improvements, paving, sidewalks,
storm sewers, culverts and bridges.
         b.   The property of the Village, both real and personal.
         c.   The Village water and sanitary sewage works.
         d.   Telephone, cable, natural gas and electricity franchises and
related issues.
      2.   The Public Works Department Trustee shall make such reports to the
Corporate Authorities as may be necessary to keep them informed on all matters
pertaining to the department and shall make recommendations in relation to any
such matters as he deems proper for action by the Corporate Authorities. (Ord.
863, 7-19-2005)
   E.   Technology:
      1.   There is hereby established a position within the Village which
shall be known as the Technology Trustee who shall be a member of the Board of
Trustees. The Technology Trustee shall serve as a liaison between the Corporate
Authorities, the Village Administrator, and Finance Director with respect to
matters and policies concerning:
         a.   Review and evaluation of new computer equipment and software;
         b.   Short and long range planning for key future information
technology services;
         c.   Review and evaluation of technology upgrades, methods and
procedures and implementation of changes to increase work flow or project
efficiencies;
         d.   Implementation of geographical information systems to benefit all
Village departments.
      2.   The Technology Trustee shall make such reports to the Corporate
Authorities as may be necessary to keep them informed on all records in
relation to any such matters as he or she deems proper for action by the
Corporate Authorities.
   F.   Public Safety/Emergency Preparedness Department:
      1.   There is hereby established a position within the Village which
shall be known as the Public Safety/Emergency Preparedness Department Trustee
who shall be a member of the Board of Trustees. The Public Safety/Emergency
Preparedness Department Trustee shall serve as a liaison between the Corporate
Authorities, the Village Administrator, the Police Chief, and Emergency
Management Director with respect to matters and policies relating to:
         a.   The enforcement of all penal ordinances of the Village in
addition to all ordinances, resolutions, rules and regulations relative to
street parking, traffic regulations and the like.
         b.   The Board of Police and Fire Commissioners (at such time as same
is established).
         c.   The Police Pension Board (at such time as same is established).
         d.   Coordination of emergency preparedness efforts between the
Village Administration, Public Works Department, Building Safety Department,
Police Department, Emergency Management Agency and Fire Protection District to
prepare responses for a variety of emergencies.
         e.   Development and preparation of emergency preparedness educational
presentations to businesses, residents and Village employees.
         f.   Development and maintenance of emergency operating plan.
      2.   The Public Safety/Emergency Preparedness Department Trustee shall
make such reports to the Corporate Authorities as may be necessary to keep them
informed of all matters pertaining to the department and shall make records in
relation to any such matters as he deems proper for action by the Corporate
Authorities. (Ord. 1154, 7-2-2013)
   G.   Community Development Department:
      1.   There is hereby established a position within the Village which
shall be known as the Community Development Department Trustee who shall be a
member of the Board of Trustees. The Community Development Department Trustee
shall serve as a liaison between the Corporate Authorities and the Village
Administrator with respect to matters and policies relating to:
         a.   Zoning, building and related ordinances of the Village; and
         b.   Annexation of property to the Village; and
         c.   Reviewing and amending the Comprehensive Plan and zoning map; and
         d.   The Planning and Zoning Commission.
      2.   The Community Development Department Trustee shall make such reports
to the Corporate Authorities as may be necessary to keep them informed of all
matters pertaining to the department and shall make records in relation to any
such matters as he deems proper for action by the Corporate Authorities. (Ord.
863, 7-19-2005)
1-5-6: ORDER OF BUSINESS:
The business of the Board of Trustees shall be conducted in the following
order:
   A.   Call to order;
   B.   Pledge allegiance to the flag;
   C.   Roll call;
   D.   Public hearing/recognitions/special items;
   E.   Public comment;
   F.   Consent agenda;
   G.   New business;
   H.   Reports and communications from village officials;
   I.   Executive session;
   J.   Action from executive session; and
   K.   Adjournment. (Ord. 1252, 6-6-2017; amd. Ord. 1356-21, 6-15-2021)
1-5-7: RULES OF ORDER:
The rules of order governing all meetings of the Board of Trustees shall be
"Robert's Rules of Order".
The President of the Board shall keep order and shall decide all questions of
order and procedure.
No vote of the Board shall be reconsidered or rescinded at a special meeting
unless at such special meeting there be as large a number of Trustees as was
present when the vote was taken, as is provided by statute. (1928 Code §17;
amd. 1990 Code)
1-5-8: PUBLIC COMMENT AT BOARD MEETINGS:
   A.   At each meeting, a period of time will be devoted to public
participation. An individual may address the Board only during this portion of
regular or special Board meetings or as granted by the Village President or
designee. Before appearing before and addressing the Board, members of the
public are urged to seek solutions to their concerns through administrative
channels.
   B.   The following rules shall govern speakers who address the Board at
meetings:
      1.   Every member of the public that attends a meeting shall receive a
copy of that meeting's agenda.
      2.   Any member of the public that wishes to speak at the meeting must
sign in on the attendance sheet provided at the entrance of the meeting room
with their name. Optional information shall be address and professional
affiliation, if applicable.
      3.   All comments should be addressed to the Village President.
      4.   Speakers will be given up to three (3) minutes to speak, and shall
be permitted to address the Board in the order in which they signed in. The
presiding officer may extend the time allotted to any individual speaker, as
appropriate.
      5.   No individual speaker may, during their allotted time to address the
Board, speak or act in any way that interferes with the overall decorum and
proceedings of the meeting.
      6.   Speakers' concerns or comments should be limited to Village of
Manhattan policy or operations.
      7.   The presiding officer shall have the authority to limit repetitive
comments.
      8.   An immediate response from the Board is not required. Board members
may respond, as appropriate or direct speakers to the appropriate staff member
for assistance. Issues requiring possible action by the Board may be added to a
future agenda, provided that forty-eight (48) hours' notice of such addition
shall be given pursuant to the requirements of the Open Meetings Act.
      9.   Public comments shall become part of the public record of the Board
meeting.
(Ord. 1252, 6-6-2017; amd. 1492-25, 5-22-2025)
1-5-9: AUDIO AND VIDEO RECORDINGS OF BOARD MEETINGS:
   A.   Any person may record the proceedings at any meeting of the Corporate
Authorities of the Village that is required to be open by law. Such recording
may be accomplished by tape, film, or other means, but any such recording shall
be subject to the following restrictions:
      1.   No recording shall be accomplished in any fashion that will
interfere with the overall decorum and proceedings of the meeting.
      2.   All equipment used to effectuate any recording must be silent and
unobtrusive, and use of flash or lighting equipment shall not be permitted
except as allowed by the presiding officer on a case by case basis.
      3.   No microphone or other pick-up may be placed in the section of the
room designated for the Board unless otherwise permitted by the presiding
officer.
      4.   Persons recording a meeting, along with any equipment used for such
recording, may be limited to an area of the meeting room designated by the
presiding officer for such purpose to ensure that such recording does not
disrupt the meeting or the other attendees. (Ord. 1252, 6-6-2017)
CHAPTER 6
VILLAGE CLERK
SECTION:
1-6-1: Election, Bond and Salary
1-6-2: Keeping Records
1-6-3: Reports
1-6-4: General Duties
1-6-5 :   Deputy Clerks; Appointment; Removal
1-6-1: ELECTION, BOND AND SALARY:
The Village Clerk shall be elected for such term as may be provided by statute,
and shall take the statutory oath of office. He shall give a bond with sureties
to be approved by the Board of Trustees in the sum of three thousand dollars
($3,000.00) conditioned upon the faithful performance of his duties. The
Village Clerk shall receive such compensation as may be provided from time to
time by ordinance. (1928 Code §19)
In case the office of Village Clerk shall become vacant for any reason, the
President by and with the advice and consent of the Board of Trustees shall
appoint a successor to fill out the unexpired time. (1928 Code §20)
1-6-2: KEEPING RECORDS:
The Village Clerk shall keep the record of ordinances which is required to be
kept by statute, and such other records as may be required by ordinance. He
shall keep in a separate book a record of all licenses and permits issued by
him, and of the amounts of money received by him; and he shall keep the record
of accounts between his office and that of the Village Treasurer. (1928 Code
§21)
1-6-3: REPORTS:
It shall be the duty of the Clerk at the end of each month to report to the
Board the amount of money received by him during the month and turn such money
over to the Village Treasurer. (1928 Code §22)
1-6-4: GENERAL DUTIES:
It shall be the duty of the Village Clerk to perform all duties and functions
which may be required of him by statute or Village ordinance, to attend the
meetings of the Board of Trustees and to keep the records thereof, and to keep
a record of all of the officers of the Village with names of the person holding
each office.
The Clerk shall be custodian of all records, papers and documents belonging to
the Village which are not specifically given into the custody of some other
officer, and shall be custodian of the Village Seal. (1928 Code §23)
1-6-5: DEPUTY CLERKS; APPOINTMENT; REMOVAL:
   A.   The Village Clerk shall have authority, in his/her sole discretion, to
appoint up to two (2) deputy clerks to help him/her discharge the functions and
duties of the office of municipal clerk. The Village Clerk shall notify the
Corporate Authorities of the Village of each such appointment at the next
regular meeting of the Corporate Authorities after the appointment occurs.
   B.   Each deputy clerk appointed pursuant to this section shall be an
employee, not an officer, of the Village. The Village Clerk shall be
responsible for the fidelity of all deputy clerks appointed pursuant to this
section.
   C.   Each deputy clerk shall serve at the pleasure of the Village Clerk and
may be removed and dismissed by said clerk at any time and for any reason or no
reason at all. In the event that the Village Clerk removes and dismisses any
deputy clerk, the Village Clerk shall notify the Corporate Authorities of that
fact at the next regular meeting of the Corporate Authorities following said
removal and dismissal.
   D.   In the event that the Office of the Village Clerk shall be vacant for
any reason, the Village President shall have authority to exercise the Village
Clerk's powers of appointment and removal/dismissal pursuant to this Section,
provided that any appointments or removal/dismissal by the Village President
shall be subject to the advice and consent of the Village Board. (Ord. 1331-20,
6-2-2020)
CHAPTER 7
VILLAGE OFFICERS
SECTION:
1-7-0: Administrator
1-7-1: Treasurer
1-7-2: Superintendent Of Public Works
1-7-3: Attorney
1-7-4: Chief Of Police
1-7-5: Budget Officer
1-7-0: ADMINISTRATOR:
   A.   Creation Of Office: The office of village administrator is hereby
created by a two-thirds (2/3) vote of the board of trustees, which office, once
created, shall be appointed by the village president with the advice and
consent of the board of trustees. The village administrator shall be chosen on
the basis of his operative and administrative qualifications with special
reference to his actual experience in, or his knowledge of, accepted practices
in regard to the duties of his office hereinafter set forth.
   B.   Employment Contract; Term: The village administrator shall be employed
by contract, the terms of which shall be agreed upon by both the village
administrator and a majority of the corporate authorities of the village. The
term of the village administrator shall be no less than one year.
   C.   Removal: The village administrator shall serve at the pleasure of the
village president and the board of trustees. The administrator may be removed
from office by the village president with the advice and consent of four (4)
members of the board of trustees.
   D.   Oath And Bond: Before entering upon the duties of this office, the
village administrator shall furnish a bond in such amount and with such surety
as may be approved by the board of trustees, but not to be less than twenty
thousand dollars ($20,000.00). The cost of such bond shall be paid by the
village.
Before entering upon the duties of this office, the village administrator shall
take and subscribe the oath prescribed by the statutes of the state of Illinois
in such case provided.
   E.   Temporary Absence; Interim Village Administrator: During the temporary
absence or disability of the village administrator, the village president, with
the advice and consent of the board of trustees, may designate some qualified
person to act as village administrator until such time as the village
administrator returns to duty. If the village administrator fails to hold the
office by reason of death, permanent physical or mental disability, conviction
of a disqualifying crime, or dismissal from or abandonment of office, the
village president, with the advice and consent of the board of trustees, shall
appoint a qualified person to act as the interim village administrator, whose
office shall be temporary and who shall perform all the duties of the village
administrator only until the village president, with the advice and consent of
the board of trustees, appoints a new village administrator. The office of
interim village administrator shall not exceed six (6) months unless approved
by the board of trustees, but in no event shall the office of interim village
administrator exceed the term of the current village president. The salary of
the interim village administrator shall be fixed by the president and board of
trustees. If the interim village administrator is already under bond to the
village in any other capacity, the village president and board of trustees may
waive the requirement that the appointee shall furnish an additional bond. A
person appointed as the interim village administrator does not need to be in
compliance with the requirements in Subsection B regarding an employment
contract and the term of office.
   F.   Powers And Duties: The village administrator, under and subject to the
direction of the village president and the board of trustees, shall be the
chief administrator of the village and shall be responsible to the village
president and board of trustees for the proper administration of the affairs of
the village. To that end, the village administrator shall have the authority
and shall be required to:
      1.   Execute, on behalf of the village president and board of trustees,
and administer, supervise and control the affairs of the village in accordance
with the policies set by the village president and board of trustees.
      2.   Cooperate with such advisory boards and commissions that the village
board has and shall create. The village administrator shall receive direction
from the village board.
      3.   Supervise and coordinate the work of all departments of the village
in accordance with policies set by the president and board of trustees.
      4.   Recommend for appointment, promotion, and dismissal the department
heads and all personnel necessary to fill all positions created by the village
board which are vacant.
      5.   Receive and investigate all complaints in relation to matters
concerning the administration of the government of the village and the services
maintained by the public utilities in the village and see that all franchises,
permits and privileges granted by the village are faithfully observed. (Ord.
623, 2-6-1996)
      6.   (Rep. by Ord. 1147, 6-4-2013)
      7.   Prepare or cause to be prepared on or before April 1 of each year a
budget report indicating the funds necessary to defray the estimated expenses
of the village for the fiscal year:
         a.   Prepare or cause to be prepared the annual appropriation
ordinance in time for consideration and enactment by the village board as
required by statute.
         b.   Prepare or cause to be prepared the annual tax levy. Nothing
herein set forth shall give the village administrator powers not permitted by
professional ethics and standards.
      8.   Submit to the village board promptly following the end of the fiscal
year a complete report on the finances and administrative activities of the
village for said fiscal year.
      9.   Present to the village board each month a joint statement with the
village treasurer showing the financial condition of the village as of the end
of the preceding month and showing amounts expended and unexpended balances for
each department in accordance with the annual budget.
      10.   Keep a current inventory of all real and personal property of the
village and location of such property. The village administrator shall be
responsible for the care and the custody of all village property which is not
by statute or ordinance assigned to some other officer or body for caring and
control.
      11.   Devote his entire time to the discharge of his official duties.
      12.   Submit to the village board all matters requiring village board
action or attention. All offices and departments shall submit all matters
requiring village board action or attention to the village administrator. All
requests by the village board of employees or departments relating to the
village board's administrative supervision and control of the affairs of the
village and employees shall be submitted to the village administrator who shall
then act on behalf of the village board in accordance with the board's
direction.
      13.   Attend all meetings of the village board. The village administrator
shall have the right to take part in the discussion of all matters coming
before the village board, but shall have no right to vote.
   G.   Severability: This section explains that if one part of this chapter is
ruled to be invalid by the courts, the remainder of this chapter is still in
effect. The provisions and sections of this chapter shall be deemed severable
and the invalidity of any portion of this chapter shall not affect the validity
of the remainder.
   H.   Effective Date: This section shall be in full force and effect from and
after its passage, approval, and publication as required by law. (Ord. 623, 2-
6-1996; amd. Ord. 1398-22, 6-21-2022)
1-7-1: TREASURER:
   A.   Appointment And Oath: There is hereby created the office of village
treasurer. The treasurer shall be appointed by the president by and with the
advice and consent of the board of trustees. Before entering upon the duties of
his office, he shall take the statutory oath. (1928 Code §31)
   B.   Bond, Salary: The treasurer shall give a bond in such sum as may be
directed by the board of trustees, but in no case shall such bond be less than
three (3) times the latest federal census population or any subsequent census
figure used for motor fuel tax purposes, with sureties to be approved by the
president and board of trustees conditioned upon the faithful performance of
the duties of the office. The treasurer shall receive such compensation as may
be provided from time to time and said compensation may be increased while the
treasurer is in office. (Ord. 734, 11-21-2000)
   C.   General Duties: The treasurer shall perform all duties prescribed for
him by statute or by village ordinance. He shall receive all money paid into
the village, either directly from the person paying the money or from the hands
of such other officer as may receive it, and he shall pay out money only on
vouchers or orders properly signed by the village clerk and the president. The
treasurer need not reside within the village. (1928 Code §33; amd. 1990 Code)
   D.   Deposit Of Funds: He shall deposit the village funds in such
depositories as are selected from time to time by the president and trustees;
and he shall keep the deposit of village money separate and distinct from his
own money, and shall not intermingle his own money with the village money and
shall not make private or personal use of any village money. (1928 Code §34)
   E.   Records: The treasurer shall keep the records showing all money
received by him, showing the source from which it is received and the purpose
for which it is paid; and he shall keep records at all times showing the
financial status of the village. (1928 Code §35)
   F.   Reports: The village treasurer shall at the first meeting of each
month, or more often if required by the board, make a report, under oath, to
the board of trustees of the amount of money received by him, paid out and on
hand, and such other items as shall constitute a complete and accurate account
of his office. (1928 Code §36)
   G.   Annual Report: The village treasurer shall at the close of each fiscal
year, make out and deliver to the village clerk a full and complete report of
the activities of his office during the preceding year, stating the amount of
money received, and from whom received and for what purpose received, and
exhibit all credits allowed by him under the ordinances of the village, and a
statement showing the financial condition of the village at the close of such
fiscal year. (1928 Code §37)
1-7-2: SUPERINTENDENT OF PUBLIC WORKS:
   A.   Creation Of Office: There is hereby created the office of
superintendent of public works. He shall be appointed by the president by and
with the advice and consent of the board of trustees. The superintendent of
public works shall give such bond with sureties as may be required by the board
conditioned upon the faithful performance of his duties. (1928 Code §26)
   B.   General Duties: The superintendent of public works shall have the
powers and perform the duties of the superintendent of streets and the
superintendent of waterworks and he shall perform such other duties as may be
required of him by law or ordinance. (1928 Code §27)
   C.   Public Property: The superintendent of public works shall supervise the
repair and construction of all public property and shall be custodian of all
public property which is not given into the hands of any certain officer. (1928
Code §28)
   D.   Records: The superintendent of public works shall keep the records of
all expenses incurred by him or his office, and of all monies received by him.
He shall keep such other reports and records as may be required by the board of
trustees. (1928 Code §29)
   E.   Supervision: The superintendent of public works shall supervise and
make all necessary inspections of the streets, alleys and other public places,
and the waterworks system of the village and report the condition thereof to
the board with all necessary recommendations for keeping the same in good
repair and adequate for the needs of the village. (1928 Code §30)
1-7-3: ATTORNEY:
   A.   Appointment: The president may appoint, by and with the advice and
consent of the board of trustees, an attorney in good standing and licensed to
practice law in this state, to act as village attorney. (1928 Code §56)
   B.   Board Meetings: The village attorney shall attend every meeting of the
village board of trustees at which the president or any trustee requests his
presence by notice at least twenty four (24) hours before the time set for the
meeting. (1928 Code §57)
   C.   Duties: The village attorney shall give advice concerning the law
governing any problem concerning the village when requested to do so by any
trustee or the president, and shall render written opinions when directed so to
do by the board. He shall draw up ordinances when directed by the board; and
shall represent the village in all actions at law or equity brought by or
against the village or in which the village may be interested. He shall have no
power to settle or compromise any such suit without specific authorization by
the board. (1928 Code §58)
   D.   Compensation: The village attorney shall receive such compensation as
may be directed from time to time by the board of trustees. (1928 Code §59)
1-7-4: CHIEF OF POLICE:
   A.   Appointment, Salary: There is hereby created the office of chief of
police. He shall be appointed by the president by and with the advice and
consent of the village trustees. The chief of police shall give a bond in the
sum of five hundred dollars ($500.00) with sureties to be approved by the
president and trustees conditioned upon the faithful performance of his duties,
and he shall receive such compensation as may be provided from time to time.
(1928 Code §38; amd. 1990 Code)
   B.   General Duties: The village chief of police shall be a conservator of
the peace, and shall have charge of the police force of the village. He shall
arrest or cause to be arrested any person who violates any ordinance of the
village or law of the state or nation, and shall hold such person for
investigation or for proper trial. (1928 Code §39; amd. 1990 Code)
   C.   Enforce Regulations: It shall be the duty of the village chief of
police to see that all village ordinances are enforced, and he shall report to
the board any violations of which he shall have notice or knowledge. (1928 Code
§40; amd. 1990 Code)
   D.   Writs: The village chief of police shall be empowered to serve writs in
cases arising before the proper village officer. (1928 Code §41; amd. 1990
Code)
   E.   Deputies: In case of emergency where public peace and safety require
it, the president may appoint any number of deputy police who shall have full
powers as conservators of the peace. This appointment may be written or oral.
The term of office of such deputy police shall not extend beyond the next
regular meeting of the board of trustees following his appointment unless the
board of trustees approves the appointment. Deputy police shall receive such
compensation for their services as may be provided by the board. (1928 Code
§42; amd. 1990 Code)
1-7-5: BUDGET OFFICER:
   A.   Adoption Of Budget Law: The village of Manhattan hereby adopts sections
8-2-9.1 through 8-2-9.10 of the Illinois municipal code 1  to establish a
budget officer, to be designated by the village president with the approval of
the corporate authorities. The budget officer shall take an oath and post a
bond as provided in sections 3.1-10-25 and 3.1-10-30 of the Illinois municipal
code 2 .
   B.   Position Established: The position of village budget officer is hereby
established as an officer of the village of Manhattan. The finance director
shall serve as village budget officer.
   C.   Duties: The village budget officer shall have the following powers and
duties:
      1.   To permit and encourage and establish the use of efficient planning,
budgeting, auditing, reporting, accounting and other fiscal management
procedures in all village departments, commissions and boards.
      2.   To compile an annual budget in accordance with state law governing
the compilation and contents of budgets 3 .
      3.   To examine all books and records of all village departments,
commissions and boards which relate to monies received by the village, its
departments, commissions and boards; and paid out by the village, its
departments, commissions and boards, debts and accounts receivable; and amounts
owed by or to the village, its departments, commissions and boards.
      4.   To obtain such additional information from the village, its
departments, commissions and boards as may be useful to the village budget
officer for purposes of compiling a municipal budget, such information to be
furnished by the village, its departments, commissions and boards in the form
required by the village budget officer. Any department, commission or board
which refuses to make such information as is requested of it available to the
village budget officer, shall not be permitted to make expenditures under any
subsequent budget for the village until such department, commission, or board
has complied in full with the request of the village budget officer.
      5.   To establish and maintain such procedures as shall ensure that no
expenditures are made by the village, its departments, commissions or boards
except as authorized by the budget. (Ord. 845, 2-15-2005)
 
Notes
1 1. 65 ILCS 5/8-2-9.1 – 5/8-2-9.10.
2 2. 65 ILCS 5/3.1-10-25, 5/3.1-10-30.
3 1. 65 ILCS 5/8-2-9.3.
CHAPTER 8
VILLAGE OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES; GENERAL PROVISIONS
SECTION:
1-8-1: Assignment Of Duties
1-8-2: Oath Of Office
1-8-3: Compensation Of Village Officers And Personnel
1-8-4: Election Of Officers
1-8-5: Terms Of Office, Vacancies
1-8-6: Records, Money
1-8-7: Arrests, Conservators Of The Peace
1-8-8: Village Property
1-8-9: Removal Of Officers
1-8-10: Illinois Municipal Retirement Fund
1-8-11: Impersonation Of Officer Or Employee
1-8-12: Interference With Officers; Injury To Public Property
1-8-13: Requirements For Part Time Police Officers
1-8-14:    Prohibition Of Elected Officials
1-8-1: ASSIGNMENT OF DUTIES:
The president shall have the power to assign to any appointed officer any duty
which is not assigned by ordinance to some other specific officer; and he shall
determine disputes or questions relating to the respective powers or duties of
officers after consultation with the village attorney. (1928 Code §76)
1-8-2: OATH OF OFFICE:
Every officer of the village shall, before entering upon his duties, take the
oath as provided by state law. (1928 Code §78)
1-8-3: COMPENSATION OF VILLAGE OFFICERS AND PERSONNEL:
   A.   Salaries: The salaries for the village officers and personnel provided
below constitute the entire compensation for the village officers and
personnel. No additional monies will be paid to the village officers and
personnel for any other matter or business of the village. No additional monies
will be paid to the village officers and personnel for meetings attended.
Said salaries as set forth below shall not apply to the existing officials, but
shall become applicable whenever an office has been filled by a new election.
 
Village president           $10,000.00 annually
Village trustees            5,000.00 annually
Village clerk               4,000.00 annually
Village liquor commissioner 2,500.00 annually
 
(Ord. 800, 1-20-2004)
   B.   Increase(s)/Decrease(s): An increase or decrease in the compensation of
any elected officer shall not take effect during the term for which that
officer is elected.
   C.   Planning And Zoning Commission (PZC): The compensation for the chairman
or other members of the planning and zoning commission (PZC) of the village of
Manhattan provided below constitutes the entire compensation for the chairman
or other members of the planning and zoning commission (PZC). Compensation
shall be paid for attendance at each official public meeting held by the
planning and zoning commission (PZC). No additional compensation will be paid
to the chairman or other members of the planning and zoning commission (PZC)
for any other matter or business of the village.
      1.   Chairman: Forty five dollars ($45.00) per meeting.
      2.   Members: Thirty five dollars ($35.00) per meeting. (Ord. 905, 6-6-
2006)
1-8-4: ELECTION OF OFFICERS:
   A.   Elections shall be held for all village officers and officials that are
designated by state law or village ordinance to be elected. Any officers and
officials not required by state law or village ordinance to be elected shall be
appointed by the village president upon the advice and consent of the board of
trustees. (Ord. 734, 11-21-2000)
   B.   All newly elected officials or reelected officials shall assume their
office and be seated to their office at the first meeting in May following the
general election. (Ord. 539, 2-20-1990)
1-8-5: TERM OF OFFICE, VACANCIES:
   A.   Term Of Office; Vacancies: Every appointive officer of the village
shall serve for a term of one year following the date of his appointment unless
otherwise provided by ordinance. In case of a vacancy in any appointive office,
a new officer may be appointed in the same manner as the former incumbent was
appointed. (1928 Code §81)
   B.   Termination Of Office: Every officer of the village upon the
termination of his office, for any cause whatsoever, shall deliver to his
successor all books and records which may be property of the village; and if no
successor has been appointed within one week after the termination of office,
such property shall be delivered either to the village clerk or to the village
treasurer. (1928 Code §82)
1-8-6: RECORDS, MONEY:
All records kept by any officer of the village shall be open to inspection by
the president or any member of the board of trustees at all reasonable times,
whether such records are required to be kept by statute or village ordinance or
not; and all monies collected by such officers in their official capacity shall
be turned over to the village treasurer at least once each month. (1928 Code
§77)
1-8-7: ARRESTS, CONSERVATORS OF THE PEACE:
The president, every member of the board of trustees, chief of police and
superintendent of public works shall be conservators of the peace with such
powers to make arrests as provided by state law. (1928 Code §80; amd. 1990
Code)
1-8-8: VILLAGE PROPERTY:
The superintendent of public works shall be the custodian of all village
property, other than money or records, which is not given to any other officer
for custody by ordinance. The clerk shall be custodian of all records which are
not assigned to any other officer for care. All money collected by any officer
for and on behalf of the village shall be turned over to the treasurer. Each
officer so receiving any money shall turn it over to the treasurer at least
once each month, and shall make a written report to the board of trustees at
the next regular meeting that this has been done, showing how much money was
received and turned over, and the purpose for which it was received. (1928 Code
§87)
1-8-9: REMOVAL OF OFFICERS:
The president of the board of trustees may remove from office any person
appointed to office by him for neglect of duties or for misconduct in office.
(1928 Code §89)
1-8-10: ILLINOIS MUNICIPAL RETIREMENT FUND:
The village does hereby elect to participate in the Illinois municipal
retirement fund, effective January 1, 1989. The standard for Illinois municipal
retirement fund participation shall be a position normally requiring
performance of duty for one thousand (1,000) hours per year. (Ord. 527, 5-3-
1988)
1-8-11: IMPERSONATION OF OFFICER OR EMPLOYEE:
It shall be unlawful for any person to impersonate, without lawful authority,
any village officer or employee. Any person convicted of a violation of this
section shall be punished by a fine as established in section
1-4-1 of this title for any one offense. (Ord. 791, 8-5-2003; amd. Ord. 1061,
4-20-2010)
1-8-12: INTERFERENCE WITH OFFICERS; INJURY TO PUBLIC PROPERTY:
It shall be unlawful for any person to interfere with any officer of the
village or any employee thereof in the proper performance of his lawful duties.
It shall be unlawful for any person to do or cause any injury to any property
belonging to the village. (1928 Code §88)
1-8-13: REQUIREMENTS FOR PART TIME POLICE OFFICERS:
The following requirements for hiring of a part time police officer shall be:
   A.   Must have high school diploma or equivalent.
   B.   Must be at least twenty one (21) years of age at the time of the
application.
   C.   Must be a United States citizen.
   D.   Must have a valid Illinois class D driver's license.
   E.   No felony conviction or disqualifying criminal history.
   F.   May have 20/100 vision correctable to 20/20.
   G.   Must be able to pass a background investigation and any other
examination that the village might require.
   H.   Must meet the training requirements of the Illinois law enforcement
training and standards board.
   I.   Must successfully obtain a certificate within eighteen (18) months
after date of hire from the Illinois law enforcement training and standards
board attesting to successful completion of the part time police officers
training course or a waiver from the Illinois law enforcement training and
standards board attesting the determination by the board that the part time
police officers training course is unnecessary because of extensive prior law
enforcement experience.
(Ord. 672, 3-3-1998)
1-8-14: PROHIBITION OF ELECTED OFFICIALS:
All elected officers of the village are prohibited from holding another office
within the village, unless otherwise authorized by law, and are prohibited from
being employed by the village in any capacity or performing duties other than
their duties as an elected official and receiving compensation for the
performance of such duties, unless otherwise authorized by law.
(Ord. 1473-24, 8-27-2024)
CHAPTER 9
VILLAGE FINANCE
SECTION:
1-9-1: Contributions To Library District (Rep. by Ord. 941, 3-6-2007, eff. 5-1-
2007)
1-9-2: Execution Of Village Checks
1-9-3: Professional Fee Payment Procedure
1-9-4: Expenditure Of Funds
1-9-5: Depositories For Village Funds
1-9-6: Collection Charge
1-9-1: CONTRIBUTIONS TO LIBRARY DISTRICT:
(Rep. by Ord. 941, 3-6-2007, eff. 5-1-2007)
1-9-2: EXECUTION OF VILLAGE CHECKS:
All checks drawn on the village general, payroll, street and alley, operation
and maintenance, police, and garbage checking accounts shall require the
signatures of two (2) of the following: village president, village
administrator and/or village treasurer. (Res. 176, 12-3-1991; amd. Res. 330-05,
5-17-2005)
1-9-3: PROFESSIONAL FEE PAYMENT PROCEDURE:
   A.   Any developer, person, entity, corporation, association or group
requesting, seeking or applying for a zoning change, annexation, subdivision,
resubdivision, development, redevelopment and the like shall at the time of the
initiation of said request execute a professional fee agreement with the
village, substantially in the form attached to the ordinance codified herein
and incorporated herein by reference.
   B.   Any developer who presently has any pending matter with the village
shall execute an agreement in the form attached to the ordinance codified
herein and incorporated herein by reference before the village will proceed
further in any respect with the development. (Ord. 612, 2-7-1995)
   C.   Any person convicted of a violation of any section or provision of this
chapter shall be punished by a fine as established in section
1-4-1 of this title for any one offense. Each day such violation is committed
or permitted to continue shall constitute a separate offense and shall be
punishable as such hereunder. (Ord. 791, 8-5-2003; amd. Ord. 1061, 4-20-2010)
1-9-4: EXPENDITURE OF FUNDS:
   A.   Certain bills may be paid without prior approval when the bills are
regularly recurring in nature, such as, but not limited to, the following:
      1.   Wages of village employees;
      2.   Utility bills;
      3.   Bills for supplies and maintenance and all other bills of a routine
and regularly recurring nature. (Ord. 1147, 6-4-2013)
   B.   The following positions shall have the authority to purchase all
materials, supplies and equipment subject to and pursuant to directives of the
village board and within the bounds of the budget. These purchases shall be
subject to and conform with the law as set forth in the statutes of the state
of Illinois, especially those laws pertaining to the creation of liabilities
against the village and pertaining to the expenditure of monies appropriated by
the village. All expenditures must be limited to the budget or special
appropriation. Expenditures over one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) must have a
minimum of three (3) competing estimates.
      1.   Village president is authorized to make expenditures up to six
thousand dollars ($6,000.00) without preliminary authorization of the village
board.
      2.   Village administrator is authorized to make expenditures up to ten
thousand dollars ($10,000.00) without preliminary authorization of the village
board.
      3.   Director of Public Works is authorized to make expenditures up to
one thousand five hundred dollars ($1,500.00) without preliminary authorization
of the Village Board.
      4.   Police Chief is authorized to make expenditures up to one thousand
five hundred dollars ($1,500.00) without preliminary authorization of the
Village Board. (Ord. 1207, 10-21-2015)
   C.   Purchase orders shall be signed by an appropriate department head and/
or the Village Administrator and thereafter paid by the Village Treasurer.
   D.   All other bills and invoices shall be paid only on approval of the
Corporate Authorities at a regularly scheduled or special meeting of the
Corporate Authorities and in accordance with all applicable ordinances,
resolutions, codes, rules, regulations, guidelines and procedures of the
Village then in effect. (Ord. 1147, 6-4-2013)
1-9-5: DEPOSITORIES FOR VILLAGE FUNDS:
The First Bank of Manhattan, Harris, N.A., Illinois Funds, Wells Fargo,
Homestar Bank, Prairie Trail Credit Union, Merchants and Manufacturers Bank,
Morgan Stanley Private Bank N.A., Charles Schwab, Fifth Third Bank, First
Midwest Bank, and IAA Credit Union are hereby designated as depositories in
which the funds of the Village may be deposited to its credit by any officer,
agent, or employee of the Village. (Ord. 889, 2-21-2006; amd. Ord. 1163-13, 10-
5-2013; Ord. 1177-14, 5-6-2014; Ord. 1254, 8-15-2017)
1-9-6: COLLECTION CHARGE:
   A.   There is hereby imposed a collection charge of thirty dollars ($30.00)
upon any person who shall present a check or other payment instrument to the
Village in payment of any of the fees and charges of the Village as listed
hereafter in the event such check or payment instrument is dishonored:
      1.   Because the drawer of the check or payment instrument does not have
sufficient funds on account with the bank or other financial institution upon
which the check or other payment instrument is drawn;
      2.   Because the account on which the check or payment instrument was
issued is closed; or
      3.   Because a stop order has been issued by one of the account owners
with regard to the check or payment instrument.
The collection charge as set forth above shall be in addition to any other
charge, fee or penalty imposed by this Code, and may be imposed one time for
each such check or payment instrument which is presented to the Village and
subsequently dishonored.
   B.   The following fees and charges imposed by this Code may be the subject
of a collection charge as imposed by this regulation:
      1.   Charges for the collection of garbage;
      2.   Fees for water service and sewer service connections;
      3.   Rates and charges for water services, sewer services, or combined
water and sewer services;
      4.   Water and sewer deposits;
      5.   Building permit fees;
      6.   Charges and fees with regard to the inspection of buildings;
      7.   Commercial registrations;
      8.   Liquor licenses;
      9.   Fines or penalties as may be imposed for violations of the
provisions of this Code; and
      10.   Fees or charges with regard to any licenses or permits which may be
issued pursuant to this Code.
   C.   Collection fees and costs: In the event a fine or penalty is assessed
pursuant any provision of this Code, a default in the payment of a fine or
penalty or any installment of a fine or penalty may be collected by any means
authorized for the collection of monetary judgments. The village and the
village attorney or the finance director or their designees may retain
attorneys and private collection agents for the purpose of collecting any
default in payment of any fine or penalty imposed by this Code, or any
installment of a fine or penalty. The village shall add a 35% cost of
collections to any outstanding balance that requires the village to retain the
services of a collection agency. This 35% cost includes any default in a fine
or penalty or any installment of a fine or penalty that was previously referred
to an attorney or private collection agency and the payment of which remains
outstanding. (Ord. 887, 2-7-2006; amd. Ord. 1369-21, 11-2-2021)
CHAPTER 10
CORPORATE SEAL
SECTION:
1-10-1: Corporate Seal
1-10-1: CORPORATE SEAL:
The Corporate Seal of the Village shall be a round disk with the words Village
of Manhattan, Will County, Illinois engraved in the outer circle, and in the
interior and center in a curved line the word Incorporated, then a "star"
below, and the figures 1886, engraved on the face thereof.
The Seal shall remain in the custody of the Village Clerk, to be used by him in
all proper cases. The unauthorized use of the Seal shall not have any binding
effect on the Village; and the Seal alone without the signature of the Clerk in
attestation shall have no effect. (1928 Code §84)
CHAPTER 11
CITIZENS ADVISORY COMMISSION
SECTION:
1-11-1: Establishment
1-11-2: Composition
1-11-3: Appointments; Terms Of Office
1-11-4: Organization, Meetings
1-11-5: Duties
1-11-1: ESTABLISHMENT:
A citizens advisory commission to the village's president and board of trustees
is hereby established. (Ord. 646, 6-3-1997)
1-11-2: COMPOSITION:
The citizens advisory commission shall consist of seven (7) residents of the
village. (Ord. 858, 7-5-2005)
1-11-3: APPOINTMENTS; TERMS OF OFFICE:
   A.   Appointments: The president of the village, with the advice and consent
of the board of trustees, shall appoint all members to the advisory commission.
   B.   Terms: All terms of the advisory commission shall be for a one year
period. Advisory commission members shall serve until their successors are
appointed and qualified. (Ord. 646, 6-3-1997)
1-11-4: ORGANIZATION, MEETINGS:
   A.   Chairperson: The advisory commission shall elect one of its members to
serve as its chairperson.
   B.   Meetings:
      1.   Quorum: A majority of the members of the advisory commission then
holding office shall be required to conduct its business.
      2.   Minutes: The advisory commission shall elect one of its members as
secretary to take and prepare complete and accurate minutes of its meetings and
shall distribute and make copies of those minutes to the village president and
board of trustees.
      3.   Meetings: The advisory commission shall meet at least monthly. Other
special meetings may be called either upon the written notice by the advisory
commission chairperson or a majority of the members of the advisory commission.
At least four (4) days' notice is required to all advisory commission members
of any special meeting.
      4.   Compensation: The advisory commission shall serve without
compensation. (Ord. 646, 6-3-1997)
1-11-5: DUTIES:
The citizens advisory commission shall be advisory and its duties shall
include:
   A.   To provide a forum for the village and its residents to discuss and
address their ideas and comment upon issues facing the village.
   B.   To evaluate the feasibility of various village projects and to
investigate revenue sources to implement said projects.
   C.   To investigate the feasibility of a "tree city" program.
   D.   To promote an exchange of ideas between the village and its residents.
   E.   To participate in such projects as may from time to time be requested
by the village president and board of trustees.
   F.   To offer the village president and board of trustees suggestions and
ideas for the betterment of the village. (Ord. 646, 6-3-1997)
CHAPTER 12
BIDDING AND CONTRACT PROCEDURES
SECTION:
1-12-1: Competitive Bidding Required
1-12-2: Formal Contract Procedure
1-12-3: Advertisements For Bids
1-12-4: Scope Of Notice
1-12-5: Bid Deposits
1-12-6: Bid Opening Procedure
1-12-7: Rejection Of Bids
1-12-8: Bidders In Default To Village
1-12-9: Award Of Contract
1-12-10: Open Market Procedure
1-12-11: Professional Services Exempt From Bidding Requirements
1-12-12: Emergency Purchases
1-12-13: Cooperative Purchasing
1-12-14: Construction Project Bids
1-12-1: COMPETITIVE BIDDING REQUIRED:
Any work or other public improvement that is not to be paid for in whole or in
part by special assessment or special taxation, and all purchases of and
contracts for supplies, materials, and services shall, except as specifically
provided herein, be based whenever possible on competitive bids. (Ord. 673, 6-
2-1998)
1-12-2: FORMAL CONTRACT PROCEDURE:
All work or other public improvement that is not to be paid for in whole or in
part by special assessment or special taxation, and all purchases, orders, or
contracts for supplies, materials, equipment, or contractual services except as
otherwise provided herein, when the estimated cost thereof shall exceed twenty
thousand dollars ($20,000.00), shall be purchased from the lowest responsible
bidder, after due notice inviting bids, unless competitive bidding is waived by
a vote of two-thirds (2/3) of the trustees then holding office. (Ord. 1096, 1-
17-2012)
1-12-3: ADVERTISEMENTS FOR BIDS:
A notice inviting bids shall be published at least once in a newspaper with
general circulation within the village. The village shall also advertise all
pending work or purchases by posting a notice on the public bulletin board in
the village office. (Ord. 673, 6-2-1998)
1-12-4: SCOPE OF NOTICE:
The newspaper notice required herein shall include a general description of the
work to be performed or the articles to be purchased, shall state where
specifications may be secured, and shall specify the time and place for opening
bids. (Ord. 673, 6-2-1998)
1-12-5: BID DEPOSITS:
When deemed necessary by the board of trustees, bid deposits shall be
prescribed in the public notices inviting bids. Unsuccessful bidders shall be
entitled to the return of their bid deposits upon the award of the contract by
the board of trustees. A successful bidder shall forfeit any bid deposit upon
failure on his part to enter into a contract within ten (10) days after the
award.
Such bid deposit may be in the form of a certified check, bond, or letter of
credit in an amount as specified in the advertisement for bids to ensure
finalization of the contract and to indemnify the village against all loss,
damages, and claims that may accrue against the village as a consequence of the
granting of the contract. (Ord. 673, 6-2-1998)
1-12-6: BID OPENING PROCEDURE:
   A.   Sealed: Bids shall be submitted sealed to the village and shall be
identified as bids on the envelope.
   B.   Opening: Bids shall be opened in public at the time and place stated in
the public notice.
   C.   Tabulation: A tabulation of all bids received shall be made by the
board of trustees or by a village employee in which event a tabulation of the
bids shall be furnished to the board of trustees at its next meeting. (Ord.
673, 6-2-1998)
1-12-7: REJECTION OF BIDS:
The village, through its corporate authorities, shall have the authority to
reject all bids or parts of all bids when the public interest will be served
thereby. (Ord. 673, 6-2-1998)
1-12-8: BIDDERS IN DEFAULT TO VILLAGE:
The village shall not accept the bid of a contractor who is in default on the
payment of any taxes, licenses, or other money due the village. (Ord. 673, 6-2-
1998)
1-12-9: AWARD OF CONTRACT:
   A.   Authority In Village: The board of trustees shall have the authority to
award contracts within the purview of this section.
   B.   Lowest Responsible Bidder: Contracts shall be awarded to the lowest
responsible bidder on the basis of the bid that is in the best interest of the
village to accept. In awarding the contract, in addition to price, the board of
trustees shall consider:
      1.   The ability, capacity, and skill of the bidder to perform the
contract or provide the service required;
      2.   Whether the bidder can perform the contract or provide the service
promptly, or within the time specified, without delay or interference;
      3.   The character, integrity, reputation, judgment, experience and
efficiency of the bidder;
      4.   The quality of the performance of previous contracts or services;
      5.   The previous and existing compliance by the bidder with laws and
ordinances relating to the contract or service;
      6.   The sufficiency of the financial resources and ability of the bidder
to perform the contract or provide the service;
      7.   The quality, availability, and adaptability of the supplies or
contractual services to the particular use required;
      8.   The ability of the bidder to provide future maintenance and service
for the use of the subject of the contract;
      9.   The number and scope of conditions attached to the bid.
   C.   Performance Bonds: The board of trustees shall have the authority to
require a performance bond, before entering into a contract, in such amounts as
it shall find reasonably necessary to protect the best interest of the village
and to conform to the statutory requirements for such bonds. (Ord. 673, 6-2-
1998)
1-12-10: OPEN MARKET PROCEDURE:
All work and purchases of supplies, materials, and services of less than the
estimated value of twenty thousand dollars ($20,000.00) shall be made in the
open market, without newspaper advertisement and without observing the
procedures prescribed by this chapter for the award of formal contracts in such
a manner so as to ensure the best interest of the public after solicitation of
bids on proposals by mail, telephone, facsimile transmission or otherwise.
(Ord. 1096, 1-17-2012)
1-12-11: PROFESSIONAL SERVICES EXEMPT FROM BIDDING REQUIREMENTS:
All contracts for professional services, including, but not limited to,
attorneys, engineers, real estate appraisers, and architects, and any other
profession whose ethical code involved prohibits or discourages involvement in
normal bidding procedures, may be entered into by the village without observing
the bidding procedures prescribed by section
1-12-9 of this chapter for the award of formal contracts.
Regular employment contracts in the municipal service shall likewise be exempt
from the provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 673, 6-2-1998)
1-12-12: EMERGENCY PURCHASES:
In case of an apparent emergency that requires immediate work or purchase of
supplies, materials, or services, the board of trustees shall be empowered to
secure by open market procedure as herein set forth, at the lowest obtainable
price, any work, supplies, materials, or services regardless of the amount of
the expenditure. A finding of such an emergency shall be made in an affirmative
vote of at least two-thirds (2/3) of the board of trustees at the time of such
emergency contract or no later than the first regular village board meeting
thereafter. (Ord. 673, 6-2-1998)
1-12-13: COOPERATIVE PURCHASING:
The village shall have the authority to join with other units of government in
cooperative purchasing plans when the best interests of the village would be
served thereby. (Ord. 673, 6-2-1998)
1-12-14: CONSTRUCTION PROJECT BIDS:
   A.   Responsible Bidder: "Responsible bidder for construction contracts"
means a bidder who meets all of the following applicable criteria, and submits
evidence of such compliance:
      1.   All applicable laws prerequisite to doing business in Illinois.
      2.   Evidence of compliance with:
         a.   Federal employer tax identification number or social security
number (for individual).
         b.   Provisions of section 2000(e) of chapter 21, title 42 of the
United States Code and federal executive order 11246 as amended by executive
order 11375 (known as the equal opportunity employer provisions).
      3.   Certificates of insurance indicating the following coverage: general
liability, workers' compensation, completed operations, automobile, hazardous
occupation, product liability, and professional liability.
      4.   Compliance with all provisions of the Illinois prevailing wage act,
including wages, medical and hospitalization insurance and retirement for those
trades as covered by the act.
      5.   Participation in apprenticeship and training programs approved and
registered with the United States department of labor's bureau of
apprenticeship and training.
   B.   Cost: The terms and conditions set forth herein shall only apply to the
construction of new facilities, renovation of existing facilities and road
construction projects that exceed twenty five thousand dollars ($25,000.00) in
expense. (Ord. 747, 8-21-2001)
CHAPTER 13
ADMINISTRATIVE COMPLIANCE TICKETS
SECTION:
1-13-1: Authority
1-13-2: Requirements Of Violator
1-13-3: Conditions; Terms
1-13-4: Fine Payment Schedule
1-13-1: AUTHORITY:
The ordinances of the village hereby provide for the use of administrative
compliance tickets. (Ord. 1181, 7-15-2014)
1-13-2: REQUIREMENTS OF VIOLATOR:
Notwithstanding any other provision of this chapter, any person accused of
violating any provision of this code may be issued an administrative compliance
ticket which shall require the violator to:
   A.   Pay an administrative fee of not less than seventy five dollars
($75.00) unless as otherwise specified to the village treasurer within thirty
(30) days of the issuance of an administrative compliance ticket as settlement
and compromise of the claim against the violator.
   B.   Correct, repair, or rectify any condition which constitutes a
continuing violation of a village ordinance or regulation within the period
specified in the administrative compliance ticket. (Ord. 1181, 7-15-2014)
1-13-3: CONDITIONS; TERMS:
If the person accused of the violation fails to settle and pay the claim, and
correct, repair or rectify any condition which constitutes a continuing
violation of ordinance or law within the period specified in the administrative
compliance ticket, a hearing date may be issued to said person for the
violation, and that person shall be subject to fines and penalties as
authorized by law/ordinance. (Ord. 1181, 7-15-2014)
1-13-4: FINE PAYMENT SCHEDULE:
The fine payment schedule for violations of traffic regulations concerning the
standing and parking of vehicles, the condition of vehicles, the condition and
use of vehicle equipment, the size of vehicles (width, height, and length of
vehicles) and the display of village wheel tax licenses is as follows:
FINE PAYMENT SCHEDULE
 
                           Violations Of Traffic
                           Regulations: Violations of
                           traffic regulations
                           concerning the standing and
                           parking of vehicles (except
                           handicapped parking), the
                          condition of vehicles, the  Handicapped Parking
                           condition and use of
                           vehicle equipment, the size
                           of vehicles (width, height,
                           and length of vehicles) and
                           the display of village
                           wheel tax licenses
Step 1: If you are served
with a "violation notice"
and pay before the first   Amount of the fine per      Amount of the fine per
hearing, or appear at the  village ordinance           state statute
first hearing and found
liable, the fine shall be:
Step 2: If you fail to
appear at the first        Double the amount of the    Double the amount of the
hearing, the fine must be  fine                        fine; maximum amount
paid before the second                                 $1,000.00
hearing and shall be:
Step 3: If you fail to
appear at the second       Double the amount due;      Double the amount due;
hearing, the fine must be  maximum amount $500.00      maximum amount $1,000.00
paid before the third
hearing and shall be:
Step 4: If you fail to
appear at the third
hearing, or upon a final   Double the amount due;      Double the amount due;
determination of           maximum amount $500.00      maximum amount $1,000.00
liability, the fine shall
be:
 
(Ord. 1181, 7-15-2014; amd. Ord. 1474-24, 9-17-2024)
CHAPTER 14
ETHICS
SECTION:
1-14-1: State Officials And Employees Ethics Act
1-14-1: STATE OFFICIALS AND EMPLOYEES ETHICS ACT:
   A.   The regulations of section 5-15 1  and article 10 2  of the state
officials and employees ethics act, 5 Illinois Compiled Statutes 430/1-1 et
seq. (hereinafter referred to as the "act" in this section), are hereby adopted
by reference and made applicable to the officers and employees of the village
to the extent required by 5 Illinois Compiled Statutes 430/70-5.
   B.   The solicitation or acceptance of gifts prohibited to be solicited or
accepted under the act, by any officer or any employee of the village, is
hereby prohibited.
   C.   The offering or making of gifts prohibited to be offered or made to an
officer or employee of the village under the act, is hereby prohibited.
   D.   The participation in political activities prohibited under the act, by
any officer or employee of the village, is hereby prohibited.
   E.   For purposes of this section, the terms "officer" and "employee" shall
be defined as set forth in 5 Illinois Compiled Statutes 430/70-5(c).
   F.   The penalties for violations of this section shall be the same as those
penalties set forth in 5 Illinois Compiled Statutes 430/50-5 for similar
violations of the act.
   G.   This section does not repeal or otherwise amend or modify any existing
ordinances or policies which regulate the conduct of village officers and
employees. To the extent that any such existing ordinances or policies are less
restrictive than this section, however, the provisions of this section shall
prevail in accordance with the provisions of 5 Illinois Compiled Statutes 430/
70-5(a).
   H.   Any amendment to the act that becomes effective after the effective
date of this section shall be incorporated into this section by reference and
shall be applicable to the solicitation, acceptance, offering and making of
gifts and to prohibited political activities. However, any amendment that makes
its provisions optional for adoption by municipalities shall not be
incorporated into this section by reference without formal action by the
corporate authorities of the village.
   I.   If the Illinois supreme court declares the act unconstitutional in its
entirety, then this section shall be repealed as of the date that the Illinois
supreme court's decision becomes final and not subject to any further appeals
or rehearings. This section shall be deemed repealed without further action by
the corporate authorities of the village if the act is found unconstitutional
by the Illinois supreme court.
   J.   If the Illinois supreme court declares part of the act unconstitutional
but upholds the constitutionality of the remainder of the act, or does not
address the remainder of the act, then the remainder of the act as adopted by
this section shall remain in full force and effect; however, that part of this
section relating to the part of the act found unconstitutional shall be deemed
repealed without further action by the corporate authorities of the village.
(Ord. 812, 5-18-2004)
 
Notes
1 1. 5 ILCS 430/5-15.
2 2. 5 ILCS 430/10 – 10–10-40.
CHAPTER 15
INVESTMENT POLICY
SECTION:
1-15-1:    Scope
1-15-2: Objectives
1-15-3:    Standards Of Care
1-15-4:    Safekeeping And Custody
1-15-5:    Suitable And Authorized Investments
1-15-6:    Investment Parameters
1-15-7:    Reporting
1-15-8:    Policy Considerations
1-15-1: SCOPE:
   A.   This policy applies to the investment of funds for the Village. This
policy does not include investment of employees' investment retirement funds
and proceeds from bond issues, which are restricted by bond indentures. In the
event this policy conflicts with any federal or state laws or regulations,
including, but not limited to, the Public Funds Investment Act (30 Illinois
Compiled Statutes 235/2.5), the federal and state laws or regulations shall
apply. In all other events, this policy shall apply.
   B.   Pooling Of Funds: Except for cash in certain restricted and special
funds, the Village will consolidate cash balances from all funds to maximize
investment earnings. Investment income will be allocated to the various funds
based on their respective participation and in accordance with generally
accepted accounting principals. (Ord. 1304-19, 10-1-2019)
1-15-2: OBJECTIVES:
The primary objectives, in priority order, of investment activities shall be
safety, liquidity, and yield:
   A.   Safety: Safety of principal is the foremost objective of the investment
program. Investments shall be undertaken in a manner that seeks to ensure the
preservation of capital in the overall portfolio. The objective will be to
mitigate credit risk and interest rate risk.
      1.   Credit Risk: The Village will minimize credit risk, the risk of loss
due to the failure of the security issuer or backer, by:
         a.   Limiting investments to the safest types of securities;
         b.   Pre-qualifying the financial institutions, brokers/dealers,
intermediaries, and advisers with which the Village will do business; and
         c.   Diversifying the investment portfolio so that potential losses on
individual securities will be minimized.
      2.   Interest Rate Risk: The Village will minimize the risk that the
market value of securities in the portfolio will fall due to changes in general
interest rates by:
         a.   Structuring the investment portfolio so that investments mature
to meet cash requirements for ongoing operations, thereby avoiding the need to
redeem/sell investments prior to maturity; and
         b.   Investing operating funds primarily in shorter-term securities,
money market mutual funds, or similar investment pools.
   B.   Liquidity: The investment portfolio shall remain sufficiently liquid to
meet all operating requirements that may be reasonably anticipated. This is
accomplished by structuring the portfolio so that investments mature concurrent
with cash needs to meet anticipated demand. A portion of the portfolio also may
be placed in money market funds or local government investment pools which
offer same-day liquidity for short-term funds.
   C.   Yield: The investment portfolio shall be designed with the objective of
attaining a market rate of return throughout budgetary and economic cycles,
taking into account the investment risk constraints and liquidity needs. Return
on investment is of secondary importance compared to the safety and liquidity
objectives described above. The core of investments is limited to relatively
low risk securities in anticipation of earning a fair return relative to the
risk being assumed. Securities shall not be sold prior to maturity with the
following exceptions:
      1.   A security with declining credit may be sold early to minimize loss
of principal;
      2.   A security swap would improve the quality, yield, or target duration
in the portfolio; and/or
      3.   Liquidity needs of the portfolio require that the security be sold.
(Ord. 1304-19, 10-1-2019)
1-15-3: STANDARDS OF CARE:
   A.   Prudence:
      1.   The standard of prudence to be used by investment officials shall be
the "prudent person" standard and shall be applied in the context of managing
and overall portfolio. Investment officers acting in accordance with written
procedures and this investment policy and exercising due diligence shall be
relieved of personal responsibility for an individual security's credit risk or
market price changes, provided deviations from exceptions are reported in a
timely fashion and the liquidity and the sale of securities are carried out in
accordance with the terms of this policy.
      2.   Investments shall be made with judgment and care, under
circumstances then prevailing, which persons of prudence, discretion and
intelligence exercise in the management of their own affairs, not for
speculation, but for investment, considering the probable safety of their
capital as well as the probable income to be derived.
   B.   Ethics And Conflicts Of Interest: Officers and employees involved in
the investment process shall refrain from personal business activity that could
conflict with the proper execution and management of the investment program, or
that could impair their ability to make impartial decisions. Employees and
investment officials shall disclose any material interest in financial
institutions with which they conduct business. They shall further disclose any
personal financial/investment positions that could be related to the
performance of the investment portfolio. Employees and officers shall refrain
from undertaking personal investment transactions with the same individual with
whom business is conducted on behalf of the Village.
   C.   Delegation Of Authority: Authority to manage the investment program is
granted to the Finance Director, hereinafter referred to as Investment Officer.
Responsibility for the operation of the investment program is hereby delegated
to the Investment Officer, who shall act in accordance with established written
procedures and internal controls for the operation of the investment program
consistent with this investment policy. Procedures should include references
to: safekeeping, investment accounting, repurchase agreements, wire transfer
agreements, and collateral/depositary agreements. No person may engage in an
investment transaction except as provided under the terms of this policy and
the procedures established by the Investment Officer. The Investment Officer
shall be responsible for all transactions undertaken and shall establish a
system of controls to regulate the activities of subordinate officials. (Ord.
1304-19, 10-1-2019)
1-15-4: SAFEKEEPING AND CUSTODY:
   A.   Authorized Financial Dealers And Institutions:
      1.   A list will be maintained of financial institutions authorized to
provide investment services. In addition, a list also will be maintained of
approved security broker/dealers selected by creditworthiness.
      2.   All financial institutions and/or broker/dealers who desire to
become qualified for investment transactions must supply the following upon
request:
         a.   Most recent audited financial statements upon request;
         b.   Proof of National Association of Securities Dealers (NASD)
certification;
         c.   Proof of state registration;
         d.   Certification of having read and understood and agreeing to
comply with the Village's investment policy; and
         e.   Proof of participation in the Federal Deposit Insurance
Corporation.
      3.   A periodic review of financial condition and registration of
qualified financial institutions and broker/dealers may be conducted by the
Investment Officer.
   B.   Internal Controls:
      1.   The Investment Officer is responsible for establishing and
maintaining an internal control structure designed to ensure that the assets of
the Village are protected from loss, theft, or misuse. The internal control
structure shall be designed to provide reasonable assurance that these
objectives are met. The concept of reasonable assurance recognizes that (i) the
cost of a control should not exceed the benefits likely to be derived and (ii)
the valuation of costs and benefits requires estimates and judgments by
management.
      2.   Accordingly, the Investment Officer shall establish a process for an
annual independent review by an external auditor to assure compliance with
policies and procedures. The internal controls shall address the following
points:
         a.   Control of collusion;
         b.   Separation of transaction authority from accounting and
recordkeeping;
         c.   Custodial safekeeping;
         d.   Avoidance of physical delivery securities;
         e.   Clear delegation of authority to subordinate staff members; and
         f.   Written confirmation of transactions for investments and wire
transfers. (Ord. 1304-19, 10-1-2019)
1-15-5: SUITABLE AND AUTHORIZED INVESTMENTS:
   A.   Investment Types:
      1.   The following investments will be permitted by this policy and are
those defined by state and local law where applicable:
         a.   U.S. government obligations, U.S. government agency obligations,
and U.S. government instrumentality obligations, which have a liquid market
with a readily determinable market value;
         b.   Certificates of deposit and other evidences of deposit at
financial institutions;
         c.   Investment-grade obligations of state, provincial and local
governments and public authorities;
         d.   Repurchase agreements whose underlying purchased securities
consist of the foregoing;
         e.   Money market mutual funds regulated by the Securities and
Exchange Commission and whose portfolios consist only of dollar-denominated
securities; and
         f.   Local government investment pools, either state- administered or
through joint powers statutes and other intergovernmental agreement
legislation.
      2.   Investment in derivatives of the above instruments shall require
authorization by the Village of Manhattan Board of Trustees.
   B.   Collateralization:
      1.   Where allowed by state law, collateralization will be required on
two (2) types of investments: certificates of deposit and repurchase
agreements. In order to anticipate market changes and provide a level of
security for all funds, the collateralization level will be one hundred two
percent (102%) of market value of principal and accrued interest.
      2.   The Village will only accept the following as collateral:
         a.   U.S. government obligations;
         b.   U.S. government agency obligations;
         c.   U.S. government instrumentality obligations, which have a liquid
market with a readily determinable market value; and
         d.   Letters of credit issued by a federal home loan bank. (Ord. 1304-
19, 10-1-2019)
1-15-6: INVESTMENT PARAMETERS:
   A.   Diversification: The Village will diversify its investments by security
type and institution. With the exception of U.S. Treasury securities and local
government pools, no more than sixty five percent (65%) of the Village's total
investment portfolio will be invested in a single security type or with a
single financial institution.
   B.   Maximum Maturities:
      1.   To the extent possible, the Village shall attempt to match its
investments with anticipated cash flow requirements. The Village will not
directly invest/deposit funds with a maturity date of more than four (4) years
from the date of purchase or in accordance with state and local statutes and
ordinances.
      2.   Because of inherent difficulties in accurately forecasting cash flow
requirements, a portion of the portfolio should be continuously invested in
readily available funds such as money market funds or overnight repurchase
agreements to ensure that appropriate liquidity is maintained to meet ongoing
obligations. (Ord. 1304-19, 10-1-2019)
1-15-7: REPORTING:
Methods: The investment officer shall prepare an investment report monthly. The
report will include the following:
   A.   Listing of individual investments held at the end of the reporting
period;
   B.   Average weighted yield to maturity of investments in the portfolio;
   C.   Listing of investment by maturity date; and
   D.   Location of investment. (Ord. 1304-19, 10-1-2019)
1-15-8: POLICY CONSIDERATIONS:
   A.   Exception: Any investment currently held that does not meet the
guidelines of this policy shall be exempted from the requirements of this
policy. At maturity or liquidation, such monies shall be reinvested only as
provided by this policy.
   B.   Amendments: Any changes must be approved by the Village of Manhattan
Board of Trustees, as well as the individual(s) charged with maintaining
internal controls. (Ord. 1304-19, 10-1-2019)
CHAPTER 16
BOARD OF FIRE AND POLICE COMMISSIONERS
SECTION:
1-16-1: Established
1-16-2: Appointments
1-16-1: ESTABLISHED:
Pursuant to the Illinois municipal code section 10-2.1-1, 65 Illinois Compiled
Statutes 5/10-2.1-1, the village of Manhattan hereby establishes a board of
fire and police commissioners to carry out the obligations as set forth in 65
Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/10-2.1-1 et seq., except that pursuant to section
10-2.1-4, 65 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/10-2.1-4, the chief of the police
department shall be appointed as set forth in section
1-7-4 of this title. (Ord. 920, 10-3-2006)
1-16-2: APPOINTMENTS:
Pursuant to the Illinois municipal code section 10-2.1-1 et seq., 65 Illinois
Compiled Statutes 5/10-2.1-1 et seq., the village president, with the consent
of the board of trustees, shall appoint a board of fire and police
commissioners, who shall be residents of the village. (Ord. 920, 10-3-2006)
CHAPTER 17
POLICE PENSION FUND
SECTION:
1-17-1: Established
1-17-2: Board Created; Duties
1-17-3: Operations
1-17-1: ESTABLISHED:
There is hereby created and established a police pension fund in and for the
village of Manhattan, Will County, Illinois, in accordance with article 3 of 40
Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/3-101 et seq. (the "act") for the benefit of all
full time police officers entitled to participate pursuant to the act. (Ord.
957, 4-17-2007)
1-17-2: BOARD CREATED; DUTIES:
   A.   There shall be hereby created and established a board of trustees of
police fund ("pension board") consisting of five (5) members to administer the
police pension fund.
   B.   Two (2) members of the pension board shall be appointed by the village
president of the board of trustees. The third and fourth members of the pension
board shall be elected from the active participants of the police pension fund
by such active participants. The fifth member of the pension board shall be
elected by and from the beneficiaries.
   C.   One of the pension board members appointed by the village president
shall serve for one year beginning on May 8, 2007. The other appointed pension
board member shall serve for two (2) years beginning on the same date. Their
successors shall serve for two (2) years each or until their successors are
appointed and qualified.
   D.   The election for pension board members shall be held biennially on the
third Monday in April, at such place or places in the village and under the
Australian ballot system and such other regulations as shall be prescribed by
the appointed members of the pension board.
   E.   The active police pension fund participants shall be entitled to vote
only for the active participant members of the pension board. All beneficiaries
of legal age may vote only for the member chosen from among the beneficiaries.
No person shall be entitled to cast more than one ballot at such election. The
term of elected members shall be two (2) years, beginning on the second Tuesday
of the first May after the election.
   F.   Upon the death, resignation or inability to act of any elected pension
board member, his or her successor shall be elected for the unexpired term at a
special election, to be called by the pension board and conducted in the same
manner as the regular biennial election.
   G.   Pension board members shall neither receive nor have any right to
receive any salary from the police pension fund for services performed and
shall serve without compensation.
   H.   The pension board members shall have the powers and duties to manage
and control the police pension fund as set forth by law and in the act. (Ord.
957, 4-17-2007)
1-17-3: OPERATIONS:
All money received or collected shall be credited by the village treasurer to
the account of the police pension fund and held by the village treasurer
subject to the order and control of the pension board. The village treasurer
shall maintain a record of all money received, transferred, and held for the
account of the pension board. (Ord. 957, 4-17-2007)
CHAPTER 18
IDENTITY THEFT PREVENTION PROGRAM
SECTION:
1-18-1: Purpose
1-18-2: Scope
1-18-3: Definitions
1-18-4: Administration Of The Program
1-18-5: Identity Theft Prevention Elements
1-18-6: Program Management And Accountability
1-18-7: Other Legal Requirements
1-18-1: PURPOSE:
The purpose of this identity theft prevention program (program) is to protect
customers of the village's utility services from identity theft. The program is
intended to establish reasonable policies and procedures to facilitate the
detection, prevention and mitigation of identity theft in connection with the
opening of new covered accounts and activity on existing covered accounts.
(Res. 430-09, 1-6-2009, eff. 2-1-2009)
1-18-2: SCOPE:
This program applies to the creation, modification and access to identifying
information of a customer of one or more of the utilities operated by the
village and all employees. This program does not replace or repeal any
previously existing policies or programs addressing some or all of the
activities that are the subject of this program, but rather it is intended to
supplement any such existing policies and programs. (Res. 430-09, 1-6-2009,
eff. 2-1-2009)
1-18-3: DEFINITIONS:
When used in this program, the following terms have the meanings set forth
opposite their name, unless the context clearly requires that the term be given
a different meaning:
   COVERED ACCOUNT: An account that the village offers or maintains, primarily
for personal, family or household purposes, that involves or is designed to
permit multiple payments of transactions (16 CFR 681.2(b)(3)(i)). A utility
account is a "covered account". The term "covered account" also includes other
accounts offered or maintained by the village for which there is a reasonably
foreseeable risk to the village or its customers from identity theft (16 CFR
681.2(b)(3)(ii)).
   IDENTIFYING INFORMATION: Any name or number that may be used, alone or in
conjunction with any other information, to identify a specific person,
including any name, social security number, date of birth, official state or
government issued driver's license or identification number, alien registration
number, government passport number, employer or taxpayer identification number.
Additional examples of "identifying information" are set forth in 16 CFR
section 603.2(a).
   IDENTITY THEFT: A fraud committed or attempted using the identifying
information of another person without authority (16 CFR sections 681.2(b)(8)
and 603.2(a)).
   RED FLAG: A pattern, practice or specific activity that indicates the
possible existence of identity theft.
Certain terms used but not otherwise defined herein shall have the meanings
given to them in the FTC's identity theft rules (16 CFR part 681) or the fair
credit reporting act of 1970 (15 USC section 1681 et seq.), as amended by the
fair and accurate credit transactions act of 2003 passed into law on December
4, 2003 (public law 108-159). (Res. 430-09, 1-6-2009, eff. 2-1-2009)
1-18-4: ADMINISTRATION OF THE PROGRAM:
The initial adoption and approval of the identity theft prevention program
shall be by resolution of the village board of trustees. Thereafter, changes to
the program of a day to day operational character and decisions relating to the
interpretation and implementation of the program may be made by the finance
director who shall be the program administrator. Major revisions of this policy
shall be approved by the village board of trustees.
Development, implementation, administration and oversight of the program will
be the responsibility of the program administrator. The program administrator
will report at least annually to the village board of trustees regarding
compliance with this program.
Issues to be addressed in the annual identity theft prevention report include:
   A.   The effectiveness of the policies and procedures in addressing the risk
of identity theft in connection with the opening of new covered accounts and
activity with respect to existing covered accounts.
   B.   Service provider arrangements.
   C.   Significant incidents involving identity theft and management's
response.
   D.   Recommendations for material changes to the program, if needed, for
improvement. (Res. 430-09, 1-6-2009, eff. 2-1-2009)
1-18-5: IDENTITY THEFT PREVENTION ELEMENTS:
   A.   Identification Of Relevant Red Flags: The village has considered the
guidelines and the illustrative examples of possible red flags from the FTC's
identity theft rules and has reviewed the village's past history with instances
of identity theft, if any. The village hereby determines that the following are
the relevant red flags for purposes of this program given the relative size of
the village and the limited nature and scope of the services that the village
provides to its citizens:
      1.   Alerts, notifications, or other warnings received from consumer
reporting agencies or service providers.
         a.   A consumer reporting agency alerts the village of a credit
freeze, address disparity, or that an account has been noted to have abusive or
fraudulent activity.
      2.   The presentation of suspicious documents.
         a.   Documents provided for ID do not appear to be genuine and
unaltered.
         b.   The photo or physical description is not consistent with the
appearance of the applicant.
         c.   Information given to open the account is not consistent with the
ID of the applicant.
      3.   The presentation of suspicious personal identifying information,
such as a suspicious address change.
         a.   Personal ID is of the same type associated with fraudulent
activity: fictitious address, mailbox drop, or prison or phone number is
invalid; it is associated with a pager or answering service.
         b.   Personal ID provided is associated with known fraudulent
activity.
         c.   Personal ID is inconsistent with utility records.
         d.   The customer fails to provide all needed personal ID upon
request.
      4.   The unusual use of, or other suspicious activity related to, a
covered account.
         a.   The utility is notified of unauthorized charges or transactions
in connection with a customer's account.
         b.   Customer notifies utility that they are not receiving their bill.
         c.   Mail sent to customer is repeatedly returned.
         d.   Payments are made in a manner associated with fraud. For example,
a deposit or initial payment is made and no payments are made thereafter.
      5.   Notice of possible identity theft.
         a.   Utility is notified by law enforcement officials or others, that
it has opened a fraudulent account for a person engaged in identity theft.
   B.   Detection Of Red Flags: The employees of the village that interact
directly with customers on a day to day basis shall have the initial
responsibility for monitoring the information and documentation provided by the
customer and any third party service provider in connection with the opening of
new accounts and the modification of or access to existing accounts and the
detection of any red flags that might arise. Management shall see to it that
all employees who might be called upon to assist a customer with the opening of
a new account or with modifying or otherwise accessing an existing account are
properly trained such that they have a working familiarity with the relevant
red flags identified in this program so as to be able to recognize any red
flags that might surface in connection with the transaction.
An employee who is not sufficiently trained to recognize the red flags
identified in this program shall not open a new account for any customer,
modify any existing account or otherwise provide any customer with access to
information in an existing account without the direct supervision and specific
approval of a management employee. Management employees shall be properly
trained such that they can recognize the relevant red flags identified in this
program and exercise sound judgment in connection with the response to any
unresolved red flags that may present themselves in connection with the opening
of a new account or with modifying or accessing of an existing account.
Management employees shall be responsible for making the final decision on any
such unresolved red flags.
The program administrator shall establish from time to time a written policy
setting forth the manner in which a prospective new customer may apply for
service, the information and documentation to be provided by the prospective
customer in connection with an application for a new utility service account,
the steps to be taken by the employee assisting the customer with the
application in verifying the customer's identity and the manner in which the
information and documentation provided by the customer and any third party
service provider shall be maintained. Such policy shall be generally consistent
with the spirit of the customer identification program rules (31 CFR 103.121)
implementing section 326(a) of the USA PATRIOT act but need not be as detailed.
The program administrator shall establish from time to time a written policy
setting forth the manner in which customers with existing accounts shall
establish their identity before being allowed to make modifications to or
otherwise gain access to existing accounts.
   C.   Response To Detected Red Flags: If the responsible employees of the
village as set forth in the previous subsection are unable, after making a good
faith effort, to form a reasonable belief that they know the true identity of a
customer attempting to open a new account or modify or otherwise access an
existing account based on the information and documentation provided by the
customer and any third party service provider, the village shall not open the
new account or modify or otherwise provide access to the existing account as
the case may be. Opening new accounts or the modification or access to existing
accounts will be on a nondiscriminatory basis based on the village's policies.
The program administrator shall establish from time to time a written policy
setting forth the steps to be taken in the event of an unresolved red flag
situation. Consideration should be given to aggravating factors that may
heighten the risk of identity theft, such as a data security incident that
results in unauthorized access to a customer's account, or a notice that a
customer has provided account information to a fraudulent individual or
website. Appropriate responses to prevent or mitigate identity theft when a red
flag is detected include:
      1.   Monitoring a covered account for evidence of identity theft.
      2.   Contacting the customer.
      3.   Changing any passwords, security codes, or other security devices
that permit access to a covered account.
      4.   Reopening a covered account with a new account number.
      5.   Not opening a new covered account.
      6.   Closing an existing covered account.
      7.   Not attempting to collect on a covered account or not selling a
covered account to a debt collector.
      8.   Notifying law enforcement.
      9.   Determining that no response is warranted under the particular
circumstances. (Res. 430-09, 1-6-2009, eff. 2-1-2009)
1-18-6: PROGRAM MANAGEMENT AND ACCOUNTABILITY:
   A.   Initial Risk Assessment; Covered Accounts: Utility accounts for
personal, family and household purposes are specifically included within the
definition of "covered account" in the FTC's identity theft rules. Therefore,
the village determines that with respect to its residential utility accounts it
offers and/or maintains covered accounts. The village also performed an initial
risk assessment to determine whether the utility offers or maintains any other
accounts for which there are reasonably foreseeable risks to customers or the
utility from identity theft. In making this determination the village
considered: 1) the methods it uses to open its accounts, 2) the methods it uses
to access its accounts, and 3) its previous experience with identity theft, and
it concluded that it does not offer or maintain any such other covered
accounts.
   B.   Program Updates; Risk Assessment: The program, including relevant red
flags, is to be updated as often as necessary but at least annually to reflect
changes in risks to customers from identity theft. Factors to consider in the
program update include:
      1.   An assessment of the risk factors identified above.
      2.   Any identified red flag weaknesses in associated account systems or
procedures.
      3.   Changes in methods of identity theft.
      4.   Changes in methods to detect, prevent, and mitigate identity theft.
      5.   Changes in business arrangements, including mergers, acquisitions,
alliances, joint ventures, and service provider arrangements.
   C.   Training And Oversight: All staff and third party service providers
performing any activity in connection with one or more covered accounts are to
be provided appropriate training and receive effective oversight to ensure that
the activity is conducted in accordance with policies and procedures designed
to detect, prevent, and mitigate the risk of identity theft. (Res. 430-09, 1-6-
2009, eff. 2-1-2009)
1-18-7: OTHER LEGAL REQUIREMENTS:
Awareness of the following related legal requirements should be maintained:
   A.   31 USC 5318(g) - Reporting of suspicious activities.
   B.   15 USC 1681 c-1(h) - Identity theft prevention; fraud alerts and active
duty alerts - limitations on use of information for credit extensions.
   C.   15 USC 1681 s-2 - Responsibilities of furnishers of information to
consumer reporting agencies.
   D.   15 USC 1681 m - Requirements on use of consumer reports. (Res. 430-09,
1-6-2009, eff. 2-1-2009)
CHAPTER 19
ELECTRONIC ATTENDANCE AT MEETINGS RULES
SECTION:
1-19-1: Rules Statement
1-19-2: Prerequisites
1-19-3: Authorization To Participate
1-19-4: Adequate Equipment Required
1-19-5: Minutes
1-19-6: Rights Of Remote Member
1-19-7: Presiding Officer
1-19-8: Quorum At Meeting
1-19-1: RULES STATEMENT:
It is the decision of the village of Manhattan that any member of the corporate
authority may attend any open or closed meeting of the corporate authority via
electronic means (such as by telephone, video or internet connection) provided
that such attendance is in compliance with these rules and any applicable laws.
(Ord. 1032, 9-15-2009)
1-19-2: PREREQUISITES:
A member of the corporate authority may attend a meeting electronically if the
member meets the following conditions:
   A.   The member should notify the clerk at least twenty four (24) hours
before the meeting, unless impractical, so that necessary communications
equipment can be arranged. Inability to make the necessary technical
arrangements will result in denial of a request for remote attendance.
   B.   The member must assert one of the following three (3) reasons why he or
she is unable to physically attend the meeting:
      1.   The member cannot attend because of personal illness or disability;
or
      2.   The member cannot attend because of employment purposes or the
business of the village of Manhattan; or
      3.   The member cannot attend because of a family or other emergency.
(Ord. 1032, 9-15-2009)
1-19-3: AUTHORIZATION TO PARTICIPATE:
   A.   The clerk, after receiving the electronic attendance request, shall
inform the corporate authority of the request for electronic attendance.
   B.   After establishing that there is a quorum physically present at a
meeting where a member of the corporate authority desires to attend
electronically, the presiding officer shall state that: 1) a notice was
received by a member of the corporate authority in accordance with these rules,
and 2) the member will be deemed authorized to attend the meeting
electronically unless a motion objecting to the member's electronic attendance
is made, seconded, and approved by two-thirds (2/3) of the members of the
corporate authority physically present at the meeting. If no such motion is
made and seconded or if any such motion fails to achieve the required vote by
the members of the corporate authority physically present at the meeting, then
the request by the member to attend the meeting electronically shall be deemed
approved by the corporate authority and the presiding officer shall declare the
requesting member present. After such declaration by the presiding officer, the
question of a member's electronic attendance may not be reconsidered. (Ord.
1032, 9-15-2009)
1-19-4: ADEQUATE EQUIPMENT REQUIRED:
The member participating electronically and other members of the corporate
authority must be able to communicate effectively, and members of the audience
must be able to hear all communications at the meeting site. Before allowing
electronic attendance at any meeting, the corporate authority shall provide
equipment adequate to accomplish this objective at the meeting site. (Ord.
1032, 9-15-2009)
1-19-5: MINUTES:
Any member attending electronically shall be considered an off site attendee
and counted as present electronically for that meeting if the member is allowed
to attend. The meeting minutes shall also reflect and state specifically
whether each member is physically present or present by electronic means. (Ord.
1032, 9-15-2009)
1-19-6: RIGHTS OF REMOTE MEMBER:
A member permitted to attend electronically will be able to express his or her
comments during the meeting and participate in the same capacity as those
members physically present, subject to all general meeting guidelines and
procedures previously adopted and adhered to. The member attending
electronically shall be heard, considered, and counted as to any vote taken.
Accordingly, the name of any member attending electronically shall be called
during any vote taken, and his or her vote counted and recorded by the clerk
and placed in the minutes for the corresponding meeting. A member attending
electronically may leave a meeting and return as in the case of any member,
provided the member attending electronically shall announce his or her leaving
and returning. (Ord. 1032, 9-15-2009)
1-19-7: PRESIDING OFFICER:
If the presiding officer of the public body is attending the meeting by
electronic means, then the person who acts in the absence of the presiding
officer shall chair the meeting. If there is none, then the presiding officer
shall appoint a member of the public body who is physically present at the
meeting to serve as chair of the meeting. The appointment of a chair shall be
subject to the advice and consent of the public body. The presiding officer who
is participating by electronic means shall be authorized to participate in the
meeting to the extent authorized by law or ordinance except for those acts
involved with chairing the meeting. (Ord. 1032, 9-15-2009)
1-19-8: QUORUM AT MEETING:
   A.   Limitation Of Number Of Members Who May Attend By Electronic Means: A
quorum of the public body must be physically present for the public body to
conduct its meeting before one or more members will be permitted to attend by
electronic means. If more than one member participates by electronic means, the
absent members may not meet at the same remote location if their joint presence
at the remote location would constitute a violation of the Illinois open
meetings act. (Ord. 1032, 9-15-2009)
CHAPTER 20
ORDINANCE ADMINISTRATIVE HEARINGS
SECTION:
1-20-1: Adjudication Of Ordinance Violations
1-20-2: Definitions
1-20-3: Procedures Not Exclusive
1-20-4: Qualifications Of Hearing Officers
1-20-5: Instituting Proceedings
1-20-6: Representation
1-20-7: Subpoenas
1-20-8: Defaults
1-20-9: Hearing; Evidence
1-20-10: Findings, Decision, Order
1-20-11: Administrative Review
1-20-12: Judgment On Findings, Decision, Order
1-20-1: ADJUDICATION OF ORDINANCE VIOLATIONS:
There is hereby established a system of administrative adjudication for
ordinance violations. The function is to expedite the prosecution and
correction of ordinance violations in the manner as set forth in this chapter
through an ordinance administrative hearing. The provisions as set forth in
this chapter are for the adjudication of village ordinances except for:
   A.   Proceedings not within the statutory or the home rule authority of the
village.
(Ord. 1180, 7-15-2014; amd. Ord. 1474-24, 9-17-2024)
1-20-2: DEFINITIONS:
For purposes of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply:
   HEARING OFFICER: A village employee or an officer or agent of the village,
other than a law enforcement officer, whose duty it is to:
   A.   Hear testimony and accept evidence that is relevant to the existence of
the ordinance violation;
   B.   Issue subpoenas directing witnesses to appear and give relevant
testimony at the ordinance administrative hearing, upon the request of the
parties or their representatives;
   C.   Preserve and authenticate the record of the ordinance administrative
hearing and all exhibits and evidence introduced at the ordinance
administrative hearing;
   D.   Issue a determination of whether an ordinance violation exists; and
   E.   Impose penalties consistent with applicable code provisions and
assessing costs upon finding a party liable for the charged violation. 65
Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/1-2.1-4.
   NONEMERGENCY SITUATION: Any situation that does not reasonably constitute a
threat to the public interest, safety, or welfare. (Ord. 1180, 7-15-2014)
1-20-3: PROCEDURES NOT EXCLUSIVE:
This chapter does not preclude the village from using other methods to enforce
village ordinances. 65 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/1-2.1-3. (Ord. 1180, 7-15-
2014)
1-20-4: QUALIFICATIONS OF HEARING OFFICERS:
   A.   Prior to conducting ordinance administrative hearings, the hearing
officer shall successfully complete a formal training program that includes the
following:
      1.   Instruction on the rules of procedure of the ordinance
administrative hearings which they will conduct;
      2.   Orientation to each subject area of the ordinance violations that
they will adjudicate;
      3.   Observation of ordinance administrative hearings; and
      4.   Participation in hypothetical cases, including ruling on evidence
and issuing final orders.
   B.   The hearing officer must be an attorney licensed to practice law in the
state of Illinois for at least three (3) years. 65 Illinois Compiled Statutes
5/1-2.1-4. (Ord. 1180, 7-15-2014)
1-20-5: INSTITUTING PROCEEDINGS:
   A.   Proceedings for the administrative adjudication for ordinance
violations shall be instituted upon the filing of a written pleading by an
authorized official of the village.
   B.   When a police officer or other individual authorized to issue an
ordinance violation finds an ordinance violation to exist, they shall note the
violation on a violation notice and report form which includes:
      1.   The type and nature of the ordinance violation to be adjudicated;
      2.   The date and location of the ordinance administrative hearing;
      3.   The legal authority and jurisdiction under which the ordinance
administrative hearing is to be held; and
      4.   The penalties for failure to appear at the ordinance administrative
hearing.
   C.   Parties shall be served with process in a manner reasonably calculated
to give them notice by:
      1.   Personal service of process upon a party or its employees or agents;
      2.   Service by mail at a party's address; or
      3.   Posting upon the property where the violation is found when the
party is the owner or manager of the property. 65 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/
1-2.1-5. (Ord. 1180, 7-15-2014)
1-20-6: REPRESENTATION:
Parties shall be provided with an opportunity for an ordinance administrative
hearing, during which they may be represented by counsel, present witnesses,
and cross examine opposing witnesses. 65 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/1-2.1-5.
(Ord. 1180, 7-15-2014)
1-20-7: SUBPOENAS:
At any time prior to the ordinance administrative hearing date, parties may
request the hearing officer to issue subpoenas to direct the attendance and
testimony of relevant witnesses and the production of relevant documents. 65
Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/1-2.1-5. (Ord. 1180, 7-15-2014)
1-20-8: DEFAULTS:
If on the ordinance administrative hearing date the owner or his attorney fails
to appear, the hearing officer may find the owner in default and shall proceed
with the ordinance administrative hearing and accept evidence relevant to the
existence of an ordinance violation. (Ord. 1180, 7-15-2014)
1-20-9: HEARING; EVIDENCE:
At the ordinance administrative hearing, a hearing officer shall preside and
shall hear testimony and accept any evidence relevant to the existence or
nonexistence of an ordinance violation. The strict rules of evidence applicable
to judicial proceedings shall not apply. 65 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/1-2.1-
6. (Ord. 1180, 7-15-2014)
1-20-10: FINDINGS, DECISION, ORDER:
At the conclusion of the ordinance administrative hearing, the hearing officer
shall make a determination based on the evidence presented, of whether an
ordinance violation exists. The determination shall be in writing and shall
include a written finding of fact, decision, and order including the fine,
penalty, or action with which the defendant must comply. 65 Illinois Compiled
Statutes 5/1-2.1-4. (Ord. 1180, 7-15-2014)
1-20-11: ADMINISTRATIVE REVIEW:
The findings, decision and order of the hearing officer shall be subject to
review in the circuit court of Will County, and the provisions of the
administrative review law, and the rules adopted pursuant thereto are adopted
and shall apply to and govern every action for the judicial review of the final
findings, decision and order of a hearing officer under this chapter. 65
Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/1-2.1-7. (Ord. 1180, 7-15-2014)
1-20-12: JUDGMENT ON FINDINGS, DECISION, ORDER:
   A.   Any fine, other sanction, or costs imposed, or part of any fine, other
sanction, or costs imposed, remaining unpaid after the exhaustion of or the
failure to exhaust judicial review procedures under the Illinois administrative
review law 1  are a debt due and owing the village and may be collected in
accordance with applicable law.
   B.   After expiration of the period in which judicial review under the
Illinois administrative review law may be sought for a final determination of
an ordinance violation, unless stayed by a court of competent jurisdiction, the
findings, decision, and order of the hearing officer may be enforced in the
same manner as a judgment entered by a court of competent jurisdiction.
   C.   In any case in which a defendant has failed to comply with a judgment
ordering a defendant to correct an ordinance violation or imposing any fine or
other sanction as a result of an ordinance violation, any expenses incurred by
the village to enforce the judgment, including, but not limited to, attorney
fees, court costs, and costs related to property demolition or foreclosure,
after they are fixed by a court of competent jurisdiction or a hearing officer,
shall be a debt due and owing the village and may be collected in accordance
with applicable law. Prior to any expenses being fixed by a hearing officer,
the village shall provide notice to the defendant that states that the
defendant shall appear at an ordinance administrative hearing before the
hearing officer to determine whether the defendant has failed to comply with
the judgment. The notice shall set the date for such an ordinance
administrative hearing, which shall not be less than seven (7) days from the
date that notice is served. If notice is served by mail, the seven (7) day
period shall begin to run on the date that the notice was deposited in the
mail.
   D.   Upon being recorded in the manner required by article XII of the code
of civil procedure 2  or by the uniform commercial code 3 , a lien shall be
imposed on the real estate or personal estate, or both, of the defendant in the
amount of any debt due and owing the village. The lien may be enforced in the
same manner as a judgment lien pursuant to a judgment of a court of competent
jurisdiction.
   E.   A hearing officer may set aside any judgment entered by default and set
a new hearing date, upon a petition filed within twenty one (21) days after the
issuance of the order of default, if the hearing officer determines that the
petitioner's failure to appear at the ordinance administrative hearing was for
good cause or at any time if the petitioner establishes that the village did
not provide proper service of process. If any judgment is set aside pursuant to
this subsection, the hearing officer shall have authority to enter an order
extinguishing any lien which has been recorded for any debt due and owing the
village as a result of the vacated default judgment. 65 Illinois Compiled
Statutes 5/1-2.1-8. (Ord. 1180, 7-15-2014)
 
Notes
1 1. 735 ILCS 5/3-101 et seq.
2 1. 735 ILCS 5/12-101 et seq.
3 2. 810 ILCS 5/1-101 et seq.
CHAPTER 21
VEHICLE ADMINISTRATIVE HEARINGS
SECTION:
1-21-1: Adjudication Of Violations Of Traffic Regulations Concerning The
Standing, Parking, Or Condition Of Vehicles
1-21-2: Definitions
1-21-3: Violation Notice
1-21-4: Service
1-21-5: Vehicle Administrative Adjudication
1-21-6: Additional Notices
1-21-7: Final Determinations Of Violation
1-21-8: Notice Of Impending Driver's License Suspension
1-21-9: Petition To Set Aside
1-21-10: Procedures For Nonappearance
1-21-11: Schedule Of Fines
1-21-12: Administrative Review
1-21-13: Judgment On Findings, Decision, Order
1-21-1: ADJUDICATION OF VIOLATIONS OF TRAFFIC REGULATIONS CONCERNING THE
STANDING, PARKING, OR CONDITION OF VEHICLES:
   A.   There is hereby established a system of administrative adjudication for
violations of traffic regulations concerning the standing, parking, or
condition of vehicles, the condition and use of vehicle equipment, and the
display of village wheel tax licenses. The function is to provide for the fair
and efficient enforcement of village regulations through the administrative
adjudication of violations as described in 625 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/11-
208.3.
   B.   The vehicle administrative hearing shall only have authority to
adjudicate civil offenses carrying fines not in excess of five hundred dollars
($500.00), except for the unauthorized use of parking places reserved for
persons with disabilities. (Ord. 1180, 7-15-2014)
1-21-2: DEFINITIONS:
For purposes of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply:
   TRAFFIC COMPLIANCE ADMINISTRATOR: An administrator who is authorized to:
   A.   Adopt, distribute and process parking, compliance and automated speed
enforcement system or automated traffic law violation notices and other
notices;
   B.   Collect money paid as fines and penalties for violations;
   C.   Operate a vehicle administrative hearing system; and
   D.   Make a certified report to the secretary of state under 625 Illinois
Compiled Statutes 5/6-306.5.
   VIOLATION: Standing and parking of vehicles, the condition and use of
vehicle equipment, and the display of village wheel tax licenses offenses as
described in 625 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/11-208.3. (Ord. 1180, 7-15-2014)
1-21-3: VIOLATION NOTICE:
   A.   A violation notice shall specify:
      1.   The date, time, and place of violation;
      2.   The particular regulation violated;
      3.   The fine and any penalty that may be assessed for late payment;
      4.   The vehicle make and state registration number; and
      5.   The identification number of the person issuing the notice.
   B.   The violation notice shall also:
      1.   State that the payment of any indicated fine, and the payment of any
applicable penalty for late payment shall operate as a final disposition of the
violation;
      2.   Contain information as to the availability of vehicle administrative
hearings in which the violation may be contested on its merits; and
      3.   Specify the time and manner in which vehicle administrative hearings
may be had. (Ord. 1180, 7-15-2014)
1-21-4: SERVICE:
   A.   Service of the violation notice shall be by affixing the original or a
facsimile of the notice to an unlawfully parked vehicle or by handing the
notice to the operator of a vehicle if they are present.
   B.   A person authorized by ordinance to issue and serve violation notices
shall certify as to the correctness of the facts entered on the violation
notice by signing their name to the notice at the time of service or in the
case of a notice produced by a computerized device, by signing a single
certificate to be kept by the traffic compliance administrator attesting to the
correctness of all notices produced by the device while it was under their
control.
   C.   The original or a facsimile of the violation notice or, in the case of
a notice produced by a computerized device, a printed record generated by the
device showing the facts entered on the notice, shall be retained by the
traffic compliance administrator, and shall be a record kept in the ordinary
course of business.
   D.   A violation notice issued, signed and served in accordance with this
chapter, a copy of the notice, or the computer generated record shall be prima
facie correct and shall be prima facie evidence of the correctness of the facts
shown on the notice. The notice, copy, or computer generated record shall be
admissible in any subsequent administrative or legal proceedings. (Ord. 1180,
7-15-2014)
1-21-5: VEHICLE ADMINISTRATIVE ADJUDICATION:
   A.   An opportunity for vehicle administrative hearing shall be granted for
the registered owner of the vehicle or the lessee of a vehicle under 625
Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/11-1306 cited in the violation notice to contest
the merits of the alleged violation.
   B.   Formal or technical rules of evidence shall not apply.
   C.   Vehicle administrative hearings shall be recorded.
   D.   The person conducting the vehicle administrative hearing on behalf of
the traffic compliance administrator shall be empowered to administer oaths and
to secure by subpoena both the attendance and testimony of witnesses and the
production of relevant books and papers.
   E.   Persons appearing at vehicle administrative hearings under this chapter
may be represented by counsel at their expense. (Ord. 1180, 7-15-2014)
1-21-6: ADDITIONAL NOTICES:
Service of additional notices shall be sent by first class United States mail,
postage prepaid, to the address of the registered owner of the cited vehicle as
recorded with the secretary of state or, if any notice to that address is
returned as undeliverable, to the last known address recorded in a United
States post office approved database, to the lessee of the cited vehicle at the
last address known to the lessor of the cited vehicle at the time of lease or,
if any notice to that address is returned as undeliverable, to the last known
address recorded in a United States post office approved database. The service
shall be deemed complete as of the date of deposit in the United States mail.
The notices shall be in the following sequence and shall include, but not be
limited to, the information specified herein:
   A.   Second Notice: A second notice of violation shall specify:
      1.   The date and location of the violation cited in the violation
notice;
      2.   The particular regulation violated;
      3.   The vehicle make and state registration number;
      4.   The fine and any penalty that may be assessed for late payment;
      5.   The availability of vehicle administrative hearings in which the
violation may be contested on its merits;
      6.   The time and manner in which vehicle administrative hearings may be
had;
      7.   That the failure to pay the indicated fine and any applicable
penalty, or to appear at vehicle administrative hearings on the merits in the
time and manner specified, will result in a final determination of violation
for the cited violation in the amount of the fine or penalty indicated; and
      8.   That, upon the occurrence of a final determination of violation for
the failure, and the exhaustion of, or failure to exhaust, available
administrative or judicial procedures for review, any unpaid fine or penalty,
will constitute a debt due and owing the village.
   B.   Final Notice: A notice of final determination of a violation shall be
sent following a final determination of violation and the conclusion of
judicial review procedures taken under this chapter. The notice shall:
      1.   State that the unpaid fine or penalty is a debt due and owing the
village; and
      2.   Contain warnings that failure to pay any fine or penalty due and
owing the village within the time specified may result in the village's filing
of a petition in the circuit court to have the unpaid fine or penalty rendered
a judgment as provided by this chapter, or may result in suspension of the
person's driver's license for failure to pay fines or penalties, or both, for
ten (10) or more parking violations under 625 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/6-
306.5. (Ord. 1180, 7-15-2014)
1-21-7: FINAL DETERMINATIONS OF VIOLATION:
A final determination of violation shall occur following failure to pay the
fine or penalty, after a hearing officer's determination of violation and the
exhaustion of or failure to exhaust any administrative review procedures. Where
a person fails to appear at vehicle administrative hearings to contest the
alleged violation in the time and manner specified in a prior mailed notice,
the hearing officer's determination of violation shall become final: a) upon
denial of a timely petition to set aside that determination, or b) upon
expiration of the period for filing the petition without a filing having been
made. (Ord. 1180, 7-15-2014)
1-21-8: NOTICE OF IMPENDING DRIVER'S LICENSE SUSPENSION:
A notice of impending driver's license suspension shall be sent to the person
liable for failure to pay any fine or penalty that remains due and owing, on
ten (10) or more parking violations. The notice shall state that failure to pay
the fine or penalty owing within forty five (45) days of the notice's date will
result in the village notifying the secretary of state that the person is
eligible for initiation of suspension proceedings under 625 Illinois Compiled
Statutes 5/6-306.5. The notice shall also state that the person may obtain a
photostatic copy of an original ticket imposing a fine or penalty by sending a
self- addressed, stamped envelope to the village along with a request for the
photostatic copy. The notice of impending driver's license suspension shall be
sent by first class United States mail, postage prepaid, to the address
recorded with the secretary of state or, if any notice to that address is
returned as undeliverable, to the last known address recorded in a United
States post office approved database. (Ord. 1180, 7-15-2014)
1-21-9: PETITION TO SET ASIDE:
   A.   A petition to set aside a determination of violation may be filed by a
person owing an unpaid fine or penalty. The petition shall be filed with the
village within twenty one (21) days of a final determination of violation. The
grounds for the petition are limited to:
      1.   The person not having been the owner or lessee of the cited vehicle
on the date the violation notice was issued;
      2.   The person having already paid the fine and penalty for the
violation in question; and
      3.   Excusable failure to appear at or request a new date for a vehicle
administrative hearing.
   B.   After the determination of violation has been set aside upon a showing
of just cause, the registered owner shall be provided with a vehicle
administrative hearing for that violation. (Ord. 1180, 7-15-2014)
1-21-10: PROCEDURES FOR NONAPPEARANCE:
Persons may contest the merits of the alleged violation without attending a
vehicle administrative hearing if submitted in writing and received by the
village prior to the vehicle administrative hearing. (Ord. 1180, 7-15-2014)
1-21-11: SCHEDULE OF FINES:
A schedule of civil fines for violations of vehicular standing, parking, or
compliance regulations pursuant to this chapter, and a schedule of penalties
for late payment of the fines, shall be allowed. (Ord. 1180, 7-15-2014)
1-21-12: ADMINISTRATIVE REVIEW:
The findings, decision and order of the hearing officer shall be subject to
review in the circuit court of Will County, and the provisions of the
administrative review law, and the rules adopted pursuant thereto are adopted
and shall apply to and govern every action for the judicial review of the final
findings, decision and order of a hearing officer under this chapter. (Ord.
1180, 7-15-2014)
1-21-13: JUDGMENT ON FINDINGS, DECISION, ORDER:
   A.   Any fine, penalty, or part of any fine or any penalty remaining unpaid
after the exhaustion of, or the failure to exhaust, administrative remedies and
the conclusion of any judicial review procedures shall be a debt due and owing
the village and, as such, may be collected in accordance with applicable law.
Payment in full of any fine or penalty shall constitute a final disposition of
that violation.
   B.   After the expiration of the period within which judicial review may be
sought for a final determination of violation, the village may commence a
proceeding in the circuit court of Will County for purposes of obtaining a
judgment on the final determination of violation. Nothing in this chapter shall
prevent the village from consolidating multiple final determinations of
violations against a person in a proceeding. Upon commencement of the action,
the village shall file a certified copy or record of the final determination of
violation, which shall be accompanied by a certification that recites facts
sufficient to show that the final determination of violation was issued in
accordance with this chapter and the applicable village ordinance. Service of
the summons and a copy of the petition may be by any method provided by 735
Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/2-203 or by certified mail, return receipt
requested, provided that the total amount of fines and penalties for final
determinations of violations does not exceed two thousand five hundred dollars
($2,500.00). If the court is satisfied that the final determination of
violation was entered in accordance with the requirements of this chapter and
the applicable village ordinance, and that the registered owner or the lessee,
as the case may be, had an opportunity for a vehicle administrative hearing and
for judicial review as provided in this chapter, the court shall render
judgment in favor of the village and against the registered owner or the lessee
for the amount indicated in the final determination of violation, plus costs.
The judgment shall have the same effect and may be enforced in the same manner
as other judgments for the recovery of money. (Ord. 1180, 7-15-2014)
CHAPTER 22
BUILDING CODE ADMINISTRATIVE HEARINGS
SECTION:
1-22-1: Adjudication Of Building Code Violations
1-22-2: Definitions
1-22-3: Procedures Not Exclusive
1-22-4: Instituting Proceedings
1-22-5: Representation
1-22-6: Subpoenas
1-22-7: Defaults
1-22-8: Continuances
1-22-9: Hearing; Evidence
1-22-10: Eviction; Rights Of The Occupants
1-22-11: Defenses To Code Violations
1-22-12: Findings, Decision, Order
1-22-13: Administrative Review
1-22-14: Judgment On Findings, Decision, Order
1-22-15: Sanctions Applicable To Owner; Property
1-22-16: Liability For Rent Collected During Time Of Violation
1-22-17: Maintenance Of Vacant Residential Real Estate
1-22-1: ADJUDICATION OF BUILDING CODE VIOLATIONS:
There is hereby established a system of administrative adjudication for
building code violations. The function is to expedite the prosecution and
correction of building code violations as set forth in this chapter. The
provisions as set forth in this chapter are for the administrative adjudication
of:
   A.   Any village ordinance, law, housing or building code or zoning
ordinance, that establishes construction, plumbing, heating, electrical, fire
prevention, sanitation or other health and safety standards that are applicable
to structures in the village; and
   B.   Any village ordinance that requires, after notice, the cutting of
weeds, the removal of garbage and debris, the removal of inoperable motor
vehicles, or the abatement of nuisances from private property. (Ord. 1180, 7-
15-2014)
1-22-2: DEFINITIONS:
For purposes of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply:
   BUILDING INSPECTOR: A state, county or village employee whose duties include
the inspection or examination of structures or property in the village to
determine if zoning or other code violations exist.
   CODE: Any village, building code or zoning ordinance that establishes
construction, plumbing, heating, electrical, fire prevention, sanitation or
other health and safety standards that are applicable to structures in the
village or any village ordinance that requires, after notice, the cutting of
weeds, the removal of garbage and debris, the removal of inoperable motor
vehicles, or the abatement of nuisances from private property.
   HEARING OFFICER: A village employee or an officer or agent of the village,
other than a building inspector or law enforcement officer, whose duty it is
to:
   A.   Preside at a building code administrative hearing called to determine
whether or not a code violation exists;
   B.   Hear testimony and accept evidence from the building inspector, the
building owner and all interested parties relevant to the existence of a code
violation;
   C.   Preserve and authenticate the transcript and record of the building
code administrative hearing and all exhibits and evidence introduced at the
building code administrative hearing;
   D.   Issue and sign a written finding, decision and order stating whether a
code violation exists.
   OWNER: The legal or beneficial owner of a structure. 65 Illinois Compiled
Statutes 5/11-31.1-1. (Ord. 1180, 7-15-2014)
1-22-3: PROCEDURES NOT EXCLUSIVE:
This chapter does not preclude the village from using other methods to enforce
village ordinances. 65 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/11-31.1-3. (Ord. 1180, 7-
15-2014)
1-22-4: INSTITUTING PROCEEDINGS:
   A.   When the building inspector finds a code violation while inspecting a
structure, the building inspector shall note the violation on a violation
notice, indicating the name and address of the structure owner, a citation to
the specific code provision or provisions alleged to have been violated, a
description of the circumstances present that constitute the alleged violation,
the date and time the violation was observed, the names of witnesses to the
violation, and the address of the structure where the violation is observed.
   B.   One copy of the violation report form shall be maintained in the files
of the building code adjudication department and shall be part of the record of
building code administrative hearing, one copy of the report form shall be
returned to the building inspector so that they may prepare evidence of the
code violation for presentation at the building code administrative hearing on
the date indicated, and one copy of the report form shall be served by personal
service or first class mail on the owner of the structure, along with a summons
commanding the owner to appear at the building code administrative hearing. If
the name of the owner of the structure cannot be ascertained or if service on
the owner cannot be made by personal service or mail, service may be made on
the owner by posting or nailing a copy of the violation report form on the
front door of the structure where the violation is found. 65 Illinois Compiled
Statutes 5/11-31.1-4. (Ord. 1180, 7-15-2014)
1-22-5: REPRESENTATION:
Parties shall be provided with an opportunity for a building code
administrative hearing, during which they may be represented by counsel,
present witnesses, and cross examine opposing witnesses. 65 Illinois Compiled
Statutes 5/11-31.1-6. (Ord. 1180, 7-15-2014)
1-22-6: SUBPOENAS:
At any time prior to the building code administrative hearing date, parties may
request the hearing officer to issue subpoenas to direct the attendance and
testimony of relevant witnesses and the production of relevant documents. 65
Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/11-31.1-5. (Ord. 1180, 7-15-2014)
1-22-7: DEFAULTS:
If on the building code administrative hearing date the owner or his attorney
fails to appear, the hearing officer may find the owner in default and shall
proceed with the building code administrative hearing and accept evidence
relevant to the existence of a code violation. 65 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/
11-31.1-5. (Ord. 1180, 7-15-2014)
1-22-8: CONTINUANCES:
No continuances shall be authorized by the hearing officer in proceedings under
this chapter except in cases where a continuance is absolutely necessary to
protect the rights of the owner. Lack of preparation shall not be grounds for a
continuance. 65 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/11-31.1-6. (Ord. 1180, 7-15-2014)
1-22-9: HEARING; EVIDENCE:
At the building code administrative hearing, a hearing officer shall preside
and shall hear testimony and accept any evidence relevant to the existence or
nonexistence of a code violation. The strict rules of evidence applicable to
judicial proceedings shall not apply. 65 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/11-31.1-
7. (Ord. 1180, 7-15-2014)
1-22-10: EVICTION; RIGHTS OF THE OCCUPANTS:
No action for eviction, abatement of a nuisance, forcible entry and detainer or
other similar proceeding shall be threatened or instituted against an occupant
of a dwelling solely because such occupant agrees to testify or testifies at a
building code administrative hearing. 65 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/11-31.1-
8. (Ord. 1180, 7-15-2014)
1-22-11: DEFENSES TO CODE VIOLATIONS:
It shall be a defense to a code violation charged under this chapter if the
owner, their attorney, or any other agent or representative proves to the
hearing officer's satisfaction that:
   A.   The code violation alleged in the notice does not in fact exist, or at
the time of the building code administrative hearing the violation has been
remedied or removed;
   B.   The code violation has been caused by the current property occupants
and that in spite of reasonable attempts by the owner to maintain the dwelling
free of such violations, the current occupants continue to cause the
violations; or
   C.   An occupant or resident of the dwelling has refused entry to the owner
or their agent to all or a part of the dwelling for the purpose of correcting
the code violation. 65 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/11-31.1-9. (Ord. 1180, 7-
15-2014)
1-22-12: FINDINGS, DECISION, ORDER:
At the conclusion of the building code administrative hearing, the hearing
officer shall make a determination based on the evidence presented, of whether
a code violation exists. The determination shall be in writing and shall
include a written finding of fact, decision, and order including the fine,
penalty, or action with which the defendant must comply. 65 Illinois Compiled
Statutes 5/11-31.1-10. (Ord. 1180, 7-15-2014)
1-22-13: ADMINISTRATIVE REVIEW:
The findings, decision and order of the hearing officer shall be subject to
review in the circuit court of Will County, and the provisions of the
administrative review law, and the rules adopted pursuant thereto are adopted
and shall apply to and govern every action for the judicial review of the final
findings, decision and order of a hearing officer under this chapter. 65
Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/11-31.1-11. (Ord. 1180, 7-15-2014)
1-22-14: JUDGMENT ON FINDINGS, DECISION, ORDER:
   A.   Any fine, other sanction or costs imposed, or part of any fine, other
sanction or costs imposed remaining unpaid after the exhaustion of, or the
failure to exhaust, judicial review procedures under the administrative review
law shall be a debt due and owing the village and, as such, may be collected in
accordance with applicable law.
   B.   After expiration of the period within which judicial review under the
administrative review law may be sought for a final determination of the code
violation, the village may commence a proceeding in the circuit court of Will
County for purposes of obtaining a judgment on the findings, decision and
order. Nothing in this section shall prevent the village from consolidating
multiple findings, decisions and orders against a person in such a proceeding.
Upon commencement of the action, the village shall file a certified copy of the
findings, decision and order, which shall be accompanied by a certification
that recites facts sufficient to show that the findings, decision and order was
issued in accordance with this chapter and the applicable village ordinance.
Service of the summons and a copy of the petition may be by any method provided
by 735 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/2-203 or by certified mail, return receipt
requested, provided that the total amount of fines, other sanctions and costs
imposed by the findings, decision and order does not exceed two thousand five
hundred dollars ($2,500.00). If the court is satisfied that the findings,
decision and order were entered in accordance with the requirements of this
chapter and the applicable village ordinance, and that the property owner had
an opportunity for a building code administrative hearing under this chapter
and for judicial review as provided in this chapter:
      1.   The court shall render judgment in favor of the village and against
the property owner for the amount indicated in the findings, decision and
order, plus costs. Such judgment shall have the same effect and may be enforced
in the same manner as other judgments for the recovery of money; and
      2.   The court may also issue such other orders and injunctions as are
requested by the village to enforce the order of the hearing officer to correct
a code violation. 65 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/11-31.1-11.1. (Ord. 1180, 7-
15-2014)
1-22-15: SANCTIONS APPLICABLE TO OWNER; PROPERTY:
The order to correct a code violation and the sanctions imposed by the village
as the result of a finding of a code violation under this chapter shall attach
to the property as well as to the owner of the property, so that a finding of a
code violation against one owner cannot be avoided by conveying or transferring
the property to another owner. Any subsequent transferee or owner of property
takes subject to the findings, decision and order of a hearing officer under
this chapter. 65 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/11-31.1-12. (Ord. 1180, 7-15-
2014)
1-22-16: LIABILITY FOR RENT COLLECTED DURING TIME OF VIOLATION:
   A.   The owner of a building located in a village in a county having a
population in excess of one hundred thousand (100,000) inhabitants who,
directly or indirectly, has collected, or caused to be collected, rentals from
an occupant of that building during a period in which the number of apartments
or family units in that building exceeded the number permitted for that
building by an ordinance of the village in which the building is located, is
liable to any such occupant in an amount equal to not more than three (3) times
the amount of any rentals paid by any such occupant, or in their behalf, after
January 1, 1970, together with court costs and reasonable attorney fees. If the
occupant is a recipient of public aid under 305 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/3-
1 et seq., 5/4-1 et seq., or 5/6-1 et seq., in whose behalf vendor payment of
the rental was made by the Illinois department of public aid, the department of
human services, acting as successor to the department of public aid under 20
Illinois Compiled Statutes 1305/1-1 et seq., or a local governmental unit, as
the case may be, the liability as herein provided is to the Illinois department
of public aid, the department of human services (acting as successor to the
department of public aid under the department of human services act), or the
local governmental unit making the vendor payment of the rental.
   B.   For the purposes of this section:
   FAMILY UNIT: A room or group of rooms used or intended to be used as a
housekeeping unit for living, sleeping, cooking and eating. The fact that any
such family unit is used or intended to be used with cooking or eating
accommodations in common with another family unit in any such building does not
affect liability hereunder.
   OWNER: The legal or beneficial owner of a building.
   C.   No liability accrues under this section until thirty (30) days after
the owner of record of a building has been notified in writing that such owner
is in violation of any such village ordinance. Such notice shall be personally
served upon such owner of record or sent by registered mail to the last known
address of such owner. 65 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/11-31.1-12.1. (Ord.
1180, 7-15-2014)
1-22-17: MAINTENANCE OF VACANT RESIDENTIAL REAL ESTATE:
   A.   A person who contracts with the federal government or any of its
agencies, including, without limitation, the department of housing and urban
development, to care for vacant residential real estate shall be responsible
for maintaining the property to prevent and correct village health and safety
code violations.
   B.   A person who intentionally violates this section is guilty of a
business offense and shall be fined not less than five hundred one dollars
($501.00) and not more than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00). 65 Illinois
Compiled Statutes 5/11-31.1-12.2. (Ord. 1180, 7-15-2014)
TITLE 2
BUSINESS REGULATIONS
CHAPTER 1
GENERAL LICENSE REGULATIONS
SECTION:
2-1-1: Licenses
2-1-2: Payment Of Fees
2-1-3: Revocation Of License
2-1-4: Condition Of Premises; Nuisance
2-1-5: Penalty
2-1-1: LICENSES:
Applications for all licenses required by village ordinance shall be made in
writing to the village clerk, unless otherwise specifically provided. All
licenses shall be issued by the clerk unless otherwise specifically provided,
and shall be for the term of one year, terminating at the end of the fiscal
year of the village unless specific provision to the contrary is made by
ordinance. (1928 Code §129)
2-1-2: PAYMENT OF FEES:
All fees required must be paid in full before any license shall be issued. When
application for a license is made after six (6) months of the current license
year have expired, a license shall be issued for the remainder of the year for
one- half (1/2) the annual fee. (1928 Code §130)
2-1-3: REVOCATION OF LICENSE:
Any license issued under any village ordinance provision may be revoked by the
president and board of trustees upon a violation by the licensee of the
ordinance provisions relating to the license, the premises occupied or the
subject matter of the license. (1928 Code §131)
2-1-4: CONDITION OF PREMISES; NUISANCE:
No business, licensed or not, shall be so conducted, by reason of the manner of
operation or the condition of the premises occupied, as to be a nuisance. (1928
Code §132)
2-1-5: PENALTY:
Any person convicted of a violation of any section or provision of this chapter
shall be punished by a fine as established in section
1-4-1 of this code for any one offense. (Ord. 791, 8-5-2003; amd. Ord. 1061, 4-
20-2010)
CHAPTER 2
MUNICIPAL OCCUPATION TAXES
SECTION:
2-2-1: Municipal Retailers' Occupation Tax
2-2-2: Municipal Service Occupation Tax
2-2-3: Hotel/Motel Operator's Occupation Tax
2-2-4: Municipal Electricity Use Tax
2-2-5: Motor Fuel Tax
2-2-6: Municipal Gas Use Tax
2-2-7: Municipal Cannabis Retailers’ Occupation Tax
2-2-1: MUNICIPAL RETAILERS' OCCUPATION TAX:
A tax is hereby imposed upon all persons engaged in the business of selling
tangible personal property, other than an item of tangible personal property
titled or registered with an agency of the state of Illinois, at retail at the
rate of 1.0 percent of the gross receipts from such sales made in the course of
such business. This tax shall not be applicable to the sales of food for human
consumption which is to be consumed off the premises where it is sold (other
than alcoholic beverages, soft drinks and food that has been prepared for
immediate consumption) and prescription and nonprescription medicines, drugs,
medical appliances and insulin, urine testing materials, syringes and needles
used by diabetics. The imposition of this home rule tax is in accordance with
the provisions of section 8-11-1 of the Illinois municipal code 1 .
A minimum of fifty percent (50%) of the proceeds from this tax shall be
allocated to fund capital infrastructure projects including, but not limited
to: street, curbs, drainage, water, sewer, alleys, and sidewalks. The remaining
proceeds shall be allocated to street maintenance and repair.
The taxes hereby imposed, and civil penalties that may be assessed as an
incident thereto, shall be collected and enforced by the Illinois department of
revenue. The department of revenue shall have full power to administer and
enforce the provisions of this section. (Ord. 974, 9-18-2007)
 
Notes
1 1. 65 ILCS 5/8-11-1.
2-2-2: MUNICIPAL SERVICE OCCUPATION TAX:
A tax is hereby imposed upon all persons engaged in the business of making
sales of service, at the rate of 1.0 percent of the selling price of all
tangible personal property transferred by such servicemen as an incident to a
sale of service. This tax shall not be applicable on the sales of food for
human consumption that is to be consumed off the premises where it is sold
(other than alcoholic beverages, soft drinks and food that has been prepared
for immediate consumption) and prescription and nonprescription medicines,
drugs, medical appliances and insulin, urine testing materials, syringes and
needles used by diabetics. The imposition of this home rule tax is in
accordance with the provisions of section 8-11-5 of the Illinois municipal code
1 .
A minimum of fifty percent (50%) of the proceeds from this tax shall be
allocated to fund capital infrastructure projects including, but not limited
to: street, curbs, drainage, water, sewer, alleys, and sidewalks. The remaining
proceeds shall be allocated to street maintenance and repair.
The taxes hereby imposed, and civil penalties that may be assessed as an
incident thereto, shall be collected and enforced by the Illinois department of
revenue. The department of revenue shall have full power to administer and
enforce the provisions of this section. (Ord. 974, 9-18-2007)
 
Notes
1 1. 65 ILCS 5/8-11-5.
2-2-3: HOTEL/MOTEL OPERATORS' OCCUPATION TAX:
   A.   Definitions: As used in this section, unless the context otherwise
requires, the terms specified have the meanings ascribed to them:
   HOTEL ACCOMMODATIONS: A room or rooms in any building or structure kept,
used, maintained, advertised or held out to be an inn, motel, hotel, tourist
home or court, lodging house, rooming house and apartment house, or place where
sleeping, rooming, office, conference or exhibition accommodations are
furnished for consideration, whether with or without meals.
   OCCUPANCY: The use or possession, or the right to the use or possession, of
any room or rooms in a hotel for any purpose, or the right to the use or
possession of the furnishings or to the services and accommodations
accompanying the use and possession of the room or rooms.
   OPERATOR: Any person operating a hotel.
   PERMANENT RESIDENT: Any person who occupied or has the right to occupy any
room or rooms, regardless of whether or not it is the same room or rooms, in a
hotel for at least thirty (30) consecutive days.
   PERSON: Any natural individual, firm, partnership, association, joint stock
company, joint adventure, public or private corporation, limited liability
company, or a receiver, executor, trustee, guardian or other representative
appointed by order of any court. Whenever the term "person" is used in any
clause prescribing and imposing a penalty, the term as applied to associations
shall mean the owners or part owners thereof, and as applied to corporations,
the officers thereof.
   RENT OR RENTAL: The consideration received for occupancy, valued in money,
whether received in money or otherwise, including all receipts, cash, credits
and property or services of any kind or nature.
   ROOM OR ROOMS: Any living quarters, sleeping or housekeeping accommodations.
   B.   Tax Imposed; Exemption:
      1.   There is hereby imposed and shall immediately accrue and be
collected a tax upon the rental or leasing of any hotel accommodation in the
village at the rate of five percent (5%) of the gross rental or leasing charge.
      2.   The tax imposed under this section shall not apply to the renting or
leasing of any hotel accommodations to permanent residents. If hotel
accommodations are provided for both permanent residents and other guests, the
rental obtained from the permanent residents shall not be included in the
computation of the tax due.
   C.   Liability For Payment Of Tax: The ultimate incidence of and liability
for payment of said tax shall be borne by the lessee or tenant of any such
hotel room. The tax herein levied shall be in addition to any and all other
taxes, and it shall be the duty of every owner, manager or operator of hotel
accommodations to secure said tax from the lessee or tenant of said hotel
accommodations and pay over to the village said tax under rules and regulations
prescribed by the finance director of the village and as otherwise provided by
this section.
   D.   Collection Of Tax: The tax herein levied shall be secured by the hotel
owner, manager or operator from the lessee or tenant when collecting the price,
charge or rent to which it applies. Every lessee or tenant shall be given a
bill, invoice, receipt or other statement or memorandum of the price, charge or
rent payable upon which the hotel accommodations tax shall be stated, charged
and shown separately.
   E.   Filing Of Return: Every owner, manager or operator of hotel
accommodations shall file a sworn tax return on a quarterly basis with the
finance director on forms prescribed by the village showing tax receipts
received with respect to hotel accommodations rented or leased during the
preceding quarterly period. At the time of filing of said tax return, the
owner, manager or operator of hotel accommodations shall remit to the village
all taxes due for the period to which the tax return applies. The dates upon
which said quarterly returns are to be filed shall be provided by rules and
regulations promulgated by the director of finance.
   F.   Failure To Pay Tax: If for any reason any tax is not paid when due, a
penalty at the rate of two percent (2%) per month on the amount of tax which
remains unpaid shall be added and collected. Whenever any person shall fail to
pay, collect, or remit any tax as provided in this section, upon the request of
the finance director, the village counsel shall bring or cause to be brought an
action to enforce the payment of said tax on behalf of the village in any court
of competent jurisdiction.
   G.   Records Kept: Every owner, manager or operator of hotel accommodations
in the village shall keep books and records showing the prices, rents or
charges made or charged and occupancies taxable under this section. The finance
director or his designee shall, at all reasonable times, have full access to
said books and records.
   H.   Disposition Of Proceeds Of Tax: The proceeds resulting from the
imposition of the tax under this section shall be paid into the treasury of the
village and shall be credited to and deposited in the corporate fund of the
village to be used solely for the purpose of promoting tourism and conventions
within the village. (Ord. 975, 9-18-2007)
   I.   Penalties: Any person violating any of the terms or provisions of this
section shall be fined as established in section
1-4-1 of this code for each offense. Every day upon which such violation shall
occur and upon which such violation shall continue shall constitute a separate
offense. (Ord. 975, 9-18-2007; amd. Ord. 1061, 4-20-2010)
2-2-4: MUNICIPAL ELECTRICITY USE TAX:
   A.   Definitions: For the purpose of this section, the following definitions
shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different
meaning:
   EXEMPT PURCHASER: A purchaser who has applied for and received a resale
number for the resale of electricity from the village comptroller/manager.
   GROSS RECEIPTS: The consideration received for distributing, supplying,
furnishing or selling electricity for use or consumption and not for resale, as
the case may be; and for all services rendered in connection therewith valued
in money, whether received in money or otherwise, including cash, credit,
services and property of every kind and material and for all services rendered
therewith; and shall be determined without any deduction on account of the cost
of transmitting the messages without any deduction on account of the cost of
materials used, labor or service costs or any other expenses.
   PERSON: Any natural individual, firm, trust, estate, partnership,
association, joint stock company, joint venture, corporation, limited liability
company, municipal corporation, the state or any of its political subdivisions,
any state university created by statute, or a receiver, trustee, conservator or
other representative appointed by order of any court.
   PERSON MAINTAINING A PLACE OF BUSINESS IN THIS STATE: Any person having or
maintaining within this state, directly or by a subsidiary or other affiliate,
an office, generation facility, distribution facility, transmission facility,
sales office or other place of business, or any employee, agent, or other
representative operating within this state under the authority of the person or
its subsidiary or other affiliate, irrespective of whether such place of
business or agent or other representative is located in this state permanently
or temporarily, or whether such person, subsidiary or other affiliate is
licensed or qualified to do business in this state.
   PURCHASE AT RETAIL: Any acquisition of electricity by a purchaser for
purposes of use or consumption, and not for resale, but shall not include the
use of electricity by a public utility, as defined in section 8-11-2 of the
Illinois municipal code 1 , directly in the generation, production,
transmission, delivery or sale of electricity.
   PURCHASER: Any person who uses or consumes, within the corporate limits of
the village, electricity acquired in a purchase at retail, other than an exempt
purchaser.
   TAX COLLECTOR: The person delivering electricity to the purchaser. (Ord.
1058, 4-20-2010, eff. 7-1-2010)
   B.   Tax Imposed On The Consumption Of Electricity: The corporate
authorities hereby find that the recitals contained in the preamble to the
ordinance codified herein are true and correct, and incorporate the recitals
into this section by reference.
      1.   Pursuant to section 8-11-2 of the Illinois municipal code 2 , the
rate of tax imposed upon the privilege of using or consuming electricity
acquired in a purchase at retail and used or consumed within the corporate
limits of the village shall be amended to provide for the following rates,
calculated on a monthly basis for each purchaser:
         a.   For the first two thousand (2,000) kilowatt hours used or
consumed in a month: 0.61 cents per kilowatt hour;
         b.   For the next forty eight thousand (48,000) kilowatt hours used or
consumed in a month: 0.40 cents per kilowatt hour;
         c.   For the next fifty thousand (50,000) kilowatt hours used or
consumed in a month: 0.36 cents per kilowatt hour;
         d.   For the next four hundred thousand (400,000) kilowatt hours used
or consumed in a month: 0.35 cents per kilowatt hour;
         e.   For the next five hundred thousand (500,000) kilowatt hours used
or consumed in a month: 0.34 cents per kilowatt hour;
         f.   For the next two million (2,000,000) kilowatt hours used or
consumed in a month: 0.32 cents per kilowatt hour;
         g.   For the next two million (2,000,000) kilowatt hours used or
consumed in a month: 0.315 cents per kilowatt hour;
         h.   For the next five million (5,000,000) kilowatt hours used or
consumed in a month: 0.31 cents per kilowatt hour;
         i.   For the next ten million (10,000,000) kilowatt hours used or
consumed in a month: 0.305 cents per kilowatt hour;
         j.   For all electricity used or consumed in excess of twenty million
(20,000,000) kilowatt hours in a month: 0.30 cents per kilowatt hour.
      2.   The tax is in addition to all taxes, fees and other revenue measures
imposed by the village in the state of Illinois or any other political
subdivision of the state. (Ord. 1075, 12-21-2010, eff. 5-1-2011)
      3.   Notwithstanding any other provision of this section, the tax shall
not be imposed if and to the extent that imposition or collection of the tax
would violate the constitution or statutes of the United States or the
constitution of the state of Illinois.
   C.   Tax In Addition To Other Payments: The tax authorized by this section
shall be in addition to the payment of money or value of products or services
furnished to this village by the taxpayer as compensation for the use of its
streets, alleys, or other public places or installation and maintenance
therein, thereon or thereunder of poles, wires, pipes, or other equipment used
in the operation of the taxpayer's business.
   D.   Collection:
      1.   The tax authorized by this section shall be collected from the
purchaser by the person maintaining a place of business in this state who
delivers the electricity to the purchaser. This tax shall constitute a debt of
the purchaser to the person who delivers the electricity to the purchaser and
if unpaid, is recoverable in the same manner as the original charge for
delivering the electricity. Any tax required to be collected pursuant to this
section and any such tax collected by a person delivering electricity shall
constitute a debt owed to the municipality by such person delivering the
electricity provided that the person delivering electricity shall be allowed a
credit for such tax related to deliveries of electricity the charges for which
are written off as uncollectible and provided further, that if such charges are
thereafter collected, the delivering supplier shall be obligated to remit such
tax. Persons delivering electricity shall also be authorized to add to such
gross charge an amount equal to three percent (3%) of the tax to reimburse the
person delivering electricity for the expense incurred in keeping records,
billing customers, preparing and filing returns, remitting the tax and
supplying data to the municipality upon request. If the person delivering
electricity fails to collect the tax from the purchaser, then the purchaser
shall be required to pay the tax directly to the municipality in the manner
prescribed by the municipality. Persons delivering electricity who file returns
pursuant to this subsection shall, at the time of filing such return, pay the
municipality the amount of the tax collected pursuant to this section. In the
event a purchaser shall make only a partial payment of any bill supplied to
him, her or it by the supplier, any such partial payment not specifically
identified by the purchaser to be applied to the tax imposed by this section
shall be deemed to be for the delivery of electricity.
      2.   On or before the last day of August 2010, each tax collector shall
make a return to the village treasurer for the month of July 2010, stating:
         a.   His name;
         b.   His principal place of business;
         c.   His kilowatt hours for the month which form the basis of the tax
imposed;
         d.   Amount of tax;
         e.   Such other reasonable and related information as the corporate
authorities may require.
On or before the last day of every month thereafter, each tax collector shall
make a like return to the village treasurer for a corresponding one month
period.
The tax collector making the return herein provided for shall, at the time of
making such return, pay to the village treasurer, the amount of tax herein
imposed; provided that in connection with any return the tax collector may, if
he so elects, report and pay an amount based upon his total billings of
business subject to the tax during the period for which the return is made
(exclusive of any amounts previously billed) with prompt adjustments of later
payments based upon any differences between such billings and the taxable gross
receipts.
      3.   If it shall appear that an amount of tax has been paid which was not
due under the provisions of this section, whether as the result of a mistake of
fact or an error of law, then such amount shall be credited against any tax
due, or to become due, under this section from the taxpayer or tax collector
who made the erroneous payment; provided that no amounts erroneously paid more
than three (3) years prior to the filing of a claim therefor shall so be
credited.
      4.   No action to recover any amount of tax due under the provisions of
this section shall be commenced more than three (3) years after the due date of
such amount. (Ord. 1058, 4-20-2010, eff. 7-1-2010)
 
Notes
1 1. 65 ILCS 5/8-11-2.
2 2. 65 ILCS 5/8-11-2.
2-2-5: MOTOR FUEL TAX:
   A.   Motor Fuel Tax; Imposition: Commencing with retail purchases of motor
fuel made on May 1, 2010, and for all such purchases made thereafter, there
shall hereby be imposed and levied a tax upon the retail purchase of motor fuel
within the corporate limits of the village, at the rate of two cents ($0.02)
per gallon or fraction thereof irrespective of the unit of measure in which
such motor fuel is actually purchased. The tax hereby imposed shall be in
addition to any and all other taxes imposed thereon. Each motor fuel retailer
within the village shall have the duty to secure the payment of the tax hereby
imposed from the purchaser of the motor fuel at the time such motor fuel
retailer collects the purchase price from such purchaser, and to transmit the
tax so collected as hereinafter provided. Nothing herein shall be construed to
impose any tax whatsoever on the occupation of persons engaged in the sale of
motor fuel, and the ultimate incidence of and liability for the payment of the
tax hereby imposed shall at all times be borne by the retail purchaser of motor
fuel. As used in this chapter, the term "motor fuel" shall have the meaning
ascribed thereto in the motor fuel tax law, 35 Illinois Compiled Statutes 505/
1 et seq., the term "motor fuel retailer" shall mean any person engaged within
the limits of the village in the business of selling motor fuel to purchasers
for use or consumption and not for resale in any form, and the term "person"
shall have the meaning ascribed thereto in the motor fuel tax law, 35 Illinois
Compiled Statutes 505/1 et seq.
   B.   Collection And Payment Of Tax; Filing Of Return: Not later than the
last day of each calendar month, each motor fuel retailer within the village of
Manhattan shall hereby be obligated to transmit to the village finance
department a sum of money equal to the amount of motor fuel tax collected by
such motor fuel retailer during the preceding calendar month, together with a
return containing an accounting thereof, to be made on such forms as are
provided by the village finance department from time to time, and which shall
at a minimum state the gross number of gallons of motor fuel purchased from
such motor fuel retailer during such preceding calendar month.
   C.   Registration; Recordkeeping: Each motor fuel retailer located within
the village shall register with the village on forms provided from time to time
by the finance department. Furthermore, each motor fuel retailer located within
the village shall have the duty and obligation to maintain full and complete
books and records showing the gross number of gallons purchased in each day and
each calendar month from such motor fuel retailer, the gross receipts in each
day and each calendar month resulting from such purchases, and the amount of
motor fuel tax collected each day and each calendar month from the purchasers
of such motor fuel pursuant to the provisions of this section. Such records
shall be available within the village for examination and audit during all
regular business hours of the village finance department.
   D.   Late Payment Charges:
      1.   In the event that any motor fuel retailer required under this
section to file a motor fuel tax return to the village fails in any given
calendar month:
         a.   To file such return when and as required under this section; or
         b.   To transmit the entire amount of motor fuel tax due and payable
to the village as and when due and payable pursuant to this section, such
person shall pay to the village, in addition to the entire amount of tax
required to be transmitted, a late payment charge of five percent (5%) of the
entire amount of such tax that such person is required to have been transmitted
to the village.
      2.   In addition to the foregoing late payment charge, any amount of tax
not transmitted when due shall bear interest at the rate of two percent (2%)
per month, or fraction thereof, until fully transmitted to the village as
required by this section.
      3.   Whenever any person shall fail to pay any tax as herein provided,
the village attorney shall, upon the request of the finance director, bring or
cause to be brought an action to enforce the payment of said tax on behalf of
the village in any court of competent jurisdiction.
   E.   Penalty: In addition to any late payment charges, any person found
guilty of violating, disobeying, omitting, neglecting, or refusing to comply
with or resisting or opposing the enforcement of any of the provisions of this
section, shall be punishable as provided under section
1-4-1 of this code. Each day that a violation continues shall be deemed a
separate offense. (Ord. 1059, 4-20-2010)
2-2-6: MUNICIPAL GAS USE TAX:
   A.   Short Title The tax imposed by this Section shall be known as the
"Municipal Gas Use Tax" and is imposed in addition to all other taxes Imposed
by the Village of Manhattan, the State of Illinois, or any other municipal
corporation or political subdivision thereof.
   B.   Definitions For the purpose of this Section, the following definitions
shall apply:
      PERSON: Any individual, firm, trust, estate, partnership, association,
Joint stock company, joint venture, corporation, limited liability company,
municipal corporation or political subdivision of this state, or a receiver,
trustee, conservator or other representative appointed by order of any court.
      PUBLIC UTILITY: A public utility as defined in Section 3-105 of the
Public Utilities Act.
      PUBLIC UTILITIES ACT: The Public Utilities Act as amended, (220 ILCS 5/1-
101 et seq.).
      RETAIL PURCHASER: Any Person who purchases gas in a Sale at Retail.
      SALE AT RETAIL: Any sale of gas by a retailer to a Person for use or
consumption, and not for resale. For this purpose, the term "retailer'' means
any Person engaged in the business of distributing, supplying, furnishing or
selling gas.
   C.   Tax:
      1.   Except as otherwise provided by this Section, a tax is Imposed on
the privilege of using or consuming gas in the Village that is purchased in a
Sale at Retail at the rate of four ($.04) cent(s) per therm.
      2.   The ultimate incidence of and liability for payment of the tax Is on
the Retail Purchaser, and nothing in this Section shall be construed to Impose
a tax on the occupation of distributing, supplying, furnishing, selling or
transporting gas.
      3.   The Retail Purchaser shall pay the tax, measured by therms of gas
delivered to the Retail Purchaser's premises, to the Public Utility designated
to collect the tax pursuant to subsection D. of this Section on or before the
payment due date of the Public Utility's bill first reflecting the tax, or
directly to the Village Treasurer on or before the fifteenth day of the second
month following the month in which the gas is delivered to the Retail Purchaser
if no Public Utility has been designated to collect the tax pursuant to
Subsection D. or if the gas is delivered by a person other than a Public
Utility so designated.
      4.   Nothing In this Section shall be construed to impose a tax upon any
person, business or activity which, under the constitutions of the United
States or State of Illinois, may not be made the subject of taxation by the
Village.
      5.   A Person who purchases gas for resale and therefore does not pay the
tax Imposed by this Section with respect to the use or consumption of the gas,
but who later uses or consumes part or all of the gas, shall pay the tax
directly to the Village Treasurer on or before the fifteenth day of the second
month following the month in which the gas is used or consumed.
      6.   The tax shall apply to gas for which the delivery to the Retail
Purchaser is billed by a Public Utility on or after May 1, 2011.
      7.   If it shall appear that an amount of tax has been paid which was not
due under the provisions of this Section, whether as a result of mistake of
fact or an error of law, then such amount shall be:
         a.   Credited against any tax due, or to become due, under this
Section from the taxpayer who made the erroneous payment; or
         b.   Subject to a refund if no such tax is due or to become due;
provided that no amounts erroneously paid more than three (3) years prior to
the filing of a claim therefore shall be so credited or refunded.
      8.   No action to recover any amount of tax due under the provisions of
this Section shall be commenced more than three (3) years after the due date of
such amount.
   D.   Collection of tax by Public Utility. The Village President and Village
Administrator are each authorized to enter into a contract for collection of
the tax imposed by this Section with any Public Utility providing gas service
in the Village. The contract shall include and substantially conform with the
following provisions:
      1.   The Public Utility will collect the tax from Retail Purchasers as an
independent contractor;
      2.   The Public Utility will remit collected taxes to the Village
Treasurer no more often than once each month;
      3.   The Public Utility will be entitled to withhold from tax collections
a service fee equal to three percent (3%) of the amounts collected and timely
remitted to the Village Treasurer;
      4.   The Public Utility shall not be responsible to the Village for any
tax not actually collected from a Retail Purchaser; and
      5.   Such additional terms as the parties may agree upon.
   E.   Books and records. Every taxpayer shall keep accurate books and
records, including original source documents and books of entry, denoting the
activities or transactions that gave rise, or may have given rise to any tax
liability or exemption under this Section. All such books and records shall, at
all times during business hours, be subject to and available for inspection by
the Village. (Ord. 1491-25, 5-6-2025)
2-2-7: MUNICIPAL CANNABIS RETAILERS’ OCCUPATION TAX:
   A.   Tax imposed; Rate.
      1.   A tax is hereby imposed upon all persons engaged in the business of
selling cannabis, other than cannabis purchased under the Compassionate Use of
Medical Cannabis Pilot Program Act, at retail in the Village at the rate of
three percent (3%) of the gross receipts from these sales made in the course of
that business.
      2.   The imposition of this tax is in accordance with the provisions of
Sections 8-11-22, of the Illinois Municipal Code (65 ILCS 5/8-11-22).
   B.   Collection of tax by retailers.
      1.   The tax imposed by this section shall be remitted by such retailer
to the Illinois Department of Revenue (Department). Any tax required to be
collected pursuant to or as authorized by this section and any such tax
collected by such retailer and required to be remitted to the Department shall
constitute a debt owed by the retailer to the State. Retailers may reimburse
themselves for their seller's tax liability hereunder by separately stating
that tax as an additional charge, which charge may be stated in combination, in
a single amount, with any State tax that sellers are required to collect.
      2.   The taxes hereby imposed, and all civil penalties that may be
assessed as an incident thereto, shall be collected and enforced by the
Department. The Department shall have full power to administer and enforce the
provisions of this section.
   C.   Effective Date. This Section shall be in full force and effect from and
after its passage and approval and publication as required by law, provided,
however, that the tax provided for herein shall take effect for all sales on or
after the first day of September, 2020, unless an earlier effective date is
allowed by law. Copies of this Section shall be certified and sent to the
Illinois Department of Revenue prior to September 30, 2019.
(Ord. 1298-19, 9-3-2019; amd. Ord. 1491-25, 5-6-2025)
CHAPTER 3
LIQUOR CONTROL REGULATIONS
SECTION:
2-3-1: Purpose
2-3-2: Definitions
2-3-3: Local Liquor Control Commissioner
2-3-4: License Required
2-3-5: Application for License
2-3-6: Restrictions on Issuance of License
2-3-7: Classification of Licenses; Fees
2-3-8: Bond; Insurance
2-3-9: Issuance of License
2-3-10: Number of Licenses Issued
2-3-11: Term Of License; Disposition Of Fees; Transfer Of License; Death Of
Licensee
2-3-12: Renewal of License
2-3-13: Conditions of License
2-3-14: Record of Licenses Kept
2-3-15: Building and Location Restrictions
2-3-16: Sanitary Conditions
2-3-17: Conduct of Business
2-3-18: Minors
2-3-19: Sale to Certain Persons Prohibited
2-3-20: Entry Powers
2-3-21: Suspension or Revocation of License
2-3-22: Penalties
2-3-1: PURPOSE:
This Chapter shall be liberally construed, to the end that the health, safety
and welfare of the inhabitants of the Village shall be protected and temperance
in the consumption of alcoholic liquors shall be fostered and promoted by sound
and careful control and regulation of the sale of alcoholic liquors. (Ord. 459,
12-21-77)
2-3-2: DEFINITIONS:
Unless the context otherwise requires, the words or phrases defined are used in
this Chapter in the sense given them in the following definitions:
ALCOHOLIC      Shall include spirits, wine, beer, ale and every other liquor or solid containing
LIQUOR:        alcohol, spirits, wine or beer capable of being consumed as a beverage by human
               beings.
               Shall include the sale, gift, transfer, pledge or assignment of not less than
               five percent (5%) of the issued and outstanding stock of a corporation in an
ALIENABLE or   amount equal to not less than five percent (5%) of the total stock of such
TRANSFERABLE:  corporation issued and outstanding at the time of such issuance, to a person or
               persons or other legal entity which was not the owner or holder of at least five
               percent (5%) of the stock of such corporation at the time of issuance of the
               present liquor license to such corporation.
               Any public place kept, used, maintained, advertised and held out to the public as
               a place where alcoholic liquor is offered for sale to the public for consumption
BAR:           on the licensed premises or for consumption off the licensed premises when sold
               to the public in its original package. The service of food or meals is incidental
               to the service of alcoholic liquor.
               A beverage obtained by alcoholic fermentation of an infusion or concoction of
BEER:          barley, or other grain, malt and hops in water, and includes, among other things,
               beer, ale, stout, lager beer, porter and the like.
               Means (i) an open-air enclosed area connected to otherwise licensed premises and
BEER GARDEN:   owned or rented by the licensee or (ii) an enclosed pavilion located on property
               that is connected to otherwise licensed premises and owned or rented by the
               licensee.
BOWLING        Any establishment or building, or any part thereof, wherein the game of bowling
ALLEYS:        with composition balls and ten wooden pins is played.
               An establishment where beer is manufactured in quantities not exceeding those
BREW PUB:      prescribed for a Brew Pub license by the State of Illinois in the Liquor Control
               Act, with the primary distribution in an adjoining restaurant where food is
               served.
               A corporation organized under the laws of this State, and not for pecuniary
CLUB:          profit, solely for the promotion of some common object other than the sale or
               consumption of alcoholic liquor, which conforms to the definition of a “club” in
               235 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/1-3.24, or as the same may be hereafter amended.
GAS STATION    A store engaged primarily in the retail sale of limited groceries and convenience
CONVENIENCE    items in connection with the sale of gasoline and/or diesel fuel, and for which
STORE:         the sale of alcoholic liquors is incidental.
LICENSEE:      Any person, firm, corporation, partnership or club holding a license under the
               provisions of this Chapter.
LIVE           A person or persons acting, singing, playing an instrument, playing of
ENTERTAINMENT: prerecorded music (excluding standard juke boxes) or otherwise performing in
               person for compensation or profit.
MICRO-BREWERY: An establishment where beer is manufactured in quantities not exceeding those
               prescribed for a Class 1 Brewer license by the State of Illinois.
               Every building or other structure kept, used, maintained, advertised and held out
               to the public to be a place where meals are actually and regularly served and
               consumed and where sleeping accommodations are offered for any pay to travelers
               and guests, whether transient, permanent or residential, in which twenty five
MOTEL:         (25) or more rooms are used for the sleeping accommodations of such guests and
               having one or more public dining rooms where meals are served to such guests,
               such sleeping accommodations and dining rooms being conducted in the same
               building or buildings, in connection there with, and such building or buildings,
               structure or structures being provided with adequate and sanitary dining room and
               kitchen equipment and capacity.
               The retail sale of spirits, wine, beer, ale and every other liquor or solid
PACKAGE        containing alcohol, spirits, wine or beer capable of being consumed as a beverage
LIQUOR:        by human beings for consumption in the original package off the premises where
               the same are sold.
               Any public place kept, used, maintained, advertised and held out to the public as
               a place where meals are served, and where meals are actually served without
RESTAURANT:    sleeping accommodations, such space being provided with adequate and sanitary
               kitchen and dining equipment and capacity and having employed therein a
               sufficient number and kind of employees to prepare, cook and serve suitable food
               for its guests.
               Any transfer, exchange or barter in any manner or by any means whatsoever for a
SELL:          consideration, and includes and means all sales made by any person whether
               principal, proprietor, agent, servant or employee.
SELL AT RETAIL
and SALE AT    Refer to and mean sales for use and consumption and not for resale in any form.
RETAIL:
               Includes to solicit or receive an order for, or keep or expose for sale and to
TO SELL:       keep with intent to sell. (Ord. 459, 12-21-77; amd. Ord. 592, 12-21-93; Ord.
               3236, 3-16-20; Ord. 1433-23, 10-17-2023)
 
2-3-3: LOCAL LIQUOR CONTROL COMMISSIONER:
The Village President is hereby authorized to be the Local Liquor Control
Commissioner and shall be charged with the administration of the Liquor Control
Act, chapter 235 of the Illinois Compiled Statutes, and of such ordinances and
resolutions relating to alcoholic liquor as may be needed. The Village
President may appoint a person or persons to assist him in the exercise of the
power and performances of the duties provided for such Local Liquor Control
Commissioner. (Ord. 459, 12-21-77)
2-3-4: LICENSE REQUIRED:
It shall be unlawful for any person to sell or offer for sale at retail in the
Village any alcoholic liquor without having a retail liquor dealer's license or
in violation of the terms of such license. (Ord. 459, 12-21-77)
2-3-5: APPLICATION FOR LICENSE:
Application for such license shall be made to and filed with the Village
President, shall be in writing, signed by the applicant, if an individual, or a
duly authorized agent thereof if a corporation, verified by oath or affidavit.
Such application shall be presented not less than ten (10) days prior to the
date issuance is desired and shall contain the following information:
   A.   The name, age and address of the applicant in the case of an
individual; in the case of a co-partnership, the persons entitled to share in
the profits thereof and, in the case of a corporation for profit, the date of
the incorporation, the object for which it was organized, the names and
addresses of the officers and directors, and if a majority interest of the
stock of such corporation is owned by one person or his nominees, the name and
address of such person.
   B.   The citizenship of the applicant, his place of birth, and if a
naturalized citizen, the time and place of his naturalization.
   C.   The character of business of the applicant and, in case of a
corporation, the object for which it was formed.
   D.   The length of time that said applicant has been in business of that
character or, in case of a corporation, the date on which it was chartered.
   E.   The location and description of the premises or place of business which
is to be operated under such license.
   F.   A statement whether applicant has made similar application for a
similar other license on premises other than described in this application, and
the disposition of such application.
   G.   A statement that the applicant has never been convicted of a felony and
is not disqualified to receive a license by reason of any matter or thing
contained in this chapter, laws of this state or the ordinances of this
village.
   H.   Whether a previous license by any state or subdivision thereof or by
the federal government has been revoked and the reasons therefor.
   I.   A statement that the applicant will not violate any of the laws of the
state or of the United States or any ordinances of the village in conduct of
his place of business.
   J.   The amount of goods, wares and merchandise on hand at the time
application is made.
   K.   The date of incorporation if an Illinois corporation, or the date of
becoming qualified under the "Illinois business corporation act" to transact
business in Illinois if a foreign corporation.
   L.   That he has not received or borrowed money or anything else of value
and that he will not receive or borrow money or anything else of value (other
than merchandising credit in the ordinary course of business for a period not
to exceed 90 days, as expressly permitted under "an act relating to alcoholic
liquors", as amended) directly or indirectly from any manufacturer, importing
distributor or distributor and shall not be a party in any way, directly or
indirectly, to any violation by a manufacturer, distributor or importing
distributor under "an act relating to alcoholic liquors", as amended. (Ord.
459, 12-21-1977)
2-3-6: RESTRICTIONS ON ISSUANCE OF LICENSE:
   A.   No license shall issue to:
      1.   A person who has been convicted of a felony under the laws of the
state.
      2.   A person who has been convicted of being the keeper of a house of
ill fame.
      3.   A person who has been convicted of pandering or crime or misdemeanor
opposed to decency and morality.
      4.   A person whose license under this chapter has been revoked for
cause; or under the laws of the state.
      5.   A person who at the time of application for renewal of any license
issued hereunder would not be eligible for such license upon a first
application.
      6.   A person who has been convicted of a violation of any state or
federal law concerning the manufacture, possession or sale of alcoholic liquor,
or who shall have forfeited his bond to appear in court to answer to charges
for such violation.
      7.   A copartnership, unless all of the members of such copartnership
shall be qualified to obtain a license.
      8.   A corporation if any officer, manager or director thereof, or any
stockholder or stockholders owning in the aggregate more than five percent (5%)
of the stock of such corporation, would not be eligible to receive a license
hereunder for any reason other than citizenship and residence within the
political subdivision.
      9.   A foreign corporation unless it is qualified to transact business in
the state under the business corporation act.
      10.   A person whose place of business is conducted by a manager or agent
unless said manager or agent possesses the same qualifications required of the
licensee.
      11.   A person who does not beneficially own the premises for which a
license is sought; or does not have a lease thereon for the full period for
which the license is issued.
      12.   A law enforcing public official, any village president or member of
the board of trustees, and no such official shall be interested in any way,
either directly or indirectly in the manufacture, sale or distribution of
alcoholic liquor.
      13.   Any person who is not a beneficial owner of the business to be
operated by the licensee.
      14.   A person who has been convicted two (2) or more times of a gambling
offense as proscribed by any of subsections (a)(3) through (a)(10) of 720
Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/28-3, or as proscribed by 5/28-3 of the "criminal
code of 1961" approved July 28, 1961, as heretofore or hereafter amended, or as
proscribed by a statute replaced by any of the aforesaid statutory provisions;
provided, that any person convicted of a first offense shall not be issued such
license for a period of one year from the conviction.
      15.   A person not eligible for a state retail liquor dealer's license.
(Ord. 459, 12-21-1977; amd. Ord. 872, 10-18-2005)
   B.   No license shall be issued for the purpose of selling or offering for
sale at retail any intoxicating liquor in any dwelling house, flat or apartment
building.
   C.   No license shall be issued to any person for the sale at retail of any
alcoholic liquor at any store or other place of business where the majority of
customers are minors of school age or where the principal business transacted
consists of schoolbooks, school supplies, food, lunches or drinks for such
minors. (Ord. 459, 12-21-1977)
2-3-7: CLASSIFICATION OF LICENSES; FEES:
Every person shall pay an annual license fee. Such licenses shall be divided
into the following classes:
   A.   Class A License: Class A licenses shall authorize the retail sale of
alcoholic liquor for consumption upon the specified premises except restaurants
and motels. The annual fee for such license shall be seven hundred dollars
($700.00).
   B.   Class B License: Class B licenses shall authorize the retail sale upon
the premises specified of alcoholic liquor in the original package to be only
consumed off the premises where the same is sold. The annual fee for such
license shall be seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00).
   C.   Class C License: Class C licenses shall authorize the retail sale of
alcoholic liquor to members and guests of the club to which it is issued, on
the specified premises. The annual fee for such license shall be two hundred
fifty dollars ($250.00).
   D.   Class D License: Class D licenses shall authorize the retail sale of
alcoholic liquor in bowling alleys to be consumed on the premises. The annual
fee for such license shall be seven hundred dollars ($700.00) plus twenty five
dollars ($25.00) per lane.
   E.   Class E License: Class E licenses shall authorize the sale of alcoholic
liquor at the place specified in the application, for picnics or public
gatherings for a period of not to exceed twenty four (24) hours. The fee for
such license shall be fifty dollars ($50.00).
   F.   Class F License: Class F licenses shall authorize the retail sale of
alcoholic liquor upon the premises specified for consumption in a restaurant
only in conjunction with the serving of meals in a dining room. The annual fee
for such license shall be seven hundred dollars ($700.00).
   G.   Class G License: Class G licenses shall authorize the retail sale of
alcoholic liquor upon the premises specified for consumption in a restaurant
and which may or may not be in conjunction with the serving of meals in a
dining room. The annual fee for such license shall be seven hundred dollars
($700.00).
   H.   Class H License: Class H licenses shall authorize the retail sale of
alcoholic liquor upon the premises specified for consumption in a motel. The
annual fee for such license shall be one thousand five hundred dollars
($1,500.00).
   I.   Class I License: Class I licenses shall authorize the retail sale of
beer and wine and no other alcoholic beverages for consumption upon the
specified premises with the sale of food. The annual fee for such license shall
be five hundred dollars ($500.00).
   J.   Additions To License: Any licensee holding a class A license, class C
license, class D license, class F license, class G license, class H license and
a class I license may at the time of application to the local liquor control
commissioner request any or all of the following modifications to the liquor
license by paying the applicable fee:
      1.   Package Liquor: The annual fee shall be fifty dollars ($50.00).
      2.   Live Entertainment: The annual fee shall be two hundred fifty
dollars ($250.00).
      3.   Special Event Live Entertainment: In lieu of the annual fee, a
licensee may make application to the liquor control commissioner for a special
event live entertainment permit. If issued, the special event live
entertainment permit shall be for a period not to exceed twenty four (24) hours
and shall be at a fee of fifty dollars ($50.00).
      4.   Extended Hour: An extended hour license shall allow the holder of
said license to remain open an additional hour after regular hours as provided
in this chapter. The holder of an extended hour license shall be allowed to
remain open until three o'clock (3:00) A.M. on the morning immediately
following any of the following holidays: New Year's Eve, Memorial Day,
Independence Day, Veterans Day, Labor Day and St. Patrick's Day. The annual fee
shall be two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00).
      5.   Holiday Extended Hour: The holder of a holiday extended hour license
shall be allowed to remain open until three o'clock (3:00) A.M. on the morning
immediately following any of the following holidays: New Year's Eve, Memorial
Day, Independence Day, Veterans Day, Labor Day and St. Patrick's Day. The
annual fee shall be one hundred dollars ($100.00).
   K.   Class K License: A class K license shall authorize the retail sale of
alcoholic liquor for consumption during events held on property owned by the
licensee and for the financial benefit of the licensee. No class K license
shall be issued to any organization other than (i) a political subdivision of
Illinois or (ii) a club, society, fraternal or benevolent organization or
association that is organized as a not for pecuniary profit. The annual fee for
such license shall be one hundred dollars ($100.00).
   L.   Class L (Beer Garden) License: Any licensee holding a class A license,
a class F license, a class G license, a class I, or a class K license may, at
the time of application to the local liquor control commissioner, request a
class L (beer garden) license from the village as well. All class L (beer
garden) licenses are subject to the following conditions and restrictions:
      1.   License Required For Outdoor Sale And Service: It shall be unlawful
for any licensee or person, firm, corporation, partnership or club to sell,
offer to sell or serve any alcoholic liquor from an outdoor location adjacent
to any building premises without first:
         a.   Obtaining a class L license, as authorized and regulated in this
section, for a beer garden on or adjacent to the property of an existing
licensee's building premises; and
         b.   Being a license holder in good standing of a class A, F, G, I, or
K license.
      2.   Entertainment: It shall be unlawful for any holder of a class L
license to play or cause to play amplified music or cause to have performed
such other forms of entertainment by means or use of electronic amplification
except during the following times and following days (unless otherwise when
extended through a special event license), and then only when all other
applicable village ordinances have been adhered to:
         a.   Friday and Saturday: Twelve o'clock (12:00) noon to eleven
o'clock (11:00) P.M.
         b.   Sundays and legal holidays recognized by the Federal government:
Twelve o'clock (12:00) noon to ten o'clock (10:00) P.M.; except that on the
following Sundays when the hours shall be extended to eleven o'clock (11:00)
P.M.:
            (A)   The Sunday before July 4, when the Fourth falls on Monday.
            (B)   The Sunday before Memorial Day.
            (C)   The Sunday before Labor Day.
         c.   Amplified music or other entertainment shall not be presented in
such a manner so that it can be heard more than seventy-five feet (75') from
the premises which holds the license.
      3.   Restrictions: It shall be the affirmative duty of the license holder
as a condition of a class L license to maintain and perform the following
requirements:
         a.   The license holder must acquire, present, and maintain a valid
certificate of insurance with the village demonstrating insurance coverage of
both the beer garden and underlying licensed premises in full compliance with
all insurance requirements set forth in this code.
         b.   Outdoor service and consumption of alcohol shall be in an
identified cordoned off area, as approved by the village liquor control
commissioner. The area must be owned or leased by the class L license holder.
      4.   Establishment Restrictions:
         a.   No alcoholic beverage shall be sold, served or consumed in the
outdoor service area of a class L license during closing hours as specified in
§ 2-3-13B. of this chapter.
         b.   Alcoholic beverages consumed in the outdoor area must be
purchased on the premises where the outdoor area is permitted by the village
liquor license.
         c.   Entrance and exit points for the outdoor area shall be restricted
as approved by the village liquor control commissioner. There shall be one
emergency exit for the area outside of the building.
      5.   Application:
         a.   Application for permission to conduct such outdoor retail sale or
service of alcohol shall be in writing in the standard license application form
for any liquor license in the village, and shall additionally state the dates
for the requested license and a diagram of the outdoor area upon which the sale
or service and consumption will occur.
      6.   Revocation:
         a.   In addition to those restrictions stated above, all class L
licenses shall be subject to all the limitations and restrictions set out in
this chapter, State Statutes and zoning ordinance. The license holder's current
building premises license is subject to the terms and restrictions of the
outdoor license.
         b.   The local liquor commissioner may revoke any class L license for
violation of the standards set forth herein, or any other applicable
restriction set out by State Statute. The commissioner may also consider
revocation of the holder's building premises license in addition to the
revocation of the outdoor license based on any violation of the restrictions
applicable to either the building premises license or outdoor license.
      7.   Renewal: Class L are renewable on a yearly basis and shall be valid
for only those months specified in the license. (Ord. 592, 12-21-1993; amd.
Ord. 3236, 3-16-2020)
   M.   Class M (Brew Pub) License: Class M licenses shall authorize the
licensee to manufacture beer only on the specified licenses premises; to make
sales of the beer manufactured on the licensed premises to distributors,
importing distributors, and to non-licensees; to store the beer upon the
licensed premises; to sell and offer for sale at retail the beer manufactured
on the licensed premises, in its original package, not for consumption on the
licensed premises (such sales shall only be made in person); and to sell and
offer for sale at retail any form of alcoholic liquor purchased from a licensed
distributor or importing distributor at tables or in a service or patron bar
area within the specified licensed premises. Such licensed premises shall
include a full kitchen and operate a restaurant. The annual fee for such
license shall be seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00). Brew Pub Requirements—A
Class M license may be granted to or retained if:
      1.   The licensee manufactures, stores, sells, and distributes the beer
pursuant to the requirements of the Illinois Liquor Control Act;
      2.   An adequate and sanitary kitchen and dining room must be provided,
having equipment and capacity necessary thereto;
      3.   The licensee shall maintain in good standing a State of Illinois
Brew Pub license as required and authorized under the Illinois Liquor Control
Act;
      4.   A Class M licensee shall not under any circumstances sell or offer
for sale beer manufactured by the licensee on the specified licensed premises
to retail licensees.
   N.   Class N (Microbrewery) License: Class N licenses shall authorize the
licensee to manufacture beer only on the specified premises; to make sales and
deliveries of the beer manufactured on the licensed premises to importing
distributors, distributors, and to retail licensees; to store the beer upon the
licensed premises; and to sell and offer for sale beer at tables or in a
service or patron bar area within the specified licensed premises. The annual
fee for such license shall be seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00). Micro-
brewery Requirements – A class M license may be granted to or retained if:
      1.   The facilities are primarily those of a micro-brewery; and
      2.   The licensee manufactures, stores, sells, and distributes the beer
pursuant to the requirements of the Illinois Liquor Control Act;
      3.   No sales of alcoholic liquor manufactured off the premises shall be
permitted for retail or consumption.
      4.   The licensee shall maintain in good standing a State of Illinois
Class 1 Brewers license as required and authorized under the Illinois Liquor
Control Act; and
      5.   The portion of the licensed premises dedicated to the retail sale of
beer shall be separated from the remainder of the premises. The location of the
retail sale and consumption of beer on the premises shall be limited to the
retail portion of the licensed premises, except during supervised tours and
private parties located in the manufacturing area.
   N.   The portion of the licensed premises dedicated to the retail sale of
beer shall be separated from the remainder of the premises. The location of the
retail sale and consumption of beer on the premises shall be limited to the
retail portion of the licensed premises, except during supervised tours and
private parties located in the manufacturing area.
   O.   Class O (Gas Station Convenience Store) License: Class O licenses shall
authorize the retail sale of beer and wine in their original package, unopened,
to be only consumed off the premises of a gas station convenience store. The
annual fee for such license shall be one thousand dollars ($1,000.00). Gas
Station Convenience Store Requirements—A Class O license may be granted to or
retained if:
      1.   No Class O license shall be issued unless the gas station
convenience store has a minimum of four thousand (4,000) square feet of
interior space;
      2.   The total floor and cooler space dedicated to the sale of beer and
wine shall be limited to ten percent (10%) of the interior of the premises;
      3.   The coolers dedicated to beer and wine shall be locked during those
hours when the sale of beer and wine is prohibited;
      4.   Floor displays or stacking of beer and wine shall be compact and
confined in a single area at least twenty feet (20') from any point of ingress
and egress, and shall not be stacked so as to obstruct the view of the interior
of the premises from the exterior of the premises;
      5.   The storage of beer and wine shall occur in a location physically
separate from the storage of all other merchandise offered for retail sale at
the licensed premises;
      6.   Signs shall be posted in the store displaying the prohibited sale of
hours of beer and wine;
      7.   No Class O license may sell individual bottles or cans of beer and
individual bottles or containers of wine less than seven hundred fifty
milliliters (750 mL). It shall be unlawful to sell any individual bottle or can
of beer and any individual bottle or container of wine less than seven hundred
fifty milliliters (750 mL) attached together or repackaged in any method other
than that originally done by the distributor or manufacturer in order to exceed
the minimum bottle, can, or container requirements; and
      8.   Beer and wine shall not be stored or displayed near the register
area of the premises. (Ord. 592, 12-21-1993; amd. Ord. 3236, 3-16-2020; Ord.
1433-23, 10-17-2023)
2-3-8: BOND; INSURANCE:
   A.   Bond: Each applicant desiring a license under this chapter, except
those applying for a twenty four (24) hour beer license, shall execute a penal
bond payable to the village in the penal sum of one thousand dollars
($1,000.00). This bond shall be conditioned upon the faithful compliance with
and performance of all of the provisions of the laws of the state relating to
the sale of alcoholic liquor and with all of the provisions of the ordinances
of the village regulating the sale of alcoholic liquor, and shall be subject to
the approval of the president of the board. Upon approval thereof, the bond
shall be filed with the village clerk. A breach of any of the conditions of the
bond shall work a forfeiture of the penalty thereof, which amount shall be
recoverable in an action of debt. Said bond shall further be conditioned for
the payment of all fines, costs, penalties and forfeitures assessed against
said licensee during the continuance of the license under the terms of this
chapter and any and all other ordinances pertaining to the sale of alcoholic
liquor now in force or hereafter adopted, on account of any act done in
violation thereof during the term for which the license is granted.
Nevertheless, any person who has become a surety upon a bond herein required
may release himself from such liability in the following manner: Such surety,
at least ten (10) days before a regular meeting of the village board, shall
give notice in writing over his signature to the village clerk of his intention
to withdraw himself as a result from such bond. The village clerk shall
forthwith notify the principal on said bond who shall thereafter file with the
president of the board a new bond with sureties to be approved by the president
of the board as hereinabove provided. If no new bond, with sufficient sureties,
approved by the president of the village board, has been filed by the licensee
within ten (10) days after notification from the clerk of the withdrawal of the
former surety, the license heretofore granted to said licensee shall be revoked
by the president of the village. No surety shall be released from any liability
on a bond arising prior to the giving of a new bond or the revocation of any
license.
   B.   Insurance: No license shall be granted to any applicant until such
applicant shall furnish evidence satisfactory to the liquor control
commissioner that such applicant is covered by a policy of dramshop insurance
issued by a responsible insurance company authorized and licensed to do
business in the state insuring such applicant against liability which such
applicant may incur under the provision of 235 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/6-
21. (Ord. 459, 12-21-1977)
2-3-9: ISSUANCE OF LICENSE:
When the president of the village shall recommend the approval of any
application and bond as herein provided, the applicant shall be issued a
license, upon the payment in advance of the required fee, which license shall
be in writing over the name and under the seal of the village, and executed by
the president of the village and attested by the village clerk. (Ord. 459, 12-
21-1977)
2-3-10: NUMBER OF LICENSES ISSUED:
There shall be issued in the village:
   Class A: No more than one (1) class A licenses to be in effect at any one
time;
   Class B: No more than two (2) class B licenses to be in effect at any one
time;
   Class C: No more than zero (0) Class C licenses to be in effect at any one
time;
   Class D: No more than zero (0) Class D licenses to be in effect at any one
time;
   Class E: An unlimited number of Class E licenses may be in effect at any one
time;
   Class F: No more than two (2) Class F license to be in effect at any one
time;
   Class G: No more than six (6) Class G licenses to be in effect at any one
time;
   Class H: No more than zero (0) Class H licenses to be in effect at any one
time;
   Class I: No more than two (2) Class I licenses to be in effect at any one
time;
   Class K: No more than two (2) Class K licenses to be in effect at any one
time;
   Class L: No more than four (4) Class L licenses to be in effect at any one
time;
   Class M: No more than zero (0) Class M licenses to be in effect at any one
time;
   Class N: No more than zero (0) Class N licenses to be in effect at any one
time;
   Class O: No more than zero (0) Class O licenses to be in effect at any one
time.
In the event that any license issued pursuant to this chapter (1) is
surrendered or abandoned by the licensee for any reason; (2) is not renewed by
the licensee as required by this chapter, or (3) is revoked by the local liquor
control commissioner for cause pursuant to section
2-3-21 of this chapter, such license shall cease to exist, the number of
available licenses in the appropriate class, as set forth above, shall be
immediately and automatically deemed and construed to have been reduced by one
without further action by the corporate authorities of the village, and said
license shall not be available to be re-issued unless and until the number of
available licenses in the appropriate class is again increased by an ordinance
of the corporate authorities of the village.
(Ord. 1141, 2-19-2013; amd. Ord. 1209, 11-17-2015; Ord. 1261, 1-16-2018; Ord.
1294-19, 7-16-2019; Ord. 3236, 3-16-2020; Ord. 1344-21, 1-5-2021; Ord. 1418-22,
12-20-2022; Ord. 1433-23, 10-17-2023; Ord. 1436-23, 11-21-2023; Ord. 1454-24,
4-16-2024; Ord. 1458-24, 5-7-2024; Ord. 1462-24, 6-4-2024; Ord. 1464-24, 6-18-
2024; Ord. 1475-24, 11-4-2024; Ord. 1487-25, 2-18-2025; Ord. 1488-25, 3-4-2025)
2-3-11: TERM OF LICENSE; DISPOSITION OF FEES; TRANSFER OF LICENSE; DEATH OF
LICENSEE.
   A.   Term of License: No license, except Class E licenses for picnics or
public gatherings, shall be issued under this chapter for a period of less than
one year and no license shall be issued for a term of more than one year from
the date of its issuance. All licenses issued hereunder shall be valid from
January 1 to December 31 of each year.
   B.   Fee: For all licenses issued and in effect after January 31 of any
license year, the initial annual license fee shall be reduced in proportion to
the full calendar months which have expired in the year prior to the issuance
of the license.
   C.   Disposition of Fees: All license fees shall be paid to the President at
the time application is made and shall be forthwith turned over to the
Treasurer of the Village. In the event the license applied for is denied, the
fee shall be returned to the applicant; if the license is granted, then the fee
shall be deposited in a General Corporate Fund or in such other fund as shall
have been designated by the Village Board by proper action.
   D.   Transfer of License: A license shall be purely a personal privilege and
the license shall not constitute property, nor shall it be subject to
attachment, garnishment, or execution; nor shall it be alienable or
transferable, voluntarily or involuntarily. To the extent of any conflict
between this provision and any other provision of this chapter, this provision
shall control but only to the extent necessary to avoid the conflict.
   E.   Death of Licensee: In the event that any licensee dies or a partnership
or corporation terminates, the license shall cease, except that the local
liquor control commissioner may, in his sole discretion, issue a new license to
the executor or administrator of the estate of the deceased licensee. In the
event that a new license is issued pursuant to this subsection, the new
licensee shall pay the appropriate license fee, but the fee shall be prorated
based upon the unexpired term of the previous license. Any license issued
pursuant to this subsection shall terminate on the December 31 next following
its issuance. No license shall be issued pursuant to this subsection unless and
until the executor or administrator of the deceased licensee’s estate have
filed an application with all required supporting documents and proofs, nor
shall any license be issued if the executor or administrator of the deceased
licensee’s estate are not otherwise eligible to hold a license under this
chapter. (Ord. 459, 12-21-1977; amd. Ord. 1433-23, 10-17-2023)
2-3-12: RENEWAL OF LICENSE:
Any licensee may renew his license at the expiration thereof, provided he is
then qualified to receive a license and the premises for which such renewal
license is sought are suitable for such purpose, and provided further that the
renewal privilege herein provided for shall not be construed as a vested right
which shall in any case prevent the President from decreasing the number of
licenses to be issued within the Village. (Ord. 459, 12-21-1977)
2-3-13: CONDITIONS OF LICENSE:
   A.   Gambling Devices: It shall be unlawful to keep, have, use or permit to
be used in any premises in the Village used for the retail sale of alcoholic
liquor, any slot machine or other instrument or device upon which money is
staked or hazarded or into which money is paid or placed upon chance, or upon
the result of the action of which money or other valuable thing is staked, bet,
hazarded, won or lost except licensees complying with the Illinois Video Gaming
Act 1  and section
9-3-11 of the Village Code.
   B.   Closing Hours: No licensee shall keep open or allow his place of
business to remain open or sell or offer for sale at retail, or offer to give
away on any licensed premises, any alcoholic liquor in the Village on Monday,
Tuesday, Wednesday or Thursday after the hour of one o'clock (1:00) A.M. and
before the hour of six o'clock (6:00) A.M.; on Sunday after the hour of one
o'clock (1:00) A.M. and before the hour of nine o'clock (9:00) A.M. and on
Friday and Saturday after the hour of two o'clock (2:00) A.M. and before the
hour of six o'clock (6:00) A.M. except as heretofore provided for extended
hours.
   C.   Posting Of License: The license issued pursuant to this chapter shall
be posted in a prominent place within the licensed premises.
   D.   Peddling: It shall be unlawful to peddle alcoholic liquor in the
Village.
   E.   Nudity Prohibited:
      1.   No person, while on any premises licensed hereunder and in public
view, shall engage in the following conduct:
         a.   Expose his or her genitals, pubic hair, buttocks, anus or anal
cleft;
         b.   Employ any device or covering which is intended to give the
appearance of or simulate his or her genitals, pubic hair, buttocks, anus or
anal cleft; or
         c.   Appear without a fully opaque covering of his or her genitals,
pubic hair, buttocks, anus or anal cleft.
      2.   No female person, while on the premises and in public view, shall
engage in the following conduct:
         a.   Expose that area of the human breast below the top of the areola;
         b.   Employ any device or covering which is intended to give the
appearance of or simulate that area of the human breast below the top of the
areola; or
         c.   Appear without a fully opaque covering of that area of the human
breast below the top of the areola. (Ord. 459, 12-21-1977; amd. Ord. 592, 12-
21-1993; Ord. 1108, 6-19-2012; Ord. 1433-23, 10-17-2023)
 
Notes
1 1. 230 ILCS 40/.
2-3-14: RECORD OF LICENSES KEPT:
The president shall keep or cause to be kept a complete record of all such
licenses issued by him and shall furnish the clerk of the village, the
treasurer of the village and the chief of police each with a copy thereof upon
the issuance of any new license, and shall notify each of the officers in
writing, upon the issuance of any new licenses or revocation of any old
licenses. (Ord. 459, 12-21-1977)
2-3-15: BUILDING AND LOCATION RESTRICTIONS:
   A.   Location:
      1.   Licenses issued hereunder shall permit the sale of alcoholic liquor
only in the premises described in the application for license. Such location
may be changed only upon the written permit to make such change, issued by the
president. No change of location shall be permitted unless the proposed new
site is a proper one for the retail sale of alcoholic liquor under the laws of
the state and the ordinances of the village.
      2.   No license shall be issued for the sale at retail of any alcoholic
liquor within one hundred feet (100') of any church, school, hospital, home for
aged or indigent persons, or for veterans, their wives or children, or any
military or naval station; provided, that this prohibition shall not apply to
clubs, or to restaurants, food shops or other places where the sale of
alcoholic liquor is not the principal business carried on, if such place of
business not exempted shall have been established for such purposes prior to
the taking effect of this chapter. No person shall hereafter engage in business
as a retailer of any alcoholic liquor within one hundred feet (100') of any
undertaking establishment or mortuary. (Ord. 459, 12-21-1977)
   B.   Building: If any retail package liquor establishment is located in a
retail food, drug or other similar establishment operated by the same
corporation, person or other entity, there shall be constructed by the owner a
physical separation of said premises from that of the retail liquor
establishment. The plans and specifications for such physical separation shall
be approved in writing by the corporate authorities. (Ord. 461, 3-1-1978)
   C.   Clear View: In premises upon which the sale of alcoholic liquor for
human consumption upon the premises is licensed (other than in restaurants,
motels or clubs) no screen, blind, curtain, partition, article or thing shall
be permitted in the windows or upon the doors of such licensed premises nor
inside such premises, which shall prevent a clear view into the interior of
such licensed premises from the street, road or sidewalk at all times, and no
booth, screen, partition or other obstruction, nor any arrangement of lights or
lighting shall be permitted in or about the interior of such premises which
shall prevent a full view of the entire interior of such premises, and the
entire space used by the public must be so located that there shall be a full
view of the same from the street, road or sidewalk. All rooms where alcoholic
liquor is sold for consumption on the premises shall be continually lighted
during the business hours by natural or artificial white light so that all
parts of the interior of the premises shall be clearly visible. In case the
view into any such licensed premises required by the foregoing provisions shall
be wilfully obscured by the licensee or by him wilfully suffered to be
obscured, such license may be revoked in the manner herein provided. In order
to enforce the provisions of this section, the village president shall have the
right to require the filing with him of plans, drawings and photographs showing
the clearance of the view as above required. (Ord. 459, 12-21-1977)
2-3-16: SANITARY CONDITIONS:
   A.   Premises: All premises used for the retail sale of alcoholic liquor or
for the storage of such liquor for such sale, shall be kept in a clean and
sanitary condition and shall be kept in full compliance with the ordinances
regulating the condition of premises used for the storage or sale of food for
human consumption.
   B.   Employees: It shall be unlawful to employ, in any premises used for the
retail sale of alcoholic liquor, any person who is afflicted with, or who is a
carrier of any contagious, infectious or venereal disease; and it shall be
unlawful for any person who is afflicted with or a carrier of any such disease
to work in or about any premises or to engage in any way in the handling,
preparation or distribution of any such liquor. (Ord. 459, 12-21-1977)
2-3-17: CONDUCT OF BUSINESS:
   A.   Maintenance Of Order:
      1.   Each licensee shall maintain a peaceful and orderly business
premises. This shall be accomplished by establishing and maintaining the
optimum precautions and actions that are practical to deter and prevent
fighting. This is referred to as the "maintenance of order standard". The duty
to prevent fighting shall be applicable both to precautionary and training
matters and to the steps taken once a fight is in imminent danger of breaking
out or a fight occurs. If a fight does occur, the local liquor control
commissioner shall have the right to conduct a hearing to consider the
circumstances surrounding the fight and to determine the extent to which the
licensee failed to adhere to the "maintenance of order standard". At such a
hearing, the local liquor control commissioner may consider the following
matters, among others:
         a.   Prior incidents of reported or unreported fighting.
         b.   Whether any fight participant was intoxicated and the extent to
which the intoxication occurred on the licensed premises.
         c.   Whether any participant was served by the licensee after the
participant's intoxication should have been evident to the licensee.
         d.   Whether any participant was intoxicated and whether the licensee
had an opportunity to effect that person's removal from the premises.
         e.   The degree of expediency the licensee observed in calling the
police when it should have been evident that a fight was imminent.
         f.   The actions of the licensee in reacting to the fight.
         g.   The extent and type of training given to the licensee's employees
in such matters as recognizing intoxication, overserving and prevention of
altercations.
         h.   Whether minors were involved in the fighting.
         i.   The sufficiency or number of persons on duty and employed by the
licensee at the time of the fight.
      2.   Considering all of the circumstances brought into evidence at the
hearing, the local liquor control commissioner shall make a determination of
whether the licensee violated the "maintenance of order standard". If it is
determined that a violation occurred, the local liquor control commissioner may
impose any penalty set forth in section
2-3-21 of this chapter, up to and including license revocation. (Ord. 1006, 11-
4-2008)
   B.   Responsible For Proper Operation: The licensee, and his or its agents,
officers and employees, shall at all times be personally responsible for the
proper operation of the business including compliance with the provisions of
this chapter and the observation of all laws and regulations applicable
thereto. (Ord. 459, 12-21-1977)
   C.   Leaving Premises With Open Container Prohibited: No person shall leave
a licensed premises with an open container of any alcoholic liquor. Any person
removing an open container of any alcoholic liquor from a licensed premises
shall be fined not less than one hundred dollars ($100.00). (Ord. 938, 2-6-
2007)
   D.   Reporting Of Violations:
      1.   The licensee, or his agent or employee on the licensed premises,
shall immediately notify the village police department when the licensee or his
agent or employee on the licensed premises knows or in the exercise of ordinary
judgment should know that a violation of federal, state, or local law or
ordinance, including, but not limited to, disorderly conduct, battery, assault,
fighting, indecent exposure, criminal damage to property, or unlawful
loitering, is occurring or imminent or at such time when the licensee or his
agent or employee on the licensed premises becomes aware of said violation,
which involves any patron or conduct involving the business, upon the licensed
premises, the accessory premises (including, but not limited to, the parking
lot of the licensed premises), or public property adjacent to the licensed or
accessory premises. For purposes of this subsection the word "immediate" shall
refer to concurrently at such time when said violation of federal, state, or
local law, or ordinance is imminent, occurring or at such time when the
licensee or his agent or employee on the licensed premises becomes aware of
said violation. The licensee shall cooperate with any law enforcement agency in
the investigation and prosecution of such violation. In addition, within forty
eight (48) hours, the licensee shall also file with the local liquor control
commissioner a report on a form provided by the village containing the
following information:
         a.   The number of the persons involved in the violation.
         b.   The approximate amount of alcohol consumed at the licensed
premises by each person involved in the violation.
         c.   What action, if any, was taken by the licensee to prevent the
violation.
         d.   What action, if any, was taken by the licensee subsequent to the
start of the violation.
         e.   The licensee's opinion as to why the violation occurred.
      2.   Failure by the licensee to give immediate notification to the police
department of a violation or failure to file a report as required in subsection
D1 of this section shall subject the licensee to a fine of not less than one
hundred dollars ($100.00) for a first offense, and for subsequent offenses a
fine of not less than two hundred dollars ($200.00) and a possible suspension
or revocation of the licensee's liquor license. (Ord. 1006, 11-4-2008)
2-3-18: MINORS:
   A.   Purchase And Sale; Presence On Premises; Employment:
      1.   Age Restrictions:
         a.   It shall be unlawful for any person under the age of twenty one
(21) to purchase or obtain any alcoholic liquor in any tavern or other place in
the village where alcoholic liquor is sold.
         b.   It shall be unlawful for any person to misrepresent his or her
age for the purpose of purchasing or obtaining alcoholic liquor in any tavern
or other place in the village where alcoholic liquor is sold.
         c.   In every tavern or other place in the village where alcoholic
liquor is sold there shall be displayed at all times in a prominent place a
printed card which shall be supplied by the village clerk and which shall read
substantially as follows:
   WARNING TO MINORS
You are subject to a fine up to $500.00 under the ordinances of the Village of
Manhattan if you purchase alcoholic liquor, or misrepresent your age for the
purpose of purchasing or obtaining alcoholic liquor.
      2.   Sale To Minors: It shall be unlawful to sell, give or deliver
alcoholic liquor to any minor, except in the performance of a religious
ceremony or service.
      3.   Presence On Licensed Premises: It shall be unlawful for any holder
of a retail liquor dealer's license or his agent or employee to suffer or
permit any minor to be or remain in any room or compartment adjoining or
adjacent to or situated in the room or place where such licensed premises is
located; provided that this subsection A3 shall not apply to any minor who is
accompanied by his or her parent or guardian, or to any licensed premises which
derives its principal business from the sale or service of other commodities
than alcoholic liquor.
      4.   Employment Of Minors: It shall be unlawful for any minor to attend
any bar, to draw, pour or mix any alcoholic liquor in any licensed retail
premises.
      5.   Penalties: In addition to all other fines and penalties, the village
president may suspend or revoke the retail license for any violation of
subsections A1 through A4 of this section. (Ord. 459, 12-21-1977; amd. Ord.
592, 12-21-1993)
   B.   False Identification:
      1.   It shall be unlawful for any person to whom the sale, gift or
delivery of alcoholic liquor is prohibited because of age, to purchase or
accept a gift of alcoholic liquor or to have alcoholic liquor in his
possession.
      2.   If a licensee or his agents or employees believes or has reason to
believe that a sale or delivery of alcoholic liquor is prohibited because of
the nonage of the prospective recipient, he shall, before making such sale or
delivery demand some form of positive identification, containing proof of age,
issued by a public officer in the performance of his official duties.
      3.   No person shall transfer, alter or deface such an identification
card; use the identification card of another; carry or use a false or forged
identification card; or obtain an identification card by means of false
information.
      4.   No person shall purchase, accept delivery or have possession of
alcoholic liquor in violation of this section. (Ord. 459, 12-21-1977)
2-3-19: SALE TO CERTAIN PERSONS PROHIBITED:
It shall be unlawful for the holder of any alcoholic liquor dealer's license to
sell, deliver or give any alcoholic liquor to any intoxicated person or to any
person known to him to be a habitual drunkard, spendthrift, insane, feeble
minded or distracted person. (Ord. 459, 12-21-1977)
2-3-20: ENTRY POWERS:
The local liquor control commissioner is hereby given the power of entering or
to authorize any law enforcing officer to enter at any time upon any premises
licensed hereunder to determine whether any of the provisions of the dramshop
act, Illinois Compiled Statutes chapter 235, or any rules or regulations
adopted by him or by the state liquor commission have been or are being
violated, and at such time to examine the premises of said licensee in
connection therewith. (Ord. 459, 12-21-1977)
2-3-21: SUSPENSION OR REVOCATION OF LICENSE:
The village president may suspend for not more than thirty (30) days 1  or
revoke for cause any liquor dealer's license for any violation of any
provisions pertaining to the sale of alcoholic liquor, as provided and in the
manner provided in 235 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/7-5. (Ord. 459, 12-21-1977)
 
Notes
1 1. 235 ILCS 5/4-4.
2-3-22: PENALTIES:
Any person convicted of a violation of any section or provision of this chapter
shall be punished by a fine as established in section
1-4-1 of this code for any one offense. Each day such violation is committed or
permitted to continue shall constitute a separate offense and shall be
punishable as such hereunder. (Ord. 791, 8-5-2003; amd. Ord. 1061, 4-20-2010)
CHAPTER 4
SOLICITING
SECTION:
2-4-1: Definitions
2-4-2: Departure Required Upon Request; Notice Regulating Soliciting
2-4-3: Hours And Days Prohibited
2-4-4: Licensing
2-4-5: Fees
2-4-6: License Revocation
2-4-7: Appeal Of License Denial Or Revocation
2-4-8: Fraud Or Misrepresentation
2-4-9: Penalty
2-4-1: DEFINITIONS:
   CONVICTED: Shall mean and include a disposition of court supervision,
probation, adjudication, or conditional discharge.
   HAWKER: Any person who shall sell or offer for sale, barter, or exchange any
goods, wares, merchandise or other commodities and cries his wares or exhibits
them for sale.
   ITINERANT VENDOR: Any person who transports tangible personal property for
retail sale who does not maintain an established office, distribution house,
sales house, warehouse, service center or residence from which such business is
conducted. However, this does not apply to any person who delivers tangible
personal property who is fulfilling an order for such property which was
solicited or placed by mail or other means. This does not apply to any person
holding a valid license, issued by a county or municipality, to engage in
retail sales.
   PEDDLER: Any person, other than a representative of a not for profit
organization, who shall sell or offer for sale, barter, or exchange any goods,
wares, merchandise, service or other commodities while traveling from residence
to residence on, along or upon the streets and sidewalks of the village.
   RESIDENCE: Every separate living unit occupied for residential purposes by
one or more persons, contained within any type of building or structure.
   SOLICITATION OR SOLICITOR: Any person who conducts one or more of the
following activities:
   A.   Seeks to obtain orders for the purchase of goods, wares, merchandise,
foodstuffs or services of any kind, character or description whatsoever, for
any kind of consideration whatsoever.
   B.   Seeks to obtain prospective customers for application for or purchase
of insurance of any type, kind or character.
   C.   Seeks to obtain subscriptions to books, magazines, periodicals,
newspapers or any type of publication.
   D.   Seeks to obtain gifts or contributions of money, clothing or any other
valuable thing for the support or benefit of any charitable or nonprofit
association, organization, corporation or project.
   E.   Seeks to enlist support for or against a particular religion,
philosophy, ideology, political party, issue or candidate, whether accepting
donations of money or not, or distributing handbills or fliers advertising any
event or service.
   F.   Seeks to advertise, promote, sell and/or explain any product, service,
organization or cause.
   G.   Includes hawkers, peddlers, transient merchants, and itinerant vendors.
   TRANSIENT MERCHANT: Any person who is engaged temporarily in the retail sale
of goods, wares or merchandise and who, for the purpose of conducting such
business, occupies any building, room, vehicle, structure of any kind, or
vacant lot. However, this does not apply to any person selling goods, wares or
merchandise which are raised, produced or manufactured by him, to any person
selling vegetables, fruit or perishable farm products at an established city or
village market, to any person operating a store or refreshment stand at a
resort, to any person operating a stand or booth on or adjacent to property
owned by him or upon which he resides, to any person operating a stand or booth
at a state or county fair, or to any person operating a stand or booth at a
trade show, exposition, convention or similar event. This does not apply to any
person holding a valid license, issued by a county or municipality, to engage
in retail sales. (Ord. 978, 10-2-2007; amd. Ord. 1021, 12-16-2008)
2-4-2: DEPARTURE REQUIRED UPON REQUEST; NOTICE REGULATING SOLICITING:
   A.   Any solicitor who has gained entrance to any residence shall
immediately and peacefully depart from the premises when requested to do so by
the occupant.
   B.   Notice Regulating Soliciting:
      1.   Any occupant of a residence in the village may restrict soliciting
or limit the hours during which solicitors are invited to their residence by
posting that intention as provided for in this section.
      2.   Sign. A weatherproof card or decal, approximately three inches by
four inches (3" x 4") in size, may be exhibited upon or near the main entrance
door to the residence, indicating the determination of the occupant, as
follows:
NO SOLICITING PERMITTED ON PREMISES
      Such card, or similar sign, so exhibited shall constitute sufficient
notice to any solicitor that the solicitor is not permitted at or on the
premises.
      3.   Duty Of Solicitors. It shall be the duty of every solicitor upon
going upon any premises in the village upon which a residence is located, to
first determine whether there is any notice as provided in this section. If a
sign is posted consistent with the terms of this section, the solicitor shall
comply with the posted notice. If the solicitor is approaching during a time
when the resident has restricted soliciting by which such notice state, then
the solicitor, whether approved or not, shall immediately and peacefully depart
from the premises. (Ord. 978, 10-2-2007; amd. Ord. 1485-25, 2-4-2025)
2-4-3: HOURS AND DAYS PROHIBITED:
It is hereby declared unlawful and a nuisance for any person, whether or not
licensed under this chapter, to go upon any premises and ring the doorbell upon
or near any door of a residence located thereon, or rap or knock upon any door,
or create any sound in any other manner calculated to attract the attention of
the occupant of such residence, for the purpose of securing an audience with
the occupant thereof and engaging in soliciting, prior to nine o'clock (9:00)
A.M. or after eight o'clock (8:00) P.M. Monday through Saturday, and prior to
twelve o'clock (12:00) noon or after five o'clock (5:00) P.M. on Sundays. (Ord.
978, 10-2-2007)
2-4-4: LICENSING:
   A.   License Required: No person shall engage in, operate as, or conduct the
business of a hawker, peddler, transient merchant or itinerant vendor in the
village without first obtaining a license thereof.
   B.   Applications: Applications shall be made in writing to the village
clerk. Each applicant shall submit a non-refundable application processing fee
of one hundred dollars ($100.00) and provide the following information under
oath:
      1.   Name, address of the present place of residence, business address if
other than the residence address, date of birth, and social security number.
      2.   Address of the place of residence during the preceding three (3)
years, if other than the present address.
      3.   Physical description of the applicant.
      4.   Name and address of the person by whom the applicant is employed or
whom he represents, and the length of time of such employment or
representation.
      5.   Description of the subject matter of the soliciting in which the
applicant will engage and a description of the commodities or articles of
merchandise in which the applicant intends to deal.
      6.   Period of time for which the license is requested.
      7.   The date, or approximate date, of the most recent previous
application for a license under this chapter, if any.
      8.   A list of all licenses or certificates of registration to conduct
business as a hawker, peddler, transient merchant or itinerant vendor obtained
by the applicant in Illinois in the twelve (12) months preceding the date of
filing of the application.
      9.   A statement as to whether a license issued to the applicant under
this chapter has been revoked within one year of the date of the application.
      10.   A statement as to whether the applicant has been convicted of a
violation of any provision of this chapter or the ordinances of any other
municipality regulating soliciting within one year of the date of the
application.
      11.   A statement as to whether the applicant has ever been convicted of
the commission of: a) a felony, or b) a misdemeanor involving dishonesty or
false statements, under the laws of the state of Illinois or any other state,
or under the laws of the United States, within five (5) years of the date of
the application.
      12.   A statement as to whether the applicant is required to register as
a sex offender under the Illinois sex offender registration act.
      13.   Fingerprinting of the applicant.
      14.   Such additional information as the chief of police or his designee
may deem necessary to process the application.
   C.   Issuance Of License: Within fifteen (15) business days of filing the
application, after consideration, investigation and review of the application,
each hawker, peddler, transient merchant or itinerant vendor who is found to be
fully qualified, upon payment of the appropriate licensing fee, shall be issued
license.
   D.   Persons Ineligible For License: No license shall be issued to any
person who has made a false material statement in the application, or:
      1.   Has been convicted of the commission of: a) a felony, or b) a
misdemeanor involving dishonesty or false statements, under the laws of the
state of Illinois or any other state, or under the laws of the United States,
within five (5) years of the date of the application; or
      2.   Has been convicted of a violation of any of the provisions of this
chapter or the ordinances of any other municipality regulating soliciting
within one year of the date of the application; or
      3.   Has had his license issued under this chapter revoked as provided in
this chapter within one year of the date of the application; or
      4.   Is required to register as a sex offender under the Illinois sex
offender registration act, 730 Illinois Compiled Statutes 150/3, under the laws
of any other state, or under the laws of the United States.
   E.   Issuance And Display Of License: Each eligible licensee shall be issued
a license signed by the village clerk bearing the seal of the village. Each
licensee shall at all times while soliciting within the village carry upon his
person the license as required by this chapter which shall be worn in such a
way as to be conspicuous, and exhibit the same to any police officer or other
person requesting to see the same. (Ord. 978, 10-2-2007; amd. Ord. 1347-21, 4-
5-2021; Ord. 1485-25, 2-2-2025)
2-4-5: FEES:
The fee for a transient merchant, itinerant vendor, hawker or peddler license
shall be one hundred dollars ($100.00) for a license valid for fourteen (14)
consecutive days from date of issue.
All license fees are nonrefundable and the license shall state the expiration
date thereof. Upon issuance of the license, a transient merchant or itinerant
vendor shall file with the police department a surety bond or shall make a cash
deposit equal to fifty percent (50%) of the wholesale value of the merchandise
that a transient merchant or itinerant vendor intends to offer for sale;
however the amount of the bond or deposit shall be not less than one thousand
dollars ($1,000.00) nor more than ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00). (Ord.
1021, 12-16-2008; amd. Ord. 1347-21, 4-5-2021; Ord. 1485-25, 2-4-2025)
2-4-6: LICENSE REVOCATION:
Any license issued under this chapter shall be revoked by the chief of police
or his designee if the licensee is convicted of a violation of any of the
provisions of this chapter, or has made a false material statement in the
application, or otherwise becomes disqualified for the issuance of a license
under the terms of this chapter. Immediately upon such revocation, written
notice thereof shall be given by the chief of police or his designee to the
licensee in person or by certified U.S. mail addressed to his residence address
as set forth in the application. Immediately upon the giving of such notice,
the license shall become null and void. (Ord. 978, 10-2-2007)
2-4-7: APPEAL OF LICENSE DENIAL OR REVOCATION:
   A.   Any person aggrieved by the denial or revocation of a license under the
provisions of this chapter shall have the right to appeal to the village board
within twenty one (21) days after the date of denial of the application or
revocation of the license. The appeal must be in writing, and shall contain a
specific request for or waiver of a hearing.
   B.   If a hearing is requested, the hearing before the village board shall
take place within thirty (30) days of the written appeal. At the hearing, the
village board shall not be bound by the rules of evidence in the courts of law,
but shall, in ascertaining the conditions and practices involved in the
decision appealed, take into account all reliable, probative and substantial
evidence. The village board shall issue a written decision within fourteen (14)
days of the hearing.
   C.   Where a hearing is waived, the appealing party shall submit all
supporting documentation with the written appeal. The village board shall issue
a written decision within twenty one (21) days of the filing of the written
appeal. (Ord. 978, 10-2-2007)
2-4-8: FRAUD OR MISREPRESENTATION:
No solicitor shall engage in any fraud, misrepresentation or imposition. (Ord.
978, 10-2-2007)
2-4-9: PENALTY:
It shall be unlawful for any person, firm, or corporation to violate any
provisions of this chapter, and, except as otherwise provided, any person,
firm, or corporation guilty of violating any of the provisions of this chapter
shall be punishable as provided under section
 1-4-1 of this code. Each day that a violation continues shall be deemed a
separate offense. (Ord. 1021, 12-16-2008)
CHAPTER 5
TRAILER CAMPS
SECTION:
2-5-1: Trailer Camps Prohibited
2-5-1: TRAILER CAMPS PROHIBITED:
Trailer camps are prohibited in the Village. (1990 Code)
CHAPTER 6
CATV FRANCHISE
SECTION:
2-6-1: Short Title
2-6-2: Definitions
2-6-3: Grant of Authority
2-6-4: Company Liability and Indemnification
2-6-5: Performance by Operator
2-6-6: Conditions on Street Occupancy and System Construction
2-6-7: Construction Approval by Village, Correction of Defects
2-6-8: Customer Service
2-6-9: Additional Regulations
2-6-10: Service Standards
2-6-11: Rates to Customers
2-6-12: Payments to Village
2-6-13: Records and Reports
2-6-14: Transfer Prohibited
2-6-15: Duration of Franchise
2-6-16: Penalties
2-6-1: SHORT TITLE:
This Chapter shall be known and may be cited as THE MANHATTAN COMMUNITY ANTENNA
TELEVISION FRANCHISE ORDINANCE. (Ord. 474, 4-2-80)
2-6-2: DEFINITIONS:
For the purposes of this Chapter, the following terms, phrases, words and
derivations shall have the meaning given therein. When not inconsistent with
the context, words used in the present tense include the future, words in the
plural number include the singular number and words in the singular number
include the plural number. The word "shall" is always mandatory and not merely
directory.
   COMMUNITY ANTENNA TELEVISION SYSTEM, hereinafter referred to as "System": A
system of coaxial cables or other electrical conductors and equipment used or
to be used primarily to receive television or radio signals directly or
indirectly off the air and transmit them to subscribers for a fee, and shall
include towers necessary for the reception of such television or radio signals.
   OPERATOR: The person, corporation or partnership authorized to do business
in the State of Illinois, which will operate a community antenna television
system within the confines of the Village of Manhattan under the terms of this
Franchise Ordinance.
   PERSON: Any person, firm, partnership, association, corporation, company or
organization of any kind.
   SYSTEM: The lines, fixtures, equipment, attachments, and all appurtenances
thereto which are used in the construction, operation and maintenance of the
community antenna television system herein authorized.
   UTILITY: The Illinois Bell Telephone Company; Public Service, division of
Commonwealth Edison; Northern Illinois Gas Company, or any other franchised
utility doing business in the Village, whose facilities may be used by the
operator.
   VILLAGE: The Village of Manhattan, Will County, Illinois.
   VILLAGE BOARD: The President and Board of Trustees of Manhattan, Illinois.
(Ord. 474, 4-2-80)
2-6-3: GRANT OF AUTHORITY:
In consideration of the faithful performance and observance of the conditions
and reservations herein specified and in consideration of the payment of the
amount provided for in Section
2-6-13 hereof, a franchise is hereby granted to Manhattan Cable T.V. (operator)
and qualified to do business in the State to construct, erect, operate,
maintain in, upon, along, across, above, over and under, the streets, alleys,
public ways and public places, now laid out or dedicated and all extensions
thereof and additions thereto in the Village, wires, poles, cables, underground
conduits, conductors and fixtures necessary for the maintenance and operation
in the Village of a community antenna television system for the reception and
distribution of television signals and energy, frequency modulated radio
signals, and visual and aural signals which are not otherwise herein
prohibited. The rights herein granted shall extend to any area annexed to the
Village, and the operator shall be bound by the same rules and regulations as
to such areas as are otherwise herein or hereafter provided. This grant extends
to the leased or rented use of poles and other facilities of any utility now or
in the future operating in the Village.
The right to use and occupy said streets, alleys, public ways and places for
the purposes herein set forth, shall be exclusive, but the Village reserves the
right to grant the use of streets, alleys, public ways and places to any person
for other purposes at any time during the period of any franchise granted under
authority of this Chapter.
Should the operator use or attach to any poles or other facilities of any
utility operating within the confines of the Village, the following provisions
shall be met: (1) the operator and utility shall execute a written agreement
covering the terms of such usage or attachment; (2) strict compliance with the
terms of such agreement is required of both parties by this Chapter; (3) a
certified copy of such agreement must be filed in the office of the Village
Clerk as a condition of the granting of any franchise under authority of this
Chapter; and (4) the owner of cables, equipment and facilities leased or rented
to the operator shall be subject to the terms and provisions of this Chapter in
the same manner and in every respect as the operator. (Ord. 474, 4-2-80)
2-6-4: COMPANY LIABILITY AND INDEMNIFICATION:
   A.   Liability Coverage: It is expressly understood and agreed by and
between the operator and the Village that the operator shall save the Village,
its officers and employees harmless from all loss sustained by the Village, its
officers and employees on account of any suit, judgment, execution, claim or
demand whatsoever arising out of the construction, operation and maintenance of
the system by the operator. The operator agrees to maintain and keep in full
force and effect at all times during the term of any franchise granted under
the authority of this Chapter, sufficient liability insurance coverage to
protect the Village, its officers and employees against any such claims, suits,
judgments, executions, or demands in a sum not less than five hundred thousand
dollars ($500,000.00) per person as to any one claim, one million dollars
($1,000,000.00) as to any one accident or occurrence, and not less than five
hundred thousand dollars ($500,000.00) for property damage as to any one
accident or occurrence.
   B.   Insurance Coverage: There shall be filed in the office of the Village
Clerk, as condition of any franchise granted under authority of this Chapter, a
certificate of insurance and copies of insurance policies showing the Village
as an additional insured as to the liability and indemnification required by
this Chapter. (Ord. 474, 4-2-80)
2-6-5: PERFORMANCE BY OPERATOR:
The operator shall, within eighteen (18) months from the effective date of such
franchise and receipt of FCC permission, offer community antenna cable service
to twenty percent (20%) of the dwelling units in the Village; and within three
(3) years of such effective date be offering community cable service to eighty
percent (80%) of the dwelling units within the Village.
The operator hereby agrees to construct and maintain at its own expense,
antenna cable television service, upon request, to the following building
within the Village: public and private schools, libraries, park district
building, police and fire stations and other Municipal buildings. The operator
shall not be required hereunder to construct any facilities for the
distribution of signals within any such buildings. All requests for free cable
service, as outlined above, shall be made to the operator by the Mayor or other
designated representative of the Village.
The operator hereby agrees that the rates charged to customers shall be
uniform, and that no free service or reduced rates will be permitted to any
customer furnished with antenna cable service. This Section shall not prevent
the operator, however, from conducting promotion campaigns to attract new
customers, including elimination or reduction of the initial connection fee.
Such reductions shall not be selective, but must apply to all customers within
a publicly stated class, area or time period.
The operator hereby agrees that he will make available the full range and
variety of program material from time to time available. (Ord. 474, 4-2-80)
2-6-6: CONDITIONS ON STREET OCCUPANCY AND SYSTEM CONSTRUCTION:
   A.   Use: All transmission and distribution structures, lines and equipment
erected by the operator within the Village shall be so located as to cause
minimum interference with the proper use of streets, alleys and other public
ways and places, and to cause minimum interference with the rights or
reasonable convenience of property owners who adjoin any of said streets,
alleys or other public ways and places.
   B.   Restoration: In case of any disturbance of pavements, sidewalks,
driveways or other surfacing, the operator shall, at its own expense and in a
manner approved by the Village, replace and restore such places so disturbed in
as good condition as before said work was commenced, and shall maintain the
restoration in a condition approved by the Village for the full period of one
year.
   C.   Relocation: In the event that at any time during the period of any
franchise granted under authority of this Chapter, the Village shall lawfully
elect to alter or change the grade of any street, alley or other public way, or
require existing utilities to be located underground, the operator, upon
reasonable notice by the Village Manager, shall remove, re-lay and relocate its
equipment at its own expense.
   D.   Placement of Fixtures: The operator shall not place any poles or other
fixtures on electric, telephone or sewer and water lines, fixtures, and
equipment, and the location by the operator of its lines and equipment shall be
in such manner as to not interfere with the usual travel on said streets,
alleys and public ways and use of the same by gas, electric, telephone and
water and sewer lines and equipment.
   E.   Temporary Removal of Wires for Building Moving: The operator shall, on
the request of the Village, temporarily raise or lower its wires to permit the
moving of buildings. The expense shall be charged to the person moving the
building.
   F.   Tree Trimming: When necessary for the installation of poles, cables,
conduit, house connections or other structures, the operator is hereby
authorized to trim trees located on public property. Such trimmings shall be
done in a workmanlike manner, in such way as to preserve the beauty and balance
of the tree.
   G.   Nonliability of Village: The Village, its officers and employees shall
not be liable for any damage occurring to the property of the operator caused
by the ordinary negligence of employees of the Village in the performance of
their duties, nor shall the Village, its officers and employees be held liable
for the interruption of service by actions of Village employees in the
performance of their duties, nor shall the Village be held liable for the
failure of the operator to be able to perform normal services due to acts of
God.
   H.   Permits, Easements and Agreements: The operator and any utility
installing facilities under contract to said operator, shall obtain a permit
for each pole or other structure to be erected. The permit application shall
include a scale drawing showing the location and dimensions of the pole or
structure to be erected. Issuance of such permits shall not unreasonably be
denied.
The operator shall be responsible for securing any right of way, easements,
permits or agreements from any other persons or utilities that may be needed
for any reason. (Ord. 474, 4-2-80)
2-6-7: CONSTRUCTION APPROVAL BY VILLAGE, CORRECTION OF DEFECTS:
Except for individual service drops, the operator shall not erect any pole, run
any line, make any attachment, nor shall construction of any kind be commenced
without the prior approval of the Village Engineer. The approval as referenced
herein shall be in the form of a permit issued by the Village Engineer upon
approval of layout maps of the system showing planned routing, utility company
poles to which the system facilities are to be attached and location of all
trunk and distribution line amplifiers made by the operator to Illinois Bell
Telephone Company or other utility company. The Village shall have the right to
inspect the construction, operation and maintenance of the system by ordinance.
In the event the operator should violate any of the terms of this Chapter or
rules and regulations as may be from time to time lawfully adopted, the Village
shall immediately give the operator thirty (30) days written notice to correct
such violation, and in the event the operator does not make such correction
within thirty (30) days from the receipt of such written notice, the Village
may make such correction itself and charge the cost of same to the operator.
(Ord. 474, 4-2-80)
2-6-8: CUSTOMER SERVICE:
The operator shall provide to all customers a system capable of transporting
and relaying up to twenty seven (27) channels. The operator shall relay to its
customers over this system the signals of all commercial and educational
television stations in the Chicago Metropolitan Area. Such signals shall be
relayed without alteration, interruption or insertion of comments or
advertising not associated with the broadcast by its originator. (Ord. 474, 4-
2-80)
2-6-9: ADDITIONAL REGULATIONS:
   A.   Recommend Service: The operator and any and all of its officers, agents
and employees, shall not indicate and shall not recommend in any manner a
specific sale or service establishment or individual to be used for the sale or
service of any television set.
   B.   Educational Service: The operator shall reserve a television channel
for the use of educational institutions within the Village limits for the
origination of educational television telecasts and the interconnection of all
said educational institutions. (Ord. 474, 4-2-80)
2-6-10: SERVICE STANDARDS:
   A.   The operator shall maintain and operate the system and render efficient
service in accordance with the rules and regulations as are or may be set forth
by the Federal Communications Commission. The operator shall operate the system
so that there will be no interference with television reception, radio
reception, telephone communications or other installations which are now or may
hereafter be installed and in use in the Village.
   B.   The operator shall take all necessary steps so that the system shall
maintain at all times:
      1.   Use of all band equipment capable of passing the entire VHF
television and FM radio spectrum;
      2.   Equipment that passes standard color television signals without
degradation and with no appreciable effect on color fidelity and intelligence;
      3.   A minimum level of one thousand (1,000) micro-volts at the input
terminals of each television receiver on the line;
      4.   A system and all equipment designed and rated for twenty four (24)
hour per day continuous operation;
      5.   A signal-to-noise ratio of not less than forty three (43) decibels;
      6.   A television signal with a hum modulation less than three percent
(3%);
      7.   Components having voltage standing wave ratio of one to four (1.4)
or less;
      8.   An inter-modulation distortion not to exceed minus forty six (-46)
decibels; and
      9.   A plot of gain versus frequency across any six (6) megacycle channel
of a flat plus or minus one (±1) decibel.
   C.   The operator shall provide and keep accurately calibrated test
equipment on hand in the service area at all times for the testing of all
service and operational standards outlined in this Chapter and shall conduct
these tests as reasonably requested by the Village under the supervision of a
Village representative, in order to establish the level of performance of the
system.
   D.   The operator shall not be deemed or declared to be in default under any
of the conditions, provisions, requirements or limitations of this Chapter in
any case in which the performance of any such condition, provision, requirement
or limitation is prevented by reason of strikes, injunctions, acts of God, or
other causes beyond the control of the company; provided, that the company
shall not have instigated such strike, or shall not have been responsible for
suits or injunctions or other causes of delay. (Ord. 474, 4-2-80)
2-6-11: RATES TO CUSTOMERS:
The operator agrees that all rates charged to customers by the operator shall
be standard, uniform and reasonable. A copy of operator's scale of charges for
installation and furnishing of service shall be filed with the Village Clerk
not less than sixty (60) days prior to the effective date of such charge.
The operator may not enforce collection of any charges to any customer beyond
the date on which the customer gives written notice to the operator to
discontinue his service, nor may the operator make any charge for disconnection
from a normal installation. Upon termination of service to any customer, the
operator shall promptly remove all of its facilities from the premises of such
a customer upon his request. (Ord. 474, 4-2-80)
2-6-12: PAYMENTS TO VILLAGE:
   A.   Gross Revenue Tax: The operator shall pay to the Village a tax or fee
of one dollar ($1.00) per subscriber per year.
   B.   Manner of Payments: All payments by the operator to the Village shall
be made semi-annually and shall be due within thirty (30) days after the close
of the preceding six (6) month period. (Ord. 474, 4-2-80)
2-6-13: RECORDS AND REPORTS:
The Village or its representatives shall have access during normal business
hours to all operator's plans, contracts, engineering, records relating to the
property and operation of the system by the operator. A semi-annual summary
report showing gross revenues received by the operator from the operation of
the system within the Village during the preceding six (6) month period and
such other information as the Village may require in support of same, shall be
submitted to the Village by the operator. (Ord. 474, 4-2-80)
2-6-14: TRANSFER PROHIBITED:
The operator shall not sell or transfer its plant or system or any portion
thereof, nor any right, title or interest in the same, nor shall the operator
transfer any rights under this Chapter to any other person without prior
approval of the Village, which approval shall not be unreasonably withheld.
No assignment or transfer of the franchise granted hereunder shall become
effective until the assignee or transferee has filed with the Village Clerk an
instrument accepting the terms of this Chapter and agreeing to perform all of
the conditions hereof. (Ord. 474, 4-2-80)
2-6-15: DURATION OF FRANCHISE:
Any franchise granted under authority of this Chapter shall remain in full
force and effect for a period of twenty (20) years and shall be subject to
renewal by the Village by negotiations upon reasonable terms with the operator
for additional periods. (Ord. 474, 4-2-80)
2-6-16: PENALTIES:
Should the operator, its successors or assigns violate any of the provisions of
this Chapter, or any reasonable rules and regulations or other laws, or fail to
promptly perform any of the provisions hereof, the operator shall forfeit all
its rights hereunder to the Village ninety (90) days after receiving written
notice. In the event of the bankruptcy or receivership of the operator, all
rights herein given to the operator shall at the option of the Village be
forfeited and terminated. (Ord. 474, 4-2-80)
CHAPTER 7
LICENSING OF COMMERCIAL ESTABLISHMENTS
SECTION:
2-7-1: License Required; Subjects Of Licensing Authority
2-7-2: Applications
2-7-3: License Procedures
2-7-4: Investigations
2-7-5: Approval; Disapproval
2-7-6: License Year And Termination
2-7-7: Computation Of License Fees
2-7-8: Licenses Not Assignable; Unlawful Use
2-7-9: Location
2-7-10: Records And Standards
2-7-11: Nuisances Prohibited
2-7-12: Working Conditions
2-7-12-1: Health Requirements
2-7-12-2: Sanitation
2-7-12-3: Heat Required
2-7-12-4: Inspection
2-7-13: Business Open To Public
2-7-14: Inspections
2-7-15: Suspension, Revocation And Appeal
2-7-16: License To Be Posted; Destruction, Removal Of License
2-7-17: License Not To Preclude Other Licenses
2-7-18: Activities And Organizations Excluded
2-7-19: Penalty
2-7-1: LICENSE REQUIRED; SUBJECTS OF LICENSING AUTHORITY:
No person shall conduct, engage in, maintain, operate, carry on or manage any
business, occupation, activity or establishment, either by himself or itself,
or through an agent, employee or partner, for which a license is required by
this chapter, without first having obtained a license for such business,
occupation, activity or establishment.
Whenever a license or permit is required for the maintenance, operation or
conduct of any business or establishment, or for doing business or engaging in
any activity or occupation, any person shall be subject to the requirement, if,
by himself or itself, or through an agent, employee or partner, he or it is
held forth as being engaged in the business, activity or occupation, or if he
or it solicits patronage therefor, actively or passively, or if he or it
performs or attempts to perform any part of such business, activity or
occupation in the village. (Ord. 1034, 10-6-2009)
2-7-2: APPLICATIONS:
Applications for all licenses and permits required hereunder shall be made to
the finance department in writing on a form provided for that purpose, except
as otherwise provided herein. If the applicant is an individual (sole
proprietorship), the application shall contain the applicant's name, residence
address and residential telephone number. If the applicant is a partnership or
other noncorporate business entity, the application shall contain the name and
residential address and residential telephone number of each partner, principal
or member thereof. If the applicant is a corporation, the application shall
contain the name, residential address and residential telephone number of each
principal officer and the registered agent thereof. If the applicant is an
unincorporated association, the application shall contain the name, residential
address and residential telephone number of the spokesman, such as a minister
or leader. Each application also shall contain:
   A.   A designation of the type or kind of license or permit desired.
   B.   The location or proposed location of the place of business, occupation
or activity.
   C.   The applicable fee to be paid as provided in this chapter.
   D.   The number of the certificate of registration required under the
retailer's occupation tax act, service occupation tax act, and/or use tax act,
if applicable.
   E.   Such additional information as may be needed for the proper guidance of
municipal officials in the evaluation of such application. (Ord. 1034, 10-6-
2009)
2-7-3: LICENSE PROCEDURES:
All persons desiring to operate a licensable commercial activity or
establishment as listed in this chapter shall file with the finance department
an application for a license to operate the commercial activity in the village
no later than thirty (30) days prior to the time such person desires to
commence operation in the village. Thereafter, prior to a person's continued
operation of such a licensable commercial activity or establishment in a
subsequent license year, said person shall file a renewal application not later
than December 1 prior to each subsequent license year. In the event such person
fails to file said renewal application by December 31 of the year, a late fee
of twenty dollars ($20.00) shall be charged and be payable at the time of
application. The required late fee shall be utilized to reimburse the village
for additional staff time processing renewal reminders and to expedite the
delinquent license application and shall not be considered a penalty fee.
Delinquency may also result in suspension and/or revocation of the right to
conduct commercial activities within the village.
Each license issued by the village shall, in the absence of any provision to
the contrary, bear the signature of the director of finance department or their
designee for purposes of this chapter. All licenses authorized to be issued and
required to be procured shall be issued by the finance department. Each license
issued shall be dated and shall state to whom it is issued, for what purpose,
the location, if any, at which such business is to be conducted and the date
when the license is to expire.
The required fee for each license issued shall be collected in full at the time
the application for a license, or the renewal thereof, is filed with the
finance department. In no event shall any rebate or refund be made of any
license fee, or part thereof, by reason of the death of the licensee or by any
reason of nonuse of the license or discontinuance of the operation of the
commercial establishment. (Ord. 1034, 10-6-2009)
2-7-4: INVESTIGATIONS:
Subsequent to receipt of an application for a license where ordinances of the
village necessitate an inspection or investigation before the issuance of such
permit or license, the finance department shall refer such application to the
proper officer or employee for making such investigation. The officer or
employee charged with the duty of making the investigation or inspection shall
make a report thereon to the finance department, favorable or otherwise. The
director of the finance department shall make or cause to be made an inspection
in connection with the care and handling of food and all other matters relating
to sanitary conditions, including, but not limited to, restaurants. The said
director shall make or cause to be made any such inspections relative to the
construction and safety of buildings or other structures. All other
investigations, except where otherwise provided, shall be made by the chief of
police or by some other officer or employee designated by the village
administrator. In every case there shall be at least an inspection of the
applicant's commercial premises by the director of the finance department or
his designee, for the purposes described in this section, unless as otherwise
provided. (Ord. 1034, 10-6-2009)
2-7-5: APPROVAL; DISAPPROVAL:
If, after due consideration of the information contained in the application,
the director of the finance department shall determine the application is
satisfactory, he shall approve the application. Thereupon it shall notify the
applicant and issue a license as provided above. If, after due consideration of
the information contained within the application, the director of the finance
department shall determine that matters concerning the application are
unsatisfactory, it shall disapprove the application, indicating the reasons
therefor. Thereupon, the director of the finance department shall notify the
applicant that the application has not been approved and that no license or
permit will be issued.
Any person aggrieved by the decision of the director of the finance department
in connection with the denial of a license as provided in this section shall
have the right of appeal to the village board of trustees. Such appeal shall be
taken by filing with the village clerk, within ten (10) days after notice of
denial, a written statement under oath setting forth specifically the grounds
for appeal. The board of trustees shall thereupon set the time and place for a
hearing on such appeal and notice of such hearing shall be given to the
applicant or licensee. Such notice may be hand delivered or mailed by certified
mail, return receipt requested, to the licensee to his last known address at
least five (5) days prior to the date set for the hearing. The decision of a
majority of the board of trustees present at the hearing of such appeal shall
be required to reverse the decision of the director of the finance department.
(Ord. 1034, 10-6-2009)
2-7-6: LICENSE YEAR AND TERMINATION:
The license year for the village shall commence on January 1 and terminate on
December 31 in each year, where no provision to the contrary is made. All
licenses, whenever issued, shall terminate on December 31 in each year. The
director of the finance department shall endeavor to notify each annual
licensee of the expiration of time of the license held by the licensee at least
sixty (60) days prior to such expiration date; provided, however, that a
failure to make such notification or the licensee's failure to receive it,
shall not exclude the licensee from the obligation to obtain a new license or a
renewal. Except as otherwise provided herein, each license may be renewed upon
proper application and payment of the required fee. The requirements and
procedures for granting and issuing a license renewal shall be the same as the
requirements and procedures for granting a new license. (Ord. 1034, 10-6-2009)
2-7-7: COMPUTATION OF LICENSE FEES:
The annual fee for a business license shall be ten dollars ($10.00). Said
amount shall be submitted with the license application. This fee is
nonrefundable and is used solely for the administration of this chapter.
When any license is issued on or between the dates of January 1 and June 30 of
any year, the license fee shall be the amount as determined by this chapter.
When any license is issued on or between the dates of July 1 and December 31 of
any year, the license fee to be paid shall be one-half (1/2) of the amount as
determined by this chapter. Unless as otherwise provided, all license fees
shall become a part of the general corporate fund. (Ord. 1034, 10-6-2009)
2-7-8: LICENSES NOT ASSIGNABLE; UNLAWFUL USE:
No license or permit may be assigned, sold, loaned, transferred, used as
collateral or otherwise encumbered. No person shall use or display any license
certificate, tag, badge or sticker which has been improperly acquired. No
person shall alter, deface, forge, or counterfeit any license, certificate,
plate, tag, badge or sticker issued by the village. (Ord. 1034, 10-6-2009)
2-7-9: LOCATION:
   A.   No license or permit for the operation of a business, establishment or
activity in the village shall be construed to permit its operation in more than
one location in the village; a separate license or permit shall be required for
each location. For the purpose of this chapter, the existence of a single
location shall be evidenced by the fact that all buildings containing the
principal or accessory uses:
      1.   Shall be connected or shall be located on the same lot or parcel.
      2.   Shall be operated and managed by the same person or owner.
      3.   Shall be an establishment with the same classification.
   B.   The location of any licensed commercial establishment, or of any
permitted act, may be changed provided:
      1.   Ten (10) days' written notice thereof is given to the finance
department.
      2.   The village's building code, zoning ordinances and other applicable
ordinances are complied with.
      3.   The license fee required in this chapter is paid. (Ord. 1034, 10-6-
2009)
2-7-10: RECORDS AND STANDARDS:
The finance department shall maintain a record of all commercial establishments
and commercial licenses issued under this chapter. These records shall be used
for the purpose of classifying, inspecting, and licensing all commercial
establishments in the village. Subject to the terms and provisions of this
chapter, upon payment in full of the required license fee to the village, the
village shall issue a license tag or sticker or certificate or similar evidence
of license which shall be displayed by the owner of the commercial
establishment in a conspicuous place of the licensed premises within ten (10)
days after receipt of said license. No license for the operation of a
commercial establishment in the village shall be issued if one or more of the
following conditions are determined to exist:
   A.   The building or premises of the commercial establishment does not
comply with the provisions and terms of the village's building code, zoning
code, fire regulations, health regulations, or with other applicable ordinances
and regulations of the village.
   B.   The building or premises of the commercial establishment are in a
condition of being unsanitary or unsafe so as to endanger the public safety,
health or welfare.
   C.   The owner of the commercial establishment or such legal entity
comprising the commercial establishment is indebted to the village. (Ord. 1034,
10-6-2009)
2-7-11: NUISANCES PROHIBITED:
   A.   Nuisances Generally: Generally, no business or establishment, whether
or not licensed, shall be so conducted or operated as to constitute a nuisance
in fact; and no building, vehicle, structure, yard, lot, premises, or part
thereof, shall be used, kept, maintained, or operated in connection with any
business or establishment so as to occasion any nuisance, or so as to be
dangerous to life or detrimental to health. Any charge of conducting or
operating a nuisance may be made under this chapter or under the provisions of
the village ordinance prohibiting nuisances generally.
   B.   Unsafe Or Unhealthful Business:
      1.   No building or structure utilized, constructed, or maintained in
connection with any business or occupation shall evidence an unsanitary, unsafe
or dangerous condition.
      2.   No substance, matter or thing of any kind whatever, which shall be
dangerous or detrimental to health, shall be allowed to exist in connection
with any business or occupation, or be used in any work or labor performed in
the village. (Ord. 1034, 10-6-2009)
2-7-12: WORKING CONDITIONS:
2-7-12-1: HEALTH REQUIREMENTS:
No owner, lessee, administrator or superintendent of any store, factory,
workshop, or other place shall allow or cause any room or part thereof to be
overcrowded or inadequate or faulty in respect to light, ventilation, heat or
cleanliness. (Ord. 1034, 10-6-2009)
2-7-12-2: SANITATION:
All such places of employment shall be kept in a clean condition, free from the
effluvia of a sewer, drain, privy, stable, or other nuisance; also so far as
practicable, such premises shall be free from all gases, vapors, dust or
otherwise which are injurious to health. Sufficient washroom facilities for all
employees shall be provided and such facilities shall be properly ventilated.
(Ord. 1034, 10-6-2009)
2-7-12-3: HEAT REQUIRED:
It shall be the duty of every person owning or controlling the heating plant
which furnishes heat to any factory, workshop, retail business, or other
commercial establishment, to maintain a temperature when workers are present
within such factory or workshop of not less than sixty five degrees Fahrenheit
(65°F) without such undue restriction of ventilation so as to interfere with
proper sanitary conditions therein; provided, however, that this requirement
shall not apply to any factory or workshop where the business conducted therein
is of such a nature that a lower temperature than sixty five degrees Fahrenheit
(65°F) is necessary or expedient for work or manufacturing process of such
business. (Ord. 1034, 10-6-2009)
2-7-12-4: INSPECTION:
The appropriate village officials shall visit or cause to be visited all such
places of employment in the village as often as they shall deem necessary to
assure compliance with the provisions of this section
2-7-12, in addition to times as may be elsewhere provided, and to have such
arrangements made as may be deemed necessary for the health and safety of the
employees. (Ord. 1034, 10-6-2009)
2-7-13: BUSINESS OPEN TO PUBLIC:
All businesses or commercial establishments licensed under this chapter which
invite the public generally into their establishments for the purpose of
conducting business, commercial activity, or any other activity licensed under
this chapter shall be subject to the following regulations in addition to all
other applicable provisions of the village's ordinances:
   A.   All areas within the licensed premises where the public may enter shall
be kept in a safe and sanitary condition.
   B.   All business or commercial establishments subject to this section shall
refrain from all deceptive trade practices as defined by ordinance, state or
federal law or regulation and shall comply with all applicable laws and
regulations regarding consumer protection and deceptive trade practices. In the
event of any such violation, the business license of the establishment may be
revoked pursuant to the provisions of this chapter.
   C.   It shall be unlawful to employ in any premises open to the public or
engaged in the transportation, processing, preparation or packaging of food or
beverages, any person who the employer knows or should have known, based upon
reasonable observation, was afflicted with, or who is a carrier of, any
contagious or infectious disease; and it shall be unlawful for any person who
knows or should have known that he was afflicted with or a carrier of any such
disease to work in or about any such premises. (Ord. 1034, 10-6-2009)
2-7-14: INSPECTIONS:
It shall be the duty of the village administrator to determine whether or not
all licenses are in compliance with all applicable ordinance and regulatory
requirements during the period of the license. Whenever inspections of the
premises used for or in connection with the operation of a licensed business or
occupation are provided for or required by this chapter, or any ordinance, or
are reasonably necessary to assure compliance with the provisions of any
ordinance or regulation of the village, or to detect violations thereof, it
shall be the duty of the licensee or the person in charge of the premises to
admit thereto for the purpose of making the inspection any officer or employee
of the village who is duly authorized by the administrator to make such
inspection at any reasonable time that such admission or entry is requested.
Whenever an analysis of any commodity or material is reasonably necessary to
assure compliance with the provisions of this chapter, or of any ordinance or
regulations, or to detect violations thereof, it shall be the duty of the
licensee or the person in charge of the premises to give to any duly authorized
officer or employee of the village requesting the same sufficient samples of
such material or commodity for such analysis upon official request. In addition
to any other penalty which may be provided, the administrator may revoke under
the provisions of this chapter the license of any owner or operator of a
licensed business in the village who refuses to permit any duly authorized
officer or employee to make such inspection or to take an adequate sample of
said commodity, or who interferes with such officer or employee while in the
performance of his duties. (Ord. 1034, 10-6-2009)
2-7-15: SUSPENSION, REVOCATION AND APPEAL:
When the conduct or operation of any business, occupation, activity or
establishment, whether licensed or unlicensed, shall constitute a nuisance in
fact and a clear and present danger to the public health, safety or general
welfare, or where the holder of any license shall have refused to allow an
inspection of his premises or has refused to furnish a sample of his goods for
testing, the village administrator shall be authorized to summarily order the
cessation of business and the closing of the premises until the danger no
longer exists. Within eight (8) days after a license or permit is suspended
pursuant to this section:
   A.   The village administrator shall call a hearing in accord with
subsection C of this section for the purpose of determining whether or not the
license or permit should be revoked.
   B.   Unless otherwise provided, any license issued under this chapter may be
suspended or revoked by the village administrator after notice and hearing as
provided in subsection C of this section for any of the following causes:
      1.   Any fraud, misrepresentation or false statement contained in the
application for the license.
      2.   Any violation by the licensee of this chapter or other village codes
or ordinances relating to the license, permit, the subject matter of the
license, or to the premises occupied.
      3.   Conviction of the licensee or permittee of any felony or of a
misdemeanor where such conviction indicates their inability to operate a safe,
honest and legitimate business operation within the village.
      4.   Failure of the licensee to pay the license fee or any other
indebtedness, charge, fine or penalty owing to the village.
      5.   Refusal to permit inspections or interference with an authorized
village officer or employee while in the performance of his duties in making
such inspections as provided in this chapter.
      6.   When the conduct of any licensee, agent or employee is so inimical
to the public health, safety or general welfare and/or the continued operation
of the business constitutes a nuisance and thus gives rise to an emergency.
Said suspension or revocation, if ordered, shall be in addition to any other
provision imposing a penalty for the violation of any section of the codes or
ordinances of the village.
   C.   The village administrator shall conduct a hearing for the purpose of
determining whether or not the license should be suspended or revoked in
accordance with the following:
      1.   Notice of the hearing for suspension or revocation of a license or
permit shall be given in writing setting forth specifically the grounds of the
complaint and the time and place of the hearing. Such notice may be hand
delivered or mailed by certified mail, return receipt requested, to the
licensee to his last known address at least five (5) days prior to the date set
for the hearing.
      2.   An attorney designated by the corporate authorities shall represent
the village at the hearing. The licensee shall be permitted counsel and have
the right to submit evidence and cross examine witnesses. The village
administrator shall serve as the hearing officer and shall render the decision,
which may include suspension for up to ten (10) days, or revocation, and/or the
payment of fines and performance of other actions.
      3.   At or prior to the hearing, the parties may enter into an agreement
which establishes a series of actions to be taken and/or fines to be paid which
will avoid suspension or revocation at that time.
   D.   Any person aggrieved by the decision of the village administrator in
connection with the suspension or revocation of a license as provided in this
section shall have the right of appeal to the village board of trustees. Such
appeal shall be taken by filing with the village clerk, within ten (10) days
after notice of suspension or revocation, a written statement under oath
setting forth specifically the grounds for appeal. The board of trustees shall
thereupon set the time and place for a hearing on such appeal and notice of
such hearing shall be given to the applicant or licensee in the same manner as
provided in this section. The decision of a majority of the board of trustees
present at the hearing of such appeal shall be required to reverse the decision
of the village administrator. (Ord. 1034, 10-6-2009)
2-7-16: LICENSE TO BE POSTED; DESTRUCTION, REMOVAL OF LICENSE:
It shall be the duty of any person conducting a licensed business in the
village to keep his license displayed at all times in a prominent place on the
premises, machine or vehicle used for such business. No person shall destroy,
obliterate, take, remove or carry away without the consent of the owner any
license, certificate, plate or sticker which has been issued by the village
except when such license, certificate, plate or sticker has been discontinued
or the licensed premises have been abandoned. Nothing herein shall prevent the
village administrator or his duly authorized representative from removing any
license, certificate, plate or sticker from the possession of a former
licensee, his premises, any vehicle or any machine when said license has been
revoked under the provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 1034, 10-6-2009)
2-7-17: LICENSE NOT TO PRECLUDE OTHER LICENSES:
The license required in this chapter shall be in addition to any vehicle
license, liquor license, building permit, inspection fees or any other fees or
charges that may be required by other village ordinances, whether now existing
or hereafter adopted. (Ord. 1034, 10-6-2009)
2-7-18: ACTIVITIES AND ORGANIZATIONS EXCLUDED:
The terms and provisions of this chapter shall not be made applicable to a
building or premises or portion thereof, the principal use of which is for the
practice or operation of a business which is preexempted from regulation by
state law; provided, however, that such activities when accessory to the
operation of a commercial establishment as herein defined shall not exclude the
principal commercial establishment from the terms and provisions of this
chapter. The license fee requirements of this chapter shall not apply to
activities sponsored or conducted by religious, educational, charitable, civic
or political organizations or institutions except to the extent that such
organization or institution routinely engages in the sale, serving or
preparation of food or drink; or to governmental institutions or agencies
acting in either a governmental or proprietary capacity; or to any franchised
public utility except to the extent that such franchised public utility engages
in the sale or preparation of food or drink for its employees; or to carriers
regulated exclusively by the federal government; or to home occupations allowed
under the zoning code; or to private clubs except to the extent that such club
routinely engages in the sale or preparation of food or drink for its members
or their guests. Nothing in this section shall be deemed to diminish the
authority of the village to perform any of its necessary or ordinary regulatory
functions, nor shall any organization as described in this section be relieved
of the responsibility of filing an application and securing a license as is
otherwise provided in this chapter. (Ord. 1034, 10-6-2009)
2-7-19: PENALTY:
It shall be unlawful for any person, firm, or corporation to violate any
provisions of this chapter, and, except as otherwise provided, any person,
firm, or corporation guilty of violating any of the provisions of this chapter
shall be punishable as provided under section
 1-4-1 of this code. Each day that a violation continues shall be deemed a
separate offense. (Ord. 1034, 10-6-2009)
CHAPTER 8
REGISTRATION OF CONTRACTORS
SECTION:
2-8-1: Registration Required
2-8-2: Application For Registration; Issuance
2-8-3: Registration Fee
2-8-4: Execution Of Bond (Rep. by Ord. 785, 4-2-2003)
2-8-5: Insurance Required
2-8-6: Revocation Of Registration; Notice
2-8-7: General Duties Of Contractors
2-8-8: Inspection And Enforcement
2-8-9: Penalty
2-8-1: REGISTRATION REQUIRED:
It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in the business of contractor
within the village without being registered as a contractor in the manner
hereinafter set forth. Contractors shall include, but not be limited to, the
classifications described in section
2-8-3 of this chapter. (Ord. 566, 6-16-1992)
2-8-2: APPLICATION FOR REGISTRATION; ISSUANCE:
   A.   Any person desiring to engage in the business of contractor within the
village shall file an application for registration with the office of the
building commissioner. Upon the filing of such application in proper form and
providing of all necessary insurance certificates, along with payment of the
registration fee set out in section
2-8-3 of this chapter, the building commissioner shall register the applicant
as a contractor and classify the applicant into the proper category as outlined
in section
2-8-3 of this chapter.
   B.   Upon verification of the applicant's application, references and
insurance, the building commissioner shall issue a certificate of registration
which will authorize the applicant to engage in such business for the fiscal
year in which it is issued. (Ord. 566, 6-16-1992; amd. Ord. 785, 4-2-2003)
2-8-3: REGISTRATION FEE:
The fee for registration of contractors shall be one hundred fifty dollars
($150.00) for general contractors and one hundred dollars ($100.00) for all
other contractors and shall be valid for a period of one year from the date of
issuance. The fee shall be an annual fee which shall be paid by the applicant
upon filing the application. (Ord. 785, 4-2-2003)
2-8-4: EXECUTION OF BOND:
(Rep. by Ord. 785, 4-2-2003)
2-8-5: INSURANCE REQUIRED:
Every person registered as a contractor in the village shall show proof of
insurance to the building commissioner in the following amounts:
 
Bodily injury liability   $300,000.00
Property damage liability 100,000.00
Workers' compensation     As required by the industrial commission of Illinois
 
 
Business auto Bodily injury liability   $300,000.00
             Property damage liability 50,000.00
 
(Ord. 566, 6-16-1992)
2-8-6: REVOCATION OF REGISTRATION; NOTICE:
The building commissioner may revoke a contractor's registration if the
contractor violates the building codes of the village. The contractor must be
notified of the intent to revoke the contractor registration and of the alleged
violations, and the contractor will have seven (7) days from the date notice is
given to correct said violations, or to show cause why there is no violation.
Notice shall be given by any of the following manners:
   A.   Certified mail at the address provided on the contractor's license.
   B.   Personal delivery.
   C.   Posting on the site in which the contractor is working. (Ord. 566, 6-
16-1992)
2-8-7: GENERAL DUTIES OF CONTRACTORS:
It shall be the duty of all contractors licensed under this chapter to comply
with the provisions of this chapter and all ordinances relating thereto or
regulating the activities of contractors and, in addition thereto, to regularly
and as needed, but at least once each week, remove or cause to be removed from
the site of contractors' activities all trash, refuse and waste materials so as
to keep the site of activities in an orderly condition, free from standing
water, unguarded dangerous implements and health and safety hazards.
Contractors shall not obstruct traffic on streets or sidewalks or permit dirt
or waste materials to fall or be carried onto such public ways. (Ord. 726, 8-1-
2000)
2-8-8: INSPECTION AND ENFORCEMENT:
The provisions of this chapter are declared to be of a regulatory nature, and
it shall at all times be the duty of the building, public works and police
departments to regularly inspect the sites of contractors' activities to see
that such sites are being conducted and operated in accordance with the
requirements of all laws and ordinances applicable thereto. (Ord. 726, 8-1-
2000)
2-8-9: PENALTY:
Any person convicted of a violation of any section or provision of this chapter
shall be punished by a fine as established in section
 1-4-1 of this code for any one offense. (Ord. 791, 8-5-2003; amd. Ord. 1061,
4-20-2010)
CHAPTER 9
SIMPLIFIED MUNICIPAL TELECOMMUNICATIONS TAX
SECTION:
2-9-1: Tax Rate
2-9-2: Definitions
2-9-3: Prevention Of Multistate And Multimunicipality Taxation
2-9-4: Collection Of Tax By Retailers
2-9-5: Returns To Department
2-9-6: Resellers
2-9-1: TAX RATE 1 :
The rate of the simplified municipal telecommunications tax imposed under the
authority of the simplified municipal telecommunications tax 2  upon the act or
privilege of originating in the municipality or receiving in the municipality
intrastate or interstate telecommunications by a person shall be six percent
(6%) of the gross charges for such telecommunications purchased at retail.
(Ord. 1076, 12-21-2010)
 
Notes
1 1. Effective for all gross charges billed by telecommunications retailers on
  and after July 1, 2011.
2 2. 35 ILCS 636/5-1 et seq.
2-9-2: DEFINITIONS:
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the following meanings:
   AMOUNT PAID: The amount charged to the taxpayer's service address in such
municipality regardless of where such amount is billed or paid.
   DEPARTMENT: The Illinois department of revenue.
   GROSS CHARGE: The amount paid for the act or privilege of originating or
receiving telecommunications in such municipality and for all services and
equipment provided in connection therewith by a retailer, valued in money
whether paid in money or otherwise, including cash, credits, services and
property of every kind or nature, and shall be determined without any deduction
on account of the cost of such telecommunications, the cost of the materials
used, labor or service costs or any other expense whatsoever. In case credit is
extended, the amount thereof shall be included only as and when paid. "Gross
charges" for private line service shall include charges imposed at each channel
termination point within this municipality and charges for the portion of the
interoffice channels provided within this municipality. Charges for that
portion of the interoffice channel connecting two (2) or more channel
termination points, one or more of which is located within the jurisdictional
boundary of this municipality, shall be determined by the retailer by
multiplying an amount equal to the total charge for the interoffice channel by
a fraction, the numerator of which is the number of channel termination points
that are located within the jurisdictional boundary of this municipality and
the denominator of which is the total number of channel termination points
connected by the interoffice channel. However, "gross charge" shall not include
any of the following:
   A.   Any amounts added to a purchaser's bill because of a charge made
pursuant to: 1) the tax imposed by this chapter, 2) the tax imposed by the
telecommunications excise tax act, 3) the tax imposed by section 4251 of the
internal revenue code, 4) 911 surcharges, or 5) charges added to customers'
bills pursuant to the provisions of section 9-221 or 9-222 of the public
utilities act, as amended, or any similar charges added to customers' bills by
retailers who are not subject to rate regulation by the Illinois commerce
commission for the purpose of recovering any of the tax liabilities or other
amounts specified in those provisions of the public utilities act.
   B.   Charges for a sent collect telecommunication received outside of such
municipality.
   C.   Charges for leased time on equipment or charges for the storage of data
or information for subsequent retrieval or the processing of data or
information intended to change its form or content. Such equipment includes,
but is not limited to, the use of calculators, computers, data processing
equipment, tabulating equipment or accounting equipment and also includes the
usage of computers under a time sharing agreement.
   D.   Charges for customer equipment, including such equipment that is leased
or rented by the customer from any source, wherein such charges are
disaggregated and separately identified from other charges.
   E.   Charges to business enterprises certified as exempt under section 9-
222.1 of the public utilities act to the extent of such exemption and during
the period of time specified by the department of commerce and economic
opportunity.
   F.   Charges for telecommunications and all services and equipment provided
in connection therewith between a parent corporation and its wholly owned
subsidiaries or between wholly owned subsidiaries when the tax imposed under
the Illinois simplified municipal telecommunications tax act has already been
paid to a retailer and only to the extent that the charges between the parent
corporation and wholly owned subsidiaries or between wholly owned subsidiaries
represent expense allocation between the corporations and not the generation of
profit for the corporation rendering such service.
   G.   Bad debts ("bad debt" means any portion of a debt that is related to a
sale at retail for which gross charges are not otherwise deductible or
excludable that has become worthless or uncollectible, as determined under
applicable federal income tax standards; if the portion of the debt deemed to
be bad is subsequently paid, the retailer shall report and pay the tax on that
portion during the reporting period in which the payment is made).
   H.   Charges paid by inserting coins in coin operated telecommunication
devices.
   I.   Amounts paid by telecommunications retailers under the
telecommunications infrastructure maintenance fee act.
   J.   Charges for nontaxable services or telecommunications if: 1) those
charges are aggregated with other charges for telecommunications that are
taxable, 2) those charges are not separately stated on the customer bill or
invoice, and 3) the retailer can reasonably identify the nontaxable charges on
the retailer's books and records kept in the regular course of business. If the
nontaxable charges cannot reasonably be identified, the gross charge from the
sale of both taxable and nontaxable services or telecommunications billed on a
combined basis shall be attributed to the taxable services or
telecommunications. The burden of proving nontaxable charges shall be on the
retailer of the telecommunications.
   INTERSTATE TELECOMMUNICATIONS: All telecommunications that either originate
or terminate outside this state.
   INTRASTATE TELECOMMUNICATIONS: All telecommunications that originate and
terminate within this state.
   PERSON: Any natural individual, firm, trust, estate, partnership,
association, joint stock company, joint venture, corporation, limited liability
company, or a receiver, trustee, guardian, or other representative appointed by
order of any court, the federal and state governments, including state
universities created by statute, or any city, town, county, or other political
subdivision of this state.
   PURCHASE AT RETAIL: The acquisition, consumption or use of
telecommunications through a sale at retail.
   RETAILER: Every person engaged in the business of making sales at retail as
defined in this section. The department may, in its discretion, upon
application, authorize the collection of the tax hereby imposed by any retailer
not maintaining a place of business within this state, who, to the satisfaction
of the department, furnishes adequate security to ensure collection and payment
of the tax. Such retailer shall be issued, without charge, a permit to collect
such tax. When so authorized, it shall be the duty of such retailer to collect
the tax upon all of the gross charges for telecommunications in this state in
the same manner and subject to the same requirements as a retailer maintaining
a place of business within this state. The permit may be revoked by the
department at its discretion.
   RETAILER MAINTAINING A PLACE OF BUSINESS IN THIS STATE (Or Any Like Term):
Any retailer having or maintaining within this state, directly or by a
subsidiary, an office, distribution facilities, transmission facilities, sales
office, warehouse or other place of business, or any agent or other
representative operating within this state under the authority of the retailer
or its subsidiary, irrespective of whether such place of business or agent or
other representative is located here permanently or temporarily, or whether
such retailer or subsidiary is licensed to do business in this state.
   SALE AT RETAIL: The transmitting, supplying or furnishing of
telecommunications and all services and equipment provided in connection
therewith for a consideration, to persons other than the federal and state
governments, and state universities created by statute and other than between a
parent corporation and its wholly owned subsidiaries or between wholly owned
subsidiaries for their use or consumption and not for resale.
   SERVICE ADDRESS: The location of telecommunications equipment from which
telecommunications services are originated or at which telecommunications
services are received by a taxpayer. In the event this may not be a defined
location, as in the case of mobile phones, paging systems, and maritime
systems, service address means the customer's place of primary use as defined
in the mobile telecommunications sourcing conformity act. For air to ground
systems and the like, "service address" shall mean the location of a taxpayer's
primary use of the telecommunications equipment as defined by telephone number,
authorization code, or location in Illinois where bills are sent.
   TAXPAYER: A person who individually or through his or her agents, employees,
or permittees engages in the act or privilege of originating or receiving
telecommunications in a municipality and who incurs a tax liability as
authorized by this act.
   TELECOMMUNICATIONS: In addition to the meaning ordinarily and popularly
ascribed to the word, includes, without limitation, messages or information
transmitted through use of local, toll, and wide area telephone service,
private line services, channel services, telegraph services, teletypewriter,
computer exchange services, cellular mobile telecommunications service,
specialized mobile radio, stationary two-way radio, paging service, or any
other form of mobile and portable one-way or two-way communications, or any
other transmission of messages or information by electronic or similar means,
between or among points by wire, cable, fiber optics, laser, microwave, radio,
satellite, or similar facilities. As used in this chapter, "private line" means
a dedicated nontraffic sensitive service for a single customer, that entitles
the customer to exclusive or priority use of a communications channel or group
of channels, from one or more specified locations to one or more other
specified locations. The definition of "telecommunications" shall not include
value added services in which computer processing applications are used to act
on the form, content, code, and protocol of the information for purposes other
than transmission. "Telecommunications" shall not include purchases of
telecommunications by a telecommunications service provider for use as a
component part of the service provided by such provider to the ultimate retail
consumer who originates or terminates the taxable end to end
telecommunications. Carrier access charges, right of access charges, charges
for use of intercompany facilities, and all telecommunications resold in the
subsequent provision of, used as a component of, or integrated into, end to end
telecommunications service shall be nontaxable as sales for resale. Prepaid
telephone calling arrangements shall not be considered "telecommunications"
subject to the tax imposed under this chapter. For purposes of this chapter,
"prepaid telephone calling arrangements" means that term as defined in section
2-27 of the retailers' occupation tax act. (Ord. 1076, 12-21-2010)
2-9-3: PREVENTION OF MULTISTATE AND MULTIMUNICIPALITY TAXATION:
   A.   To prevent actual multimunicipal taxation of the act or privilege of
originating or receiving intrastate telecommunications by a person, any
taxpayer, upon proof that the taxpayer has paid a tax in another municipality
on that event, shall be allowed a credit against any tax enacted pursuant to or
authorized by this chapter to the extent of the amount of the tax properly due
and paid in the municipality that was not previously allowed as a credit
against any other municipal tax.
   B.   To prevent actual multistate or multimunicipal taxation of the act or
privilege of originating or receiving interstate telecommunications by a
person, any taxpayer, upon proof that the taxpayer has paid a tax in another
state or municipality in this state on such event, shall be allowed a credit
against any tax enacted pursuant to or authorized by this chapter to the extent
of the amount of such tax properly due and paid in such other state or such tax
properly due and paid in a municipality in this state which was not previously
allowed as a credit against any other state or local tax in this state.
   C.   The tax imposed under this chapter is not imposed on such act or
privilege to the extent such act or privilege may not, under the constitution
and statutes of the United States, be made the subject of taxation by
municipalities in this state. (Ord. 1076, 12-21-2010)
2-9-4: COLLECTION OF TAX BY RETAILERS:
   A.   The tax authorized by this chapter shall be collected from the taxpayer
by a retailer maintaining a place of business in this state and shall be
remitted by such retailer to the department. Any tax required to be collected
pursuant to or as authorized by this chapter and any such tax collected by such
retailer and required to be remitted to the department shall constitute a debt
owed by the retailer to the state. Retailers shall collect the tax from the
taxpayer by adding the tax to the gross charge for the act or privilege of
originating or receiving telecommunications when sold for use, in the manner
prescribed by the department. The tax authorized by this chapter shall
constitute a debt of the taxpayer to the retailer until paid, and, if unpaid,
is recoverable at law in the same manner as the original charge for such sale
at retail. If the retailer fails to collect the tax from the taxpayer, then the
taxpayer shall be required to pay the tax directly to the department in the
manner provided by the department.
   B.   Retailers filing tax returns pursuant to this chapter shall, at the
time of filing such return, pay to the department the amount of the tax
collected, less a discount of one percent (1%) which is allowed to reimburse
the retailer for the expenses incurred in keeping records, billing the
customer, preparing and filing returns, remitting the tax and supplying data to
the department upon request. No discount may be claimed by a retailer on
returns not timely filed and for taxes not timely remitted.
   C.   Whenever possible, the tax authorized by this chapter shall, when
collected, be stated as a distinct item separate and apart from the gross
charge for telecommunications. (Ord. 1076, 12-21-2010)
2-9-5: RETURNS TO DEPARTMENT:
On or before August 31, 2011, and on or before the last day of every month
thereafter, the tax imposed under this chapter on telecommunication retails
shall be returned with appropriate forms and information as required by the
department pursuant to the Illinois simplified municipal telecommunications tax
act 1  and any accompanying rules and regulations created by the department to
implement the Illinois simplified municipal telecommunications tax act. (Ord.
1076, 12-21-2010)
 
Notes
1 1. 35 ILCS 636/5-50.
2-9-6: RESELLERS:
   A.   If a person who originates or receives telecommunications claims to be
a reseller of such telecommunications, such person shall apply to the
department for a resale number. Such applicant shall state facts which will
show the department why such applicant is not liable for tax authorized by the
Illinois simplified municipal telecommunications tax act on any of such
purchases and shall furnish such additional information as the department may
reasonably require.
   B.   Upon approval of the application, the department shall assign a resale
number to the applicant and shall certify such number to the applicant. The
department may cancel any number which is obtained through misrepresentation,
or which is used to send or receive such telecommunication tax free when such
actions in fact are not for resale, or which no longer applies because of the
person's having discontinued the making of resales.
   C.   Except as provided hereinabove in this chapter, the act or privilege of
originating or receiving telecommunications in this state shall not be made tax
free on the ground of being a sale for resale unless the person has an active
resale number from the department and furnishes that number to the retailer in
connection with certifying to the retailer that any sale to such person is
nontaxable because of being a sale for resale. (Ord. 1076, 12-21-2010)
CHAPTER 10
LOCALLY IMPOSED AND ADMINISTERED TAX RIGHTS AND RESPONSIBILITIES
SECTION:
2-10-1: Title
2-10-2: Scope
2-10-3: Definitions
2-10-4: Notices
2-10-5: Late Payment
2-10-6: Payment Applied
2-10-7: Credits And Refunds
2-10-8: Audit Procedure
2-10-9: Appeal
2-10-10: Hearing
2-10-11: Interest And Penalties
2-10-12: Abatement
2-10-13: Installment Contracts
2-10-14: Statute Of Limitations
2-10-15: Voluntary Disclosure
2-10-16: Publication
2-10-17: Liens
2-10-18: Application
2-10-1: TITLE:
This chapter shall be known as, and may be cited as, the LOCALLY IMPOSED AND
ADMINISTERED TAX RIGHTS AND RESPONSIBILITY ORDINANCE. (Ord. 741, 2-6-2001)
2-10-2: SCOPE:
The provisions of this chapter shall apply to the village's procedures in
connection with all of the village's locally imposed and administered taxes.
(Ord. 741, 2-6-2001)
2-10-3: DEFINITIONS:
Certain words or terms herein shall have the meaning ascribed to them as
follows:
   ACT: The local government taxpayers' bill of rights act.
   CORPORATE AUTHORITIES: The village president and board of trustees.
   LOCAL TAX ADMINISTRATOR: The village's treasurer is charged with the
administration and collection of the locally imposed and administered taxes,
including staff, employees or agents to the extent they are authorized by the
local tax administrator to act in the local tax administrator's stead. The
local tax administrator shall have the authority to implement the terms of this
chapter to give full effect to this chapter. The exercise of such authority by
the local tax administrator shall not be inconsistent with this chapter and the
act.
   LOCALLY IMPOSED AND ADMINISTERED TAX OR TAX: Each tax imposed by the village
that is collected or administered by the village, not an agency or department
of the state. It does not include any taxes imposed upon real property under
the property tax code or fees collected by the village other than
infrastructure maintenance fees.
   NOTICE: Each audit notice, collection notice or other similar notice or
communication in connection with each of the village's locally imposed and
administered taxes.
   TAX ORDINANCE: Each ordinance adopted by the village that imposes any
locally imposed and administered tax.
   TAXPAYER: Any person required to pay any locally imposed and administered
tax and generally includes the person upon whom the legal incidence of such tax
is placed and with consumer taxes includes the business or entity required to
collect and pay the locally imposed and administered tax to the village.
   VILLAGE: The village of Manhattan, Illinois. (Ord. 741, 2-6-2001)
2-10-4: NOTICES:
Unless otherwise provided, whenever notice is required to be given, the notice
is to be in writing and mailed not less than seven (7) calendar days prior to
the day fixed for any applicable hearing, audit or other scheduled act of the
local tax administrator. The notice shall be sent by the local tax
administrator as follows:
   A.   First class or express mail, or overnight mail, addressed to the
persons concerned at the persons' last known address, or
   B.   Personal service or delivery. (Ord. 741, 2-6-2001)
2-10-5: LATE PAYMENT:
Any notice, payment, remittance or other filing required to be made to the
village pursuant to any tax ordinance shall be considered late unless it is: a)
physically received by the village on or before the due date, or b) received in
an envelope or other container displaying a valid, readable U.S. postmark dated
on or before the due date, properly addressed to the village with adequate
postage prepaid. (Ord. 741, 2-6-2001)
2-10-6: PAYMENT APPLIED:
Any payment or remittance received for a tax period shall be applied in the
following order: a) first to the tax due for the applicable period; b) second
to the interest due for the applicable period; and c) third to the penalty for
the applicable period. (Ord. 741, 2-6-2001)
2-10-7: CREDITS AND REFUNDS:
   A.   The village shall not refund or credit any taxes voluntarily paid
without written protest at the time of payment in the event that a locally
imposed and administered tax is declared invalidly enacted or unconstitutional
by a court of competent jurisdiction. However, a taxpayer shall not be deemed
to have paid the tax voluntarily if the taxpayer lacked knowledge of the facts
upon which to protest the taxes at the time of payment or if the taxpayer paid
the taxes under duress.
   B.   The statute of limitations on a claim for credit or refund shall be
four (4) or less years after the end of the calendar year in which payment in
error was made. The village shall not grant a credit or refund of locally
imposed and administered taxes, interest, or penalties to a person who has not
paid the amounts directly to the village.
   C.   The procedure for claiming a credit or refund of locally imposed and
administered taxes, interest or penalties paid in error shall be as follows:
      1.   The taxpayer shall submit to the local tax administrator in writing
a claim for credit or refund together with a statement specifying:
         a.   The name of the locally imposed and administered tax subject to
the claim;
         b.   The tax period for the locally imposed and administered tax
subject to the claim;
         c.   The date of the tax payment subject to the claim and the canceled
check or receipt for the payment;
         d.   The taxpayer's recalculation, accompanied by an amended or
revised tax return, in connection with the claim; and
         e.   A request for either a refund or a credit in connection with the
claim to be applied to the amount of tax, interest and penalties overpaid, and,
as applicable, related interest on the amount overpaid; provided, however, that
there shall be no refund and only a credit given in the event the taxpayer owes
any monies to the village.
      2.   Within ten (10) days of the receipt by the local tax administrator
of any claim for a refund or credit, the local tax administrator shall either:
         a.   Grant the claim; or
         b.   Deny the claim, in whole or in part, together with a statement as
to the reason for the denial or the partial grant and denial.
      3.   In the event the local tax administrator grants, in whole or in
part, a claim for refund or credit, the amount of the grant for refund or
credit shall bear interest at the rate of five percent (5%) per annum, based on
a year of three hundred sixty five (365) days and the number of days elapsed,
from the date of the overpayment to the date of mailing of a refund check or
the grant of a credit. (Ord. 741, 2-6-2001)
2-10-8: AUDIT PROCEDURE:
Any request for proposed audit pursuant to any local administered tax shall
comply with the notice requirements of this chapter.
   A.   Each notice of audit shall contain the following information:
      1.   The tax;
      2.   The time period of the audit; and
      3.   A brief description of the books and records to be made available
for the auditor.
   B.   Any audit shall be conducted during normal business hours and if the
date and time selected by the local tax administrator is not agreeable to the
taxpayer, another date and time may be requested by the taxpayer within thirty
(30) days after the originally designated audit and during normal business
hours.
   C.   The taxpayer may request an extension of time to have an audit
conducted. The audit shall be conducted not less than seven (7) days nor more
than thirty (30) days from the date the notice is given, unless the taxpayer
and the local tax administrator agreed to some other convenient time. In the
event the taxpayer is unable to comply with the audit on the date in question,
the taxpayer may request another date within the thirty (30) days, approved in
writing, that is convenient to the taxpayer and the local tax administrator.
   D.   Every taxpayer shall keep accurate books and records of the taxpayer's
business activities, including original source documents and books of entry
denoting the transactions which had given rise or may have given rise to any
tax liability, exemption or deduction. All books shall be kept in the English
language and shall be subject to and available for inspection by the village.
   E.   It is the duty and responsibility of every taxpayer to make available
its books and records for inspection by the village. If the taxpayer or tax
collector fails to provide the document necessary for audit within the time
provided, the local tax administrator may issue a tax determination and
assessment based on the tax administrator's determination of the best estimate
of the taxpayer's tax liability.
   F.   If an audit determines there has been an overpayment of a locally
imposed and administered tax as a result of the audit, written notice of the
amount of overpayment shall be given to the taxpayer within thirty (30) days of
the village's determination of the amount of overpayment.
   G.   In the event a tax payment was submitted to the incorrect local
governmental entity, the local tax administrator shall notify the local
governmental entity imposing such tax. (Ord. 741, 2-6-2001)
2-10-9: APPEAL:
   A.   The local tax administrator shall send written notice to a taxpayer
upon the local tax administrator's issuance of a protestable notice of tax due,
a bill, a claim denial, or a notice of claim reduction regarding any tax. The
notice shall include the following information:
      1.   The reason for the assessment;
      2.   The amount of the tax liability proposed;
      3.   The procedure for appealing the assessment; and
      4.   The obligations of the village during the audit, appeal, refund and
collection process.
   B.   A taxpayer who receives written notice from the local tax administrator
of a determination of tax due or assessment may file with the local tax
administrator a written protest and petition for hearing, setting forth the
basis of the taxpayer's request for a hearing. The written protest and petition
for hearing must be filed with the local tax administrator within forty five
(45) days of receipt of the written notice of the tax determination and
assessment.
   C.   If a timely written notice and petition for hearing is filed, the local
tax administrator shall fix the time and place for hearing and shall give
written notice to the taxpayer. The hearing shall be scheduled for a date
within fourteen (14) days of receipt of the written protest and petition for
hearing, unless the taxpayer requests a later date convenient to all parties.
   D.   If a written protest and petition for hearing is not filed within the
forty five (45) day period, the tax determination, audit or assessment shall
become a final bill due and owing without further notice.
   E.   Upon the showing of reasonable cause by the taxpayer and the full
payment of the contested tax liability along with interest accrued as of the
due date of the tax, the local tax administrator may reopen or extend the time
for filing a written protest and petition for hearing. In no event shall the
time for filing a written protest and petition for hearing be reopened or
extended for more than ninety (90) days after the expiration of the forty five
(45) day period. (Ord. 741, 2-6-2001)
2-10-10: HEARING:
   A.   Whenever a taxpayer or a tax collector has filed a timely written
protest and petition for hearing under the previous section, the local tax
administrator shall conduct a hearing regarding any appeal.
   B.   No continuances shall be granted except in cases where a continuance is
absolutely necessary to protect the rights of the taxpayer. Lack of preparation
shall not be grounds for a continuance. Any continuance granted shall not
exceed fourteen (14) days.
   C.   At the hearing the local tax administrator shall preside and shall hear
testimony and accept any evidence relevant to the tax determination, audit or
assessment. The strict rules of evidence applicable to judicial proceedings
shall not apply.
   D.   At the conclusion of the hearing, the local tax administrator shall
make a written determination on the basis of the evidence presented at the
hearing. The taxpayer or tax collector shall be provided with a copy of the
written decision. (Ord. 741, 2-6-2001)
2-10-11: INTEREST AND PENALTIES:
In the event a determination has been made that a tax is due and owing, through
audit, assessment or other bill sent, the tax must be paid within the time
frame otherwise indicated.
   A.   Interest: The village hereby provides for the amount of interest to be
assessed on a late payment, underpayment, or nonpayment of the tax, to be five
percent (5%) per annum, based on a year of three hundred sixty five (365) days
and the number of days elapsed.
   B.   Penalty: If a tax return is not filed within the time and manner
provided by the controlling tax ordinance, a late filing penalty of five
percent (5%) of the amount of tax required to be shown as due on a return shall
be imposed and a late payment penalty of five percent (5%) of the tax due shall
be imposed. If no return is filed within the time or manner provided by the
controlling tax ordinance and prior to the village issuing a notice of tax
delinquency or notice of tax liability, then a failure to file penalty shall be
assessed equal to five percent (5%) of the total tax due for the applicable
reporting period for which the return was required to be filed. A late filing
or payment penalty shall not apply if a failure to file penalty is imposed by
the controlling ordinance. (Ord. 741, 2-6-2001)
2-10-12: ABATEMENT:
The local tax administrator shall have the authority to waive or abate any late
filing penalty, late payment penalty or failure to file penalty if the local
tax administrator shall determine reasonable cause exists for delay or failure
to make a filing. (Ord. 741, 2-6-2001)
2-10-13: INSTALLMENT CONTRACTS:
The village may enter into an installment contract with the taxpayer for the
payment of taxes under the controlling tax ordinance. The local tax
administrator may not cancel any installment contract so entered unless the
taxpayer fails to pay any amount due and owing. Upon written notice by the
local tax administrator that the payment is thirty (30) days delinquent, the
taxpayer shall have fourteen (14) working days to cure any delinquency. If the
taxpayer fails to cure the delinquency within the fourteen (14) days to
demonstrate good faith in restructuring the installment contract with the local
administrator, the installment contract shall be canceled without further
notice to the taxpayer. (Ord. 741, 2-6-2001)
2-10-14: STATUTE OF LIMITATIONS:
The village, through the local tax administrator, shall review all tax returns
in a prompt and timely manner and inform taxpayers of any amounts due and
owing. The taxpayer shall have forty five (45) days after receiving notice of
the reviewed tax returns to make any request for refund or provide any tax
still due and owing.
   A.   No determination of tax due and owing may be issued more than four (4)
years maximum after the end of the calendar year for which the return for the
applicable period was filed or for the calendar year in which the return for
the applicable period was due, whichever occurs later.
   B.   If any tax return is not filed or if during any four (4) year period
for which a notice of tax determination or assessment may be issued by the
village, the tax paid was less than seventy five percent (75%) of the tax due,
the statute of limitations shall be six (6) years maximum after the end of the
calendar year in which return for the applicable period was due or after the
end of the calendar year in which the return for the applicable period was
filed.
   C.   No statute of limitations shall apply if a fraudulent tax return was
filed by the taxpayer. (Ord. 741, 2-6-2001)
2-10-15: VOLUNTARY DISCLOSURE:
For any locally imposed and administered tax for which a taxpayer has not
received a written notice of an audit, investigation, or assessment from the
local tax administrator, a taxpayer is entitled to file an application with the
local tax administrator for a voluntary disclosure of the tax due. A taxpayer
filing a voluntary disclosure application must agree to pay the amount of tax
due, along with interest of one percent (1%) per month, for all periods prior
to the filing of the application but not more than four (4) years before the
date of filing the application. A taxpayer filing a valid voluntary disclosure
application may not be liable for any additional tax interest, or penalty for
any period before the date the application was filed. However, if the taxpayer
incorrectly determined and underpaid the amount of tax due, the taxpayer is
liable for the underpaid tax along with applicable interest on the underpaid
tax, unless the underpayment was the result of fraud on the part of the
taxpayer, in which case the application shall be deemed invalid and void. The
payment of tax and interest must be made by no later than ninety (90) days
after the filing of the voluntary disclosure application or the date agreed to
by the local tax administrator. However, any additional amounts owed as a
result of an underpayment of tax and interest previously paid under this
section must be paid within ninety (90) days after a final determination and
the exhaustion of all appeals of the additional amount owed or the date agreed
to by the local tax administrator, whichever is longer. (Ord. 741, 2-6-2001)
2-10-16: PUBLICATION:
Any locally administered tax ordinance shall be published via normal or
standard publishing requirements. The posting of a tax ordinance on the
internet shall satisfy the publication requirements. Copies of all tax
ordinances shall be made available to the public upon request at the village
clerk's office. (Ord. 741, 2-6-2001)
2-10-17: LIENS:
The local tax administrator shall establish an internal review procedure
regarding any liens filed against any taxpayers for unpaid taxes. Upon a
determination by the local tax administrator that the lien is valid, the lien
shall remain in full force and effect. If the lien is determined to be
improper, the local tax administrator shall:
   A.   Timely remove the lien at the village's expense;
   B.   Correct the taxpayer's credit record; and
   C.   Correct any public disclosure of the improperly imposed lien. (Ord.
741, 2-6-2001)
2-10-18: APPLICATION:
This chapter shall be liberally construed and administered to supplement all of
the village's tax ordinances. To the extent that any tax ordinance is in
conflict with or inconsistent with this chapter, this chapter shall be
controlling. (Ord. 741, 2-6-2001)
CHAPTER 11
TEMPORARY VENDORS
SECTION:
2-11-1: Definition
2-11-2: License
2-11-3: Signs
2-11-1: DEFINITION:
"Temporary vendors" are hereby defined as any person, company, corporation,
limited liability company (LLC), partnership or entity that establishes a
temporary outdoor location for the purpose of displaying and/or selling goods
and merchandise for a period of three (3) consecutive days or less. This
chapter shall not include vendors who sell food and/or beverages. (Ord. 748, 9-
18-2001)
2-11-2: LICENSE:
No temporary vendor shall set up or establish a location in Manhattan for the
purpose of displaying or selling goods and merchandise without first obtaining
a license therefor. Businesses which have a permanent building located within
the corporate limits of the village shall be exempt from the provisions of this
chapter. Temporary vendors shall submit an application executed by their duly
authorized representative that includes the name, address and telephone number
of the temporary vendor and, if it is a company or corporation, the name,
address and telephone number of its president and secretary, and if it is an
LLC, the name, address and telephone number of all its members, and if it is a
partnership, the name, address and telephone number of all its partners. The
applicant shall submit proof of its registration with the Illinois department
of revenue and a certificate of insurance for general liability coverage that
names the village as additionally insured in the minimum amount of one million
dollars ($1,000,000.00). The application shall include the location, number of
parking spaces within five hundred feet (500') of the display/sales location
and written permission from the property owner on which the display/sales area
is located. Display/sales areas shall only be located on private property that
has sufficient parking available, as determined by the village. Display/sales
locations shall be a minimum of fifty feet (50') from all intersections and
ingress/egress points onto public roads and shall not interfere with drivers'
line of sight on adjacent roadways and private parking lot drive aisles. No
license shall be issued by the village until the permit fee has been paid. The
fee shall be twenty five dollars ($25.00) per day or one hundred dollars
($100.00) per year. Licenses shall only be valid for six (6) days each calendar
year. The permit fee shall be waived for all not for profit and charitable
organizations that display or sell goods and merchandise for the purpose of
fundraising. (Ord. 748, 9-18-2001)
2-11-3: SIGNS:
Temporary vendors may display not more than two (2) signs, which shall be
affixed to the display/sales area. The signs shall not exceed thirty two (32)
square feet or six feet (6') in height. (Ord. 748, 9-18-2001)
CHAPTER 12
CABLE AND VIDEO SERVICE PROVIDER FEE AND PEG ACCESS SUPPORT FEE
SECTION:
2-12-1: Definitions
2-12-2: Cable/Video Service Provider Fee Imposed
2-12-3: PEG Access Support Fee Imposed
2-12-4: Applicable Principles
2-12-5: No Impact On Other Taxes Due From Holder
2-12-6: Audits Of Cable/Video Service Provider
2-12-7: Late Fees/Payments
2-12-1: DEFINITIONS:
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the following meanings:
   CABLE SERVICE: That term as defined in 47 USC section 522(6).
   COMMISSION: The Illinois commerce commission.
   GROSS REVENUES: All consideration of any kind or nature, including, without
limitation, cash, credits, property, and in- kind contributions received by the
holder for the operation of a cable or video system to provide cable service or
video service within the holder's cable service or video service area within
the village.
   A.   Gross revenues shall include the following:
      1.   Recurring charges for cable or video service.
      2.   Event based charges for cable service or video service, including,
but not limited to, pay per view and video on demand charges.
      3.   Rental of set top boxes and other cable service or video service
equipment.
      4.   Service charges related to the provision of cable service or video
service, including, but not limited to, activation, installation, and repair
charges.
      5.   Administrative charges related to the provision of cable service or
video service, including, but not limited to, service order and service
termination charges.
      6.   Late payment fees or charges, insufficient funds check charges, and
other charges assessed to recover the costs of collecting delinquent payments.
      7.   A pro rata portion of all revenue derived by the holder or its
affiliates pursuant to compensation arrangements for advertising or for
promotion or exhibition of any products or services derived from the operation
of the holder's network to provide cable service or video service within the
village. The allocation shall be based on the number of subscribers in the
village divided by the total number of subscribers in relation to the relevant
regional or national compensation arrangement.
      8.   Compensation received by the holder that is derived from the
operation of the holder's network to provide cable service or video service
with respect to commissions that are received by the holder as compensation for
promotion or exhibition of any products or services on the holder's network,
such as a "home shopping" or similar channel, subject to subsection A9 of this
definition.
      9.   In the case of a cable service or video service that is bundled or
integrated functionally with other services, capabilities, or applications, the
portion of the holder's revenue attributable to the other services,
capabilities, or applications shall be included in the gross revenue unless the
holder can reasonably identify the division or exclusion of the revenue from
its books and records that are kept in the regular course of business.
      10.   The service provider fee permitted by 220 Illinois Compiled
Statutes 5/21-801(b).
   B.   Gross revenues do not include any of the following:
      1.   Revenues not actually received, even if billed, such as bad debt,
subject to 220 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/21-801(c)(1)(vi).
      2.   Refunds, discounts, or other price adjustments that reduce the
amount of gross revenues received by the holder of the state issued
authorization to the extent the refund, rebate, credit, or discount is
attributable to cable service or video service.
      3.   Regardless of whether the services are bundled, packaged, or
functionally integrated with cable service or video service, any revenues
received from services not classified as cable service or video service,
including, without limitation, revenue received from telecommunication
services, information services, or the provision of directory or internet
advertising, including yellow pages, white pages, banner advertisement, and
electronic publishing or any other revenues attributed by the holder to
noncable service or nonvideo service in accordance with the holder's books and
records and records kept in the regular course of business and any applicable
laws, rules, regulations, standards, or orders.
      4.   The sale of cable services or video services for resale in which the
purchaser is required to collect the service provider fee from the purchaser's
subscribers to the extent the purchaser certifies in writing that it will
resell the service within the village and pay the fee permitted by 220 Illinois
Compiled Statutes 5/21-801(b) with respect to the service.
      5.   Any tax or fee of general applicability imposed upon the subscribers
or the transaction by a city, state, federal, or any other governmental entity
and collected by the holder of the state issued authorization and required to
be remitted to the taxing entity, including sales and use taxes.
      6.   Security deposits collected from subscribers.
      7.   Amounts paid by subscribers to "home shopping" or similar vendors
for merchandise sold through any home shopping channel offered as part of the
cable service or video service.
   C.   Revenue of an affiliate of a holder shall be included in the
calculation of gross revenues to the extent the treatment of the revenue as
revenue of the affiliate rather than the holder has the effect of evading the
payment of the fee permitted by 220 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/21-801(b)
which would otherwise be paid by the cable service or video service.
   HOLDER: A person or entity that has received authorization to offer or
provide cable or video service from the commission pursuant to 220 Illinois
Compiled Statutes 5/21-401.
   PEG: Public, education and governmental.
   PEG ACCESS SUPPORT FEE: The amount paid under this chapter and 220 Illinois
Compiled Statutes 5/21-801(d) by the holder to the village for the service
areas within its territorial jurisdiction.
   SERVICE: The provision of cable service or video service to subscribers and
the interaction of subscribers with the person or entity that has received
authorization to offer or provide cable or video service from the commission
pursuant to 220 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/21-401.
   SERVICE PROVIDER FEE: The amount paid under this chapter and 220 Illinois
Compiled Statutes 5/21-801 by the holder to a village for the service areas
within its territorial jurisdiction.
   VIDEO SERVICE: Video programming and subscriber interaction, if any, that is
required for the selection or use of such video programming services, and which
is provided through wireline facilities located at least in part in the public
right of way without regard to delivery technology, including internet protocol
technology. This definition does not include any video programming provided by
a commercial mobile service provider defined in 47 USC section 332(d) or any
video programming provided solely as part of, and via, service that enables
users to access content, information, electronic mail, or other services
offered over the public internet. (Ord. 988, 12-18-2007)
2-12-2: CABLE/VIDEO SERVICE PROVIDER FEE IMPOSED:
   A.   Fee Imposed: A fee is hereby imposed on any holder providing cable
service or video service in the village.
   B.   Amount Of Fee: The amount of the fee imposed hereby shall be five
percent (5%) of the holder's gross revenues, or the fee paid to the village by
an incumbent cable operator providing cable service, whichever is less.
   C.   Notice To Village: The holder shall notify the village at least ten
(10) days prior to the date on which the holder begins to offer cable service
or video service in the village.
   D.   Holder's Liability: The holder shall be liable for and pay the service
provider fee to the village. The holder's liability for the fee shall commence
on the first day of the calendar month following thirty (30) days after receipt
of the ordinance adopting this chapter by the holder. The ordinance adopting
this chapter shall be sent by mail, postage prepaid, to the address listed on
the holder's application notice sent pursuant to 220 Illinois Compiled Statutes
5/21-401(b)(6) to the village.
   E.   Payment Date: The payment of the service provider fee shall be due on a
quarterly basis, forty five (45) days after the close of the calendar quarter.
If mailed, the fee is considered paid on the date it is postmarked. Each
payment shall include a statement explaining the basis for the calculation of
the fee.
   F.   Exemption: The fee hereby imposed does not apply to existing cable
service or video service providers that have an existing franchise agreement
with the village in which a fee is paid.
   G.   Credit For Other Payments: An incumbent cable operator that elects to
terminate an existing agreement pursuant to 220 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/
21-301(c) with credit for prepaid franchise fees under that agreement may
deduct the amount of such credit from the fees that operator owes under
subsection B of this section. (Ord. 988, 12-18-2007)
2-12-3: PEG ACCESS SUPPORT FEE IMPOSED:
   A.   PEG Fee Imposed: A PEG access support fee is hereby imposed on any
holder providing cable service or video service in the village in addition to
the fee imposed pursuant to section
 2-12-2 of this chapter.
   B.   Amount Of Fee: The amount of the PEG access support fee imposed hereby
shall be one percent (1%) of the holder's gross revenues or, if greater, the
percentage of gross revenues that incumbent cable operators pay to the village
or its designee for PEG access support in the village. For purposes of this
subsection, the percentage of gross revenues that all incumbent cable operators
pay shall be equal to the annual sum of the payments that incumbent cable
operators in the service area are obligated to pay by franchises and agreements
or by contracts with the village or designee for public, education and
government access, including the total of any lump sum payments required to be
made over the term of each franchise or agreement divided by the number of
years of the applicable term, divided by the annual sum of such incumbent cable
operator's gross revenues during the immediately prior calendar year. The sum
of payments includes any payments that an incumbent cable operator is required
to pay pursuant to 220 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/21-301(c)(3).
   C.   Payment: The holder shall pay the PEG access support fee to the village
or to the entity designated by the village to manage PEG access. The holder's
liability for the PEG access support fee shall commence on the date set forth
in subsection
 2-12-2D of this chapter.
   D.   Payment Due: The payment of the PEG access support fee shall be due on
a quarterly basis, forty five (45) days after the close of the calendar
quarter. If mailed, the fee is considered paid on the date it is postmarked.
Each payment shall include a statement explaining the basis for the calculation
of the fee.
   E.   Credit For Other Payments: An incumbent cable operator that elects to
terminate an existing agreement pursuant to 220 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/
21-301(c) shall pay, at the time they would have been due, all monetary
payments for PEG access that would have been due during the remaining term of
the agreement had it not been terminated pursuant to that section. All payments
made by an incumbent cable operator pursuant to the previous sentence may be
credited against the fees that that operator owes under subsection B of this
section. (Ord. 988, 12-18-2007)
2-12-4: APPLICABLE PRINCIPLES:
All determinations and calculations under this chapter shall be made pursuant
to generally accepted accounting principles. (Ord. 988, 12-18-2007)
2-12-5: NO IMPACT ON OTHER TAXES DUE FROM HOLDER:
Nothing contained in this chapter shall be construed to exempt a holder from
any tax that is or may later be imposed by the village, including any tax that
is or may later be required to be paid by or through the holder with respect to
cable service or video service. A state issued authorization shall not affect
any requirement of the holder with respect to payment of the village's
simplified municipal telecommunications tax or any other tax as it applies to
any telephone service provided by the holder. A state issued authorization
shall not affect any requirement of the holder with respect to payment of the
local unit of government's 911 or E911 fees, taxes or charges. (Ord. 988, 12-
18-2007)
2-12-6: AUDITS OF CABLE/VIDEO SERVICE PROVIDER:
   A.   Audit Requirement: The village will notify the holder of the
requirements it imposes on other cable service or video service providers to
submit to an audit of its books and records. The holder shall comply with the
same requirements the village imposes on other cable service or video service
providers in its jurisdiction to audit the holder's books and records and to
recompute any amounts determined to be payable under the requirements of the
village. If all local franchises between the village and cable operator
terminate, the audit requirements shall be those adopted by the village
pursuant to the local government taxpayers' bill of rights act, 50 Illinois
Compiled Statutes 45/1 et seq., and/or chapter 10 of this title. No acceptance
of amounts remitted should be construed as an accord that the amounts are
correct.
   B.   Additional Payments: Any additional amount due after an audit shall be
paid within thirty (30) days after the village's submission of an invoice for
the sum. (Ord. 988, 12-18-2007)
2-12-7: LATE FEES/PAYMENTS:
All fees due and payments which are past due shall be governed by ordinances
adopted by this village pursuant to the local government taxpayers' bill of
rights act, 50 Illinois Compiled Statutes 45/1 et seq., and/or chapter 10 of
this title. (Ord. 988, 12-18-2007)
CHAPTER 13
CABLE AND VIDEO CUSTOMER PROTECTION LAW
SECTION:
2-13-1: Customer Service And Privacy Protection Law
2-13-2: Enforcement
2-13-3: Penalties
2-13-4: Customer Credits
2-13-1: CUSTOMER SERVICE AND PRIVACY PROTECTION LAW:
   A.   Adoption: The regulations of 220 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/70-501
are hereby adopted by reference and made applicable to the cable or video
providers offering services within the village's boundaries.
   B.   Amendments: Any amendment to the cable and video customer protection
law that becomes effective after the effective date of this chapter shall be
incorporated into this chapter by reference and shall be applicable to cable or
video providers offering services within the municipality's boundaries.
However, any amendment that makes its provisions optional for adoption by
municipalities shall not be incorporated into this chapter by reference without
formal action by the corporate authorities of the village. (Ord. 989, 12-18-
2007)
2-13-2: ENFORCEMENT:
The village, in conjunction with the authority granted to the attorney general,
does hereby pursuant to law declare its intent to enforce all of the customer
service and privacy protection standards of the cable and video customer
protection law with respect to complaints received from residents within the
village. (Ord. 989, 12-18-2007)
2-13-3: PENALTIES:
Cable or video providers, in addition to the penalties provided in the law,
shall be subject to a fine not less than one hundred dollars ($100.00) and not
more than as provided in section
1-4-1 of this code for any material breach of the cable and video customer
protection law. The monetary penalties shall apply on a competitively neutral
basis and shall not exceed seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00) for each day
of the material breach, and shall not exceed twenty five thousand dollars
($25,000.00) for each occurrence of a material breach per customer.
   A.   "Material breach" means any substantial failure of a cable or video
provider to comply with service quality and other standards specified in any
provision of the law.
   B.   The village shall give the cable or video provider written notice of
any alleged material breaches of the law and allow such provider at least
thirty (30) days from the receipt of the notice to remedy the specified
material breach.
   C.   A material breach, for the purposes of assuming penalties, shall be
deemed to occur for each day that a material breach has not been remedied by
the cable or video service provider after the notice in subsection B of this
section. (Ord. 989, 12-18-2007)
2-13-4: CUSTOMER CREDITS:
   A.   The village hereby sets forth the following schedule of customer
credits for violations:
      1.   Failure to provide notice of customer service standards upon
initiation of service: Twenty five dollars ($25.00).
      2.   a. Failure to install service within seven (7) days: Waiver of fifty
percent (50%) of the installation fee or the monthly fee for the lowest cost
basic service, whichever is greater.
         b.   Failure to install service within fourteen (14) days: Waiver of
one hundred percent (100%) of the installation fee or the monthly fee for the
lowest cost basic service, whichever is greater.
      3.   Failure to remedy service interruptions or poor video or audio
service quality within forty eight (48) hours: Pro rata credit of total regular
monthly charges equal to the number of days of the service interruption.
      4.   Failure to keep an appointment or to notify the customer prior to
the close of business on the business day prior to the scheduled appointment:
Twenty five dollars ($25.00).
      5.   Violation of privacy protections: One hundred fifty dollars
($150.00).
      6.   Failure to comply with scrambling requirements: Fifty dollars
($50.00) per month.
      7.   Violation of customer service and billing standards: Twenty five
dollars ($25.00) per occurrence.
      8.   Violation of the bundling rules: Twenty five dollars ($25.00) per
month.
   B.   The credits shall be applied on the statement issued to the customer
for the next billing cycle following the violation or following the discovery
of the violation, as set forth in 220 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/70-501(s).
The cable or video provider is responsible for providing the credits and the
customer is under no obligation to request the credit. (Ord. 989, 12-18-2007)
CHAPTER 14
HOME KITCHEN AND COTTAGE FOOD OPERATIONS
SECTION:
2-14-1:    Home Kitchen And Cottage Food Operations
2-14-1: HOME KITCHEN AND COTTAGE FOOD OPERATIONS:
   A.   For the purposes of this chapter, "Home Kitchen Operation and Cottage
Food Operations " shall have the same meaning as in the Illinois Food Handling
Regulation Enforcement Act, 410 Illinois Compiled Statutes 625/0.01, et seq.,
as amended.
   B.   The Village hereby adopts and incorporates any and all provisions of
the Illinois Food Handling Regulation Enforcement Act as are applicable to home
kitchen and cottage food operations.
   C.   Home kitchen and cottage food operations are permitted in the Village.
(Ord. 1301-19, 9-17-2019)
CHAPTER 15
RAFFLES
SECTION:
2-15-1: Short Title
2-15-2: Definitions
2-15-3: Licensing System For Raffles Established
2-15-4: Licenses Limited To Certain Non-Profit Organizations
2-15-5: Conduct Of Raffles
2-15-6: Classes Of Licenses And Fees
2-15-7: License Ineligibility Criteria And Determinations
2-15-8: Denial Of License And Appeal
2-15-9: Bond
2-15-10: Summary Statistical Information
2-15-11: Records
2-15-1: SHORT TITLE:
This chapter shall be cited as the VILLAGE OF MANHATTAN RAFFLE ORDINANCE. (Ord.
1345-21, 3-16-2021)
2-15-2: DEFINITIONS:
For the purposes of this chapter the terms defined in this chapter have the
meanings given them.
              A voluntary organization composed of individuals and businesses
BUSINESS:     who have joined together to advance the commercial, financial,
              industrial and civic interests of a community.
              An organization or institution organized and operated to benefit
CHARITABLE:   an indefinite number of the public. The service rendered to those
              eligible for benefits must also confer some benefit on the
              public.
              An organization or institution organized and operated to provide
              systematic instruction in useful branches of learning by methods
EDUCATIONAL:  common to schools and institutions of learning which compare
              favorably in their scope and intensity with the course of study
              presented in tax-supported schools.
              An organization of persons having a common interest, the primary
              interest of which is to both promote the welfare of its members
FRATERNAL:    and to provide assistance to the general public in such a way as
              to lessen the burdens of government by caring for those that
              otherwise would be cared for by the government.
              An organization composed of workers organized with the objective
LABOR:        of betterment of the conditions of those engaged in such pursuit
              and the development of a higher degree of efficiency in their
              respective occupations.
              The gross receipts from the conduct of raffles, less reasonable
NET PROCEEDS: sums expended for prizes, local license fees and other reasonable
              operating expenses incurred as a result of operating a raffle.
              An organization or institution organized and conducted on a not-
NON-PROFIT:   for-profit basis with no personal profit inuring to any one as a
              result of the operation.
              A form of lottery, as defined in section 28-2(b) of the Criminal
              Code of 2012, conducted by an organization licensed under this
              chapter, in which the player pays or agrees to pay something of
              value for a chance, represented and differentiated by a number or
              by a combination of numbers or by some other medium, one or more
              of which chances is to be designated the winning chance; the
              winning chance is to be determined through a drawing or by some
              other method based on an element of chance by an act or set of
RAFFLE:       acts on the part of persons conducting or connected with the
              lottery, except that the winning chance shall not be determined
              by the outcome of a publicly exhibited sporting contest. "Raffle"
              does not include a savings promotion raffle authorized under
              section 5g of the Illinois Banking Act, section 7008 of the
              Savings Bank Act, section 42.7 of the Illinois Credit Union Act
              (205 ILCS 5/5g, 205 ILCS 205/7008, 205 ILCS 305/42.7), section
              5136B of the National Bank Act (12 USC 25a), or section 4 of the
              Home Owners' Loan Act (12 USC 1463).
RELIGIOUS:    Any church, congregation, society, or organization founded for
              the purpose of religious worship.
              An organization or association comprised of members of which
              substantially all are individuals who are veterans or spouses,
VETERANS:     widows, or widowers of veterans, the primary purpose of which is
              to promote the welfare of its members and to provide assistance
              to the general public in such a way as to confer a public
              benefit. (Ord. 1345-21, 3-16-2021)
 
2-15-3: LICENSING SYSTEM FOR RAFFLES ESTABLISHED:
   A.   The Village of Manhattan hereby establishes a system for the licensing
of organizations to operate raffles.
   B.   Licenses issued pursuant to this chapter shall be valid for one raffle
or for a specified number of raffles to be conducted during a specified period
not to exceed one year and may be suspended or revoked for any violation of
this chapter.
   C.   The Village shall act on a license application within thirty (30) days
from the date of application. (Ord. 1345-21, 3-16-2021)
2-15-4: LICENSES LIMITED TO CERTAIN NON-PROFIT ORGANIZATIONS:
Raffle licenses shall be issued only to bona fide religious, charitable, labor,
business, fraternal, educational or veterans' organizations that operate
without profit to their members and which have been in existence continuously
for a period of five (5) years immediately before making application for a
raffle license and which have had during that entire five (5) year period a
bona fide membership engaged in carrying out their objects, or to a non-profit
fundraising organization that the licensing authority determines is organized
for the sole purpose of providing financial assistance to an identified
individual or group of individuals suffering extreme financial hardship as the
result of an illness, disability, accident or disaster. (Ord. 1345-21, 3-16-
2021)
2-15-5: CONDUCT OF RAFFLES:
   A.   The conducting of raffles is subject to the following restrictions:
      1.   The entire net proceeds of any raffle must be exclusively devoted to
the lawful purposes of the organization permitted to conduct that game.
      2.   No person except a bona fide member of the sponsoring organization
may participate in the management or operation of the raffle.
      3.   No person may receive any remuneration or profit for participating
in the management or operation of the raffle.
      4.   A licensee may rent a premises on which to determine the winning
chance or chances in a raffle only from an organization which is also licensed
under this chapter.
      5.   Raffle chances may be sold or issued only within the area specified
on the license and winning chances may be determined only at those locations
specified on the license for a raffle.
      6.   A person under the age of eighteen (18) years may participate in the
conducting of raffles only with the permission of a parent or guardian. A
person under the age of eighteen (18) years may be within the area where
winning chances in a raffle are being determined only when accompanied by his
or her parent or guardian.
      7.   If a lessor rents premises where a winning chance or chances on a
raffle is determined, the lessor shall not be criminally liable if the person
who uses the premises for the determining of winning chances does not hold a
license issued by the Village under the provisions of this chapter or the
Raffles and Poker Runs Act, 230 ILCS 15/1, et. seq.
      8.   No person, firm or corporation shall conduct raffles without having
first obtained a license therefor pursuant to this chapter.
      9.   The license and application for license must specify the area or
areas within the Village in which raffle chances will be sold, the time period
during which raffle chances will be sold or issued, the time of determination
of winning chances and the location or locations at which winning chances will
be determined.
      10.   The license application must contain a sworn statement attesting to
the not-for-profit character of the prospective licensee organization, signed
by the presiding officer and the secretary of that organization. (Ord. 1345-21,
3-16-2021)
2-15-6: CLASSES OF LICENSES AND FEES:
   A.   Raffle licenses shall come in one of the following classes:
      1.   A class 1 license shall authorize the conducting of multiple raffles
by a single applicant during a specified calendar year. The aggregate retail
value of all prizes awarded as part of a single raffle shall not exceed ten
thousand dollars ($10,000.00). The maximum price of a single chance shall not
exceed twenty-five dollars ($25.00). The aggregate retail value of all prizes
awarded during the calendar year shall not exceed one hundred thousand dollars
($100,000.00). In addition, the maximum retail value of any single prize shall
not exceed ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00). A class 1 license shall authorize
the sale or purchase of chances in person. Winners shall be determined via
manual selection.
      2.   A class 2 license shall authorize the conducting of a single raffle.
Chances for the raffle may be sold after the issuance of the license and up to
three hundred sixty-four (364) days thereafter but all prizes must be awarded
on the same day as part of a single determination. The aggregate retail value
of all prizes awarded shall not exceed one hundred thousand dollars
($100,000.00). The maximum price of a single raffle chance shall not exceed one
thousand dollars ($1,000.00). A class 2 license shall authorize the sale or
purchase of chances in person. Winners shall be determined via manual
selection.
      3.   A class 3 license shall authorize the conducting of a single raffle.
Chances for the raffle may be sold after the issuance of the license and up to
three hundred sixty-four (364) days thereafter but all prizes must be awarded
on the same day as part of a single determination. The maximum price of a
raffle chance shall not exceed one thousand dollars ($1,000.00). The aggregate
retail value of all prizes awarded shall not exceed two million five hundred
thousand dollars ($2,500,000.00). A class 3 license shall authorize the sale or
purchase of chances in person. Winners shall be determined via manual
selection.
   B.   License Fees:
      1.   The annual license fee for a class 1 or class 2 license shall be one
hundred dollars ($100.00) and shall be paid at the time of application.
      2.   The annual license fee for a class 3 license shall be two percent
(2%) of the aggregate retail value of the prizes to be awarded and shall be
paid at the time of application if the amount of the fee can be ascertained. If
the amount of the fee cannot be ascertained because the retail value of the
prize award shall increase until the prize is ultimately awarded, the following
method of payment of the licensing fee shall be used:
         a.   Initial Fee: At the time of application, applicant shall pay an
initial two hundred dollars ($200.00) application fee, which shall be applied
to the total fee collected from the applicant.
         b.   Following payment of the initial application fee, the licensing
fee of two percent (2%) of the retail value of all prizes to be awarded shall
be paid in ninety (90) day increments as follows:
            (1)   After the raffle has concluded its total sales for chances to
win for the first ninety (90) days following the start date of the raffle, the
licensee shall remit to the Village an amount equal to two percent (2%) of the
first ninety (90) days' proceeds from raffle sales that shall be added to the
aggregate retail value of the prize award amount, less the two hundred dollar
($200.00) initial license fee.
            (2)   For each ninety (90) day period thereafter, the licensee
shall remit to the Village an amount equal to two percent (2%) of the proceeds
from raffle sales sold during that ninety (90) day period that shall be added
to the aggregate retail value of the prize award amount.
            (3)   If the raffle concludes and the retail value of the prize
award amount is awarded before the completion of the ninety (90) day period,
the licensee shall remit to the Village an amount equal to two percent (2%) of
the raffle sales that were added to the aggregate retail prize award amount
following the prior ninety (90) day period.
            (4)   Each ninety (90) day period shall stand separate and apart
from the others in terms of licensing fees due. Once the licensing fee of two
percent (2%) of proceeds from raffle sales that shall be added to the aggregate
retail prize award amount has been paid for the respective ninety (90) day
period for which it was due, those proceeds from raffle sales that were added
to the aggregate retail prize award amount during that ninety (90) shall no
longer be counted toward licensing fees due in successive ninety (90) day
periods.
            (5)   In the event a licensee fails to remit the full amount of its
licensing fee for a class 3 license within ten (10) business day following the
completion of any ninety (90) day period, the unpaid amounts shall become an
obligation due and owing to the Village of Manhattan, and the licensee's
license may be revoked. (Ord. 1345-21, 3-16-2021)
2-15-7: LICENSE INELIGIBILITY CRITERIA AND DETERMINATIONS:
   A.   The following are ineligible for any license under this chapter:
      1.   Any person whose felony conviction will impair the person's ability
to engage in the licensed position;
      2.   Any person who is or has been a professional gambler or gambling
promoter;
      3.   Any person who is not of good moral character;
      4.   Any firm or corporation in which a person defined in subsections A1
through A3 has a proprietary, equitable or credit interest, or in which such a
person is active or employed;
      5.   Any organization in which a person defined in subsections A1 through
A3 is an officer, director, or employee, whether compensated or not;
      6.   Any organization in which a person defined in subsections A1 through
A3 is to participate in the management or operation of a raffle as defined in
this chapter.
   B.   Felony Convictions Of Applicant: Upon a finding that an applicant for a
license was previously convicted of a felony, the Village shall consider any
evidence of rehabilitation and mitigating factors contained in the applicant's
record, including any of the following factors and evidence, to determine if
the conviction will impair the ability of the applicant to engage in the
position for which a license is sought:
      1.   The lack of direct relation of the offense for which the applicant
was previously convicted to the duties, functions, and responsibilities of the
position for which a license is sought;
      2.   Whether five (5) years since a felony conviction or three (3) years
since release from confinement for the conviction, whichever is later, have
passed without a subsequent conviction;
      3.   If the applicant was previously licensed or employed in this State
or other states or jurisdictions, then the lack of prior misconduct arising
from or related to the licensed position or position of employment;
      4.   The age of the person at the time of the criminal offense;
      5.   Successful completion of sentence and, for applicants serving a term
of parole or probation, a progress report provided by the applicant's probation
or parole officer that documents the applicant's compliance with conditions of
supervision;
      6.   Evidence of the applicant's present fitness and professional
character;
      7.   Evidence of rehabilitation or rehabilitative effort during or after
incarceration, or during or after a term of supervision, including, but not
limited to, a certificate of good conduct under section 5-5.5-25 of the Unified
Code of Corrections or a certificate of relief from disabilities under section
5-5.5-10 of the Unified Code of Corrections; and
      8.   Any other mitigating factors that contribute to the person's
potential and current ability to perform the duties and responsibilities of the
position for which a license or employment is sought.
   C.   Applicants are not required to report the following information on an
application for a raffle license and the Village shall not consider the
following criminal history records in connection with an application for
licensure:
      1.   Juvenile adjudications of delinquent minors as defined in section 5-
105 of the Juvenile Court Act of 1987, subject to the restrictions set forth in
section 5-130 of the Juvenile Court Act of 1987.
      2.   Law enforcement records, court records, and conviction records of an
individual who was seventeen (17) years old at the time of the offense and
before January 1, 2014, unless the nature of the offense required the
individual to be tried as an adult.
      3.   Records of arrest not followed by a conviction.
      4.   Convictions overturned by a higher court.
      5.   Convictions or arrests that have been sealed or expunged. (Ord.
1345-21, 3-16-2021)
2-15-8: DENIAL OF LICENSE AND APPEAL:
   A.   If the Village refuses to issue a license to an applicant, then the
applicant shall be notified of the denial in writing with the following
included in the notice of denial:
      1.   A statement about the decision to refuse to issue a license;
      2.   A list of the convictions that the licensing authority determined
will impair the applicant's ability to engage in the position for which a
license is sought;
      3.   A list of convictions that formed the sole or partial basis for the
refusal to issue a license; and
      4.   A summary of the appeal process or the earliest the applicant may
reapply for a license, whichever is applicable.
   B.   Appeal:
      1.   Any person aggrieved by the denial or revocation of a license under
the provisions of this chapter shall have the right to appeal to the village
board within twenty one (21) days after the date of denial of the application
or revocation of the license. The appeal must be in writing, and shall contain
a specific request for or waiver of a hearing.   
      2.   If a hearing is requested, the hearing before the village board
shall take place within thirty (30) days of the written appeal. At the hearing,
the village board shall not be bound by the rules of evidence in the courts of
law, but shall, in ascertaining the conditions and practices involved in the
decision appealed, take into account all reliable, probative and substantial
evidence. The village board shall issue a written decision within fourteen (14)
days of the hearing.
      3.   Where a hearing is waived, the appealing party shall submit all
supporting documentation with the written appeal. The village board shall issue
a written decision within twenty one (21) days of the filing of the written
appeal. (Ord. 1345-21, 3-16-2021)
2-15-9: BOND:
All operation of and the conduct of raffles shall be under the supervision of a
single manager designated by the organization. The manager shall give a
fidelity bond in an amount determined by the Village in favor of the
organization conditioned upon his or her honesty in the performance of his or
her duties. Terms of the bond shall provide that notice shall be given in
writing to the Village not less than thirty (30) days prior to its
cancellation. The Village may waive this bond requirement by including a waiver
provision in the license issued to an organization under this chapter provided
that a license containing such waiver provision shall be granted only by
unanimous vote of the members of the licensed organization. (Ord. 1345-21, 3-
16-2021)
2-15-10: SUMMARY STATISTICAL INFORMATION:
   A.   No later than May 1 of each year, the Village will prepare, publicly
announce, and publish a report of summary statistical information relating to
new and renewal license applications during the preceding calendar year. Each
report shall show:
      1.   The number of applicants for a new or renewal license under this
chapter within the previous calendar year;
      2.   The number of applicants for a new or renewal license under this
chapter within the previous calendar year who had any criminal conviction;
      3.   The number of applicants for a new or renewal license under this
chapter in the previous calendar year who were granted a license;
      4.   The number of applicants for a new or renewal license with a
criminal conviction who were granted a license under this chapter within the
previous calendar year;
      5.   The number of applicants for a new or renewal license under this
chapter within the previous calendar year who were denied a license; and
      6.   The number of applicants for a new or renewal license with a
criminal conviction who were denied a license under this chapter in the
previous calendar year in whole or in part because of a prior conviction. (Ord.
1345-21, 3-16-2021)
2-15-11: RECORDS:
   A.   Each organization licensed to conduct raffles shall keep records of its
gross receipts, expenses and net proceeds for each single gathering or occasion
at which winning chances in a raffle are determined. All deductions from gross
receipts for each single gathering or occasion shall be documented with
receipts or other records indicating the amount, a description of the purchased
item or service or other reason for the deduction, and the recipient. The
distribution of net proceeds shall be itemized as to payee, purpose, amount and
date of payment.
   B.   Gross receipts from the operation of raffles programs shall be
segregated from other revenues of the organization, including bingo gross
receipts, if bingo games are also conducted by the same nonprofit organization
pursuant to license therefor issued by the Department of Revenue of the State
of Illinois, and placed in a separate account. Each organization shall have
separate records of its raffles. The person who accounts for gross receipts,
expenses and net proceeds from the operation of raffles shall not be the same
person who accounts for other revenues of the organization.
   C.   Each organization licensed to conduct raffles shall report promptly
after the conclusion of each raffle to its membership. Each organization
licensed to conduct raffles shall report promptly to the Village its gross
receipts, expenses and net proceeds from the raffle, and the distribution of
net proceeds itemized as required in this chapter.
   D.   Records required by this chapter shall be preserved for three (3)
years, and organizations shall make available their records relating to
operation of raffles for public inspection at reasonable times and places.
(Ord. 1345-21, 3-16-2021)
CHAPTER 16
MOBILE FOOD VENDORS AND MOBILE FOOD VEHICLES
SECTION:
2-16-1: Definitions
2-16-2: Mobile Food Vehicle Registration
2-16-3: Special Event Permits
2-16-4: Use And Operation Of Food Vehicles
2-16-5: Locations
2-16-6: Hours And Days Of Operation
2-16-7: Exemptions
2-16-8: Suspension Or Revocation Of Permit
2-16-9: Penalties
2-16-1: DEFINITIONS:
For the purposes of this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
provided:
MOBILE     A self-contained food service operation located in a readily moveable,
FOOD       motorized, wheeled or towed vehicle, with facilities for storing, preparing,
VEHICLE:   displaying and/or serving food or non-alcoholic beverages for retail sale
           intended for individual consumption, commonly referred to as a food vehicle.
           An individual, corporation, firm, partnership, association, proprietorship,
MOBILE     not-for-profit corporation or other legal entity engaged in the business of
FOOD       selling food or non-alcoholic beverages from a mobile food vehicle. “Mobile
VENDOR:    food vendor” does not include ice cream vehicle operators that do not park on
           private property for the purpose of serving customers.
           An event held on public or private property including, but not limited to,
           parades, festivals, block parties, athletic events, outdoor concerts, circuses,
           rodeos, fireworks displays, carnivals, movie or television productions, or
           other public meetings or events which significantly impact the village or meet
SPECIAL    some or all of the following criteria:
EVENT:     (1)   Closure of roads, streets, or village blocks.
           (2)   Issuance of multiple permits or leases.
           (3)   Use of village-owned property.
           (4)   Use of village services.
           (5)   Use of amplified sound.
SPECIAL    An individual, corporation, firm, partnership, association, proprietorship,
EVENT      not-for-profit corporation or other legal entity that obtains any and all
PERMITTEE: permits and/or licenses required by the village to operate a special event
           within the corporate boundaries of the village.
           An individual, corporation, firm, partnership, association, proprietorship,
           not-for-profit corporation or other legal entity that owns, leases, and/or
SPONSORING occupies real property located within the corporate boundaries of the village
BUSINESS:  where a mobile food vendor will operate its mobile food vehicle under this
           Article. A sponsoring business must hold current, valid business licenses and/
           or permits as required by this Chapter. (1396-22, 6-7-2022)
 
2-16-2: MOBILE FOOD VEHICLE REGISTRATION:
   A.   Permit required. It shall be unlawful for any person to operate a
mobile food vehicle within the corporate boundaries of the Village unless that
person has applied for and received a permit for said vehicle in compliance
with this Article.
   B.   Application for Permit; Required information. Applications for a mobile
food vehicle permit under this Article shall be filed on a form provided by the
Village. The application shall require, at a minimum, the following:
      1.   The name, business address, and phone number of the mobile food
vendor; and
      2.   The mobile food vendor’s Illinois business tax (IBT) number, along
with documentation sufficient to show that the mobile food vendor’s point of
sale is and shall be noted as the Village of Manhattan for all sales occurring
within the Village’s corporate boundaries; and
      3.   The make, model, and vehicle identification number of the mobile
food vehicle that the mobile food vendor intends to operate; and
      4.   Photograph(s) of the mobile food vehicle that the mobile food vendor
intends to operate, sufficient for the identification thereof; and
      5.   Proof of registration and automobile insurance for each mobile food
vehicle; and
      6.   A general description of the types of items to be sold from the
mobile food vehicle(s); and
      7.   Valid copies of all applicable permits from the Will County Health
Department; and
      8.   Certificate(s) of insurance sufficient to show that the mobile food
vendor is covered by all insurance policies required by this article.
   C.   Application fee. Every initial application for a mobile food vehicle
license shall be accompanied by a nonrefundable $100 application fee, which
shall be paid before the Village will consider the application. No application
fee shall be charged for the annual renewal of any existing mobile food vehicle
permit so long as the mobile food vendor is in good standing with the Village
at the time of the renewal application.
   D.   Approval of Application.
      1.   The Village shall not consider any application unless and until said
application is complete in full compliance with this Section. Once the Village
has received a complete application, it shall approve or deny the application
within ten (10) business days.
      2.   An applicant may be denied a mobile food vehicle permit under any of
the following conditions:
         a.   The applicant failed to properly complete the permit application.
         b.   The applicant has violated any provision of this Article.
         c.   The applicant failed to qualify for any other license, permit, or
certification required by this Article.
         d.   The applicant has had a mobile food vehicle permit revoked under
this Article within the two (2) calendar years of the date of application.
      3.   If the Village finds that the application meets with all conditions
of approval and operation under this Article, it shall grant the application
and issue the mobile food vendor a permit for the mobile food vehicle in
question.
      4.   All such permits are expressly conditional upon continuous
compliance with all conditions of approval and operation set forth in this
Article.
   E.   Annual Fee. In the event that the Village grants a mobile food vehicle
permit pursuant to this Article, the mobile food vendor shall immediately pay
an annual permit fee of $250.00
The annual permit fee required by this Section shall not be prorated.
   F.   Duration of Permit. The permit shall be valid only for the date and
times listed on the permit. Annual permits are issued for the calendar year
from January 1st through December 31st.
   G.   Permits to be displayed. A copy of the approved mobile food vehicle
permit shall be clearly displayed on the mobile food vehicle at all times while
operating within the corporate boundaries of the Village of Manhattan.
   H.   Each mobile food truck to be individually permitted. A mobile food
vehicle permit issued pursuant to this Article is specific to the vehicle
permitted. Each such vehicle must be separately permitted and no permit may be
transferred from one mobile food vehicle to another. (1396-22, 6-7-2022)
2-16-3: SPECIAL EVENT PERMITS:
   A.   A mobile food vendor that intends to operate any mobile food vehicles
in conjunction with a special event is not required to apply for and receive an
annual mobile food vehicle permit pursuant to this Article. Instead, such a
mobile food vendor shall file a special event permit application with the
Village, which shall include substantially the same information as an
application for a mobile food vehicle permit, and which shall be accompanied by
the written consent of the special event permittee in question to allow said
mobile food vendor to operate its mobile food vehicle(s) in conjunction with
the special event in question.
   B.   No application fee shall be required for a special event permit. In the
event that the special event permit is granted by the Village, the mobile food
vendor shall pay a special event permit fee equal to $10.00 per mobile food
vehicle per day for the duration of the requested permit, which shall not be
longer than the duration of the special event itself.
   C.   Upon issuance of a special event permit pursuant to this section, the
permitted mobile food vendor and associated mobile food vehicle(s) shall be
subject to all conditions and regulations of this Article to the same extent as
any other holder of a mobile food vehicle permit. Further, the special event
permittee in question is and shall be responsible to ensure full compliance
with all applicable provisions of this Article, as well as all other Village
and County regulations, during the special event in question. (1396-22, 6-7-
2022)
2-16-4: USE AND OPERATION OF FOOD VEHICLES:
   A.   Conditions of Approval and Operation. All mobile food vehicles must be
operated in compliance with the following regulations and conditions:
      1.   Mobile food vehicles must comply with all noise regulations of the
Village.
      2.   Mobile food vehicles must provide receptacles for refuse and
properly dispose of all waste.
      3.   The food vendor’s point of sale shall be noted as the Village of
Manhattan for all sales occurring within the Village’s corporate boundaries.
      4.   Mobile food vendors must carry, at their own cost and expense,
comprehensive and general liability and casualty insurance related to its
operation within the Village of Manhattan, including food service, restaurant
operation, and vehicle operation, with minimum policy limits of one million
dollars ($1,000,000.00) per occurrence. No cancellation or reduction in
coverage may occur during the effective period of the mobile food vendor’s
permit.
      5.   Mobile food vendors must maintain all required food vender operating
permit(s) and other food establishment permit(s)/license(s) issued by the Will
County Health Department at all times. Mobile food vendors shall fully comply
with all applicable Will County food service and retail food store sanitation
ordinances, and shall display its certifications and permits/licenses on the
food vehicle in an area plainly visible to customers at all times during
operation.
      6.   Mobile food vendors must notify the Village within three (3)
business days if any mobile food vehicle fails to be certified, fails to be
approved by, or fails an inspection from the Will County Health Department. No
mobile food vehicle may be operated within the Village at any time that it is
not certified and approved by the Will County Health Department.
      7.   Mobile food vendors must maintain records of all inspections,
permits, and certifications related to this Article, as well as records of all
sales, hours of operation, and any other operational-related records, for a
minimum of five (5) years. All such records shall be made available to the
Village upon request, at a reasonable time and place and upon reasonable
notice.
      8.   All food preparation shall be conducted in strict accordance with
all applicable Village ordinances, Will County Health Department codes,
regulations and ordinances, and fire protection district ordinances, codes, and
regulations.
      9.   Drive-through service shall be prohibited.
      10.   Mobile food vendors must provide the Village of Manhattan with all
records required by this article, as requested. (1396-22, 6-7-2022)
2-16-5: LOCATIONS:
   A.   A mobile food vendor may operate a permitted mobile food vehicle on
private commercial property with the written consent of the owner, tenant, or
lawful occupant of said property. The mobile food vendor shall maintain written
consent from said owner, tenant, or other lawful occupant of the property in
question with the mobile food vehicle at all times it is in operation on the
property, and shall further present said written consent to any Village
official or peace officer upon request.
   B.   A mobile food vendor operating in conjunction with a special event,
shall operate a mobile food vehicle on property where the special event is
permitted to operate.
   C.   Mobile food vehicles are prohibited as a principal/primary use and may
not be operated on a vacant lot not associated with a sponsoring business or
special event.
   D.   Mobile food Vehicles shall not park in fire lanes, handicap parking
spaces, or in any other location that will impede traffic flow or create unsafe
conditions for pedestrians or motor vehicle traffic.
   E.   Unless expressly requested and expressly authorized by the Village in
writing in the mobile food vehicle permit in question, including during special
events, mobile food vehicles are prohibited from operating in a parked/
stationary manner in the public right-of-way or on public property, including
without limitation on-street public parking spaces. (1396-22, 6-7-2022)
2-16-6: HOURS AND DAYS OF OPERATION:
   A.   The hours of operation for all mobile food vehicles in the Village
shall be limited to 9:00 a.m. through 9:00 p.m., Monday through Thursday; 9:00
a.m. through 10:00 p.m. on Friday; 8:00 a.m. through 10:00 p.m. on Saturday;
and 8:00 a.m. through 9:00 p.m. on Sunday.
   B.   Mobile food vehicles shall not operate more than two (2) days per
fourteen (14) consecutive days in any commercial zoning district.
   C.   A mobile food vendor operating a mobile food vehicle in conjunction
with a special event may operate a mobile food vehicle during all days and
hours that the special event is permitted to operate. (1396-22, 6-7-2022)
2-16-7: EXEMPTIONS:
   A.   A mobile food vendor seeking a mobile food vehicle permit or special
event permit under this Article may apply, in writing, for a fee exemption in
order to avoid paying any and all applicable application and permit fees. Such
an exemption may be granted by the Village President or his or her designee if
the mobile food vendor can show it will be operating under contract with and
solely on property owned or controlled by:
      1.   The Village of Manhattan or some other political subdivision of the
State of Illinois; or
      2.   A recognized educational institution; or
      3.   An Illinois-registered not-for-profit organization. (1396-22, 6-7-
2022)
2-16-8: SUSPENSION OR REVOCATION OF PERMIT:
The Village President may, after written notice and the opportunity for a
hearing, suspend or revoke any mobile food vehicle permit under any of the
following conditions:
   A.   The mobile food vendor has violated any provision of this article, or
any ordinance, law, code, or regulation of the Village of Manhattan, State of
Illinois, or County of Will relating to public health, safety, or fire
protection; or
   B.   The mobile food vendor made a false material statement in its
application.
   C.   The sponsoring business notifies the Village of Manhattan in writing
that the food vehicle no longer has permission to operate on its property.
(1396-22, 6-7-2022)
2-16-9: PENALTIES:
Any person that violates any of the provisions of this article shall be
punished by a fine of not less than seventy five dollars ($75.00) unless
otherwise specified nor more than seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00), or
such other amount as provided by law/ordinance, for any one offense. Each day
on which a violation exists shall constitute a separate offense. (1396-22, 6-7-
2022)
TITLE 3
BUILDING REGULATIONS
CHAPTER 1
INTERNATIONAL BUILDING CODE
SECTION:
3-1-1: Adoption
3-1-2: Amendments
3-1-3: Penalties
3-1-1: ADOPTION:
That certain documents, three (3) copies of which are on file in the office of
the village clerk, being marked and designated as the international building
code 2021 published by the International Code Council be and are hereby
provided; and each and all of the regulations, provisions, penalties,
conditions and terms of said code are hereby referred to as adopted and made a
part hereof as if fully set out in this chapter, and each and all regulations,
provisions, penalties, conditions and terms of such code are hereby referred
to, adopted and made part of this chapter as if fully set out in this chapter,
with the additions, insertions, deletions and changes, if any, prescribed in
section
3-1-2  of this chapter. (Ord. 949, 3-20-2007, eff. 4-1-2007; amd. Ord. 1459-24,
5-23-2024)
3-1-2: AMENDMENTS:
The following words, provisions, and paragraphs shall be added to the following
designated sections of the code adopted in section
3-1-1 of this chapter. These provisions supersede the requirements of the
indicated provisions of such code.
101.1 Title. Is revised by inserting the words "village of Manhattan" in the
blank.
101.1 Appointment. The village community development director shall serve as
the building official.
101.4.4 Plumbing. Change the first line to reference the Illinois plumbing
code.
105.2 Exceptions. Delete exceptions 1, 2 and 6.
112.1 Add the following: The village board shall serve as the board of appeals.
112.3 Delete section.
406.1.4 Subsection 1 shall be amended to read:
      1.   The private garage shall be separated from the dwelling unit and its
attic area by means of a minimum 5/8-inch type X gypsum board or equivalent
applied to the garage side. Garages beneath habitable rooms shall be separated
from all habitable rooms above by not less than a 5/8 inch type X gypsum board
or equivalent. Door openings between a private garage and the dwelling unit
shall be equipped with UL 1 hour rated doors, or doors in compliance with
section 715.4.3. Openings from a private garage directly into a room used for
sleeping purposes shall not be permitted. Doors shall be self-closing and self-
latching.
[F] 501.2 Address Numbers. Buildings shall have approved address numbers,
building numbers or approved building identification placed in a position that
is plainly legible and visible from the street or road fronting the property.
Occupancies containing two or separate uses shall additionally place address
numbers, building numbers or approved building identification on the rear
access of each use. Residential occupancies with garages serviced by a rear
private drive, alley or parking lot shall additionally place address numbers,
building numbers or approved building identification on the rear access visible
from the rear private drive, alley or parking lot. These numbers shall contrast
with their background. Address numbers shall be Arabic numerals or alphabetical
letters. Numbers shall be a minimum of 4 inches (102 mm) high with a minimum
stroke width of 0.5 inch (12.7 mm).
705.3 Materials. Fire walls shall be of any approved noncombustible materials.
Exception:
      1.   Buildings of type V construction.
      2.   All attached single-family structures and multi-family structure
containing three or more dwelling units or one or more dwelling units in a
structure containing any other use shall have two-hour fire rated wall/floor/
ceiling assemblies between uses. Fire rated separation walls shall be
constructed of masonry and all fire resistive rated floor, floor/ceiling
assemblies shall be of pre-cast concrete or poured in place concrete.
(Ord. 949, 3-20-2007, eff. 4-1-2007)
903.2 Shall be deleted in its entirety and the following inserted in lieu
thereof:
   AUTOMATIC SPRINKLER SYSTEMS
[F] 903.2 Where Required. Approved automatic sprinkler systems in new buildings
and structures shall be provided in the locations described in this section.
Exception:
      1.   Spaces or areas in telecommunications buildings used exclusively for
telecommunications equipment, associated electrical power distribution
equipment, batteries and standby engines, provided those spaces or areas are
equipped throughout with an automatic fire alarm system and are separated from
the remainder of the building by fire barriers consisting of not less than 1-
hour fire-resistance- rated walls and 2-hour fire-resistance-rated floor/
ceiling assemblies.
      2.   Detached gazebos, temporary tents and ramadas for residential and
public use.
      3.   Guardhouses that are less than 300 square feet in size used to
control access to or within residential and/or commercial developments of
combustible construction or 600 square feet or less that are of non-combustible
construction.
      4.   Detached non-combustible canopies used exclusively for automotive,
motor fuel dispensing stations or detached non-combustible carports or parking
canopies.
      5.   Detached equipment or storage buildings for commercial use not
exceeding 300 square feet or 600 square feet if more than 20 feet from the
principal commercial structure.
      6.   Factory built buildings utilized as temporary office buildings
similar to real estate leasing offices and construction offices.
[F] 903.2.1 Group A. An automatic sprinkler system shall be provided throughout
buildings and portions thereof used as group A occupancies as provided in this
section. For group A-1, A-2, A-3 and A-4 occupancies, the automatic sprinkler
system shall be provided throughout the floor area where the group A-1, A-2, A-
3 or A-4 occupancy is located, and in all floors between the group A occupancy
and the level of exit discharge. For group A-5 occupancies, the automatic
sprinkler system shall be provided in the spaces indicated in section
903.2.1.5.
[F] 903.2.1.1 Group A-1. An automatic sprinkler system shall be provided
throughout all group A-1 occupancies.
[F] 903.2.1.2 Group A-2. An automatic sprinkler system shall be provided
throughout all group A-2 occupancies.
[F] 903.2.1.3 Group A-3. An automatic sprinkler system shall be provided
throughout all group A-3 occupancies.
Exception: Areas used exclusively as participant sports areas where the main
floor area is located at the same level as the level of exit discharge of the
main entrance and exit.
[F] 903.2.1.4 Group A-4. An automatic sprinkler system shall be provided
throughout all group A-4 occupancies.
Exception: Areas used exclusively as participant sports areas where the main
floor area is located at the same level as the level of exit discharge of the
main entrance and exit.
[F] 903.2.1.5 Group A-5. An automatic sprinkler system shall be provided for
group A-5 occupancies in the following areas: concession stands, retail areas,
press boxes and other accessory use areas in excess of 1,000 square feet (93
m2).
[F] 903.2.1.6 Assembly occupancies on roofs. An automatic sprinkler system
shall be provided throughout all assembly occupancies on roofs.
[F] 903.2.2 Ambulatory health care facilities. An automatic sprinkler system
shall be provided throughout all ambulatory health care facilities.
[F] 903.2.3 Group E. An automatic sprinkler system shall be provided for
throughout all group E occupancies.
[F] 903.2.4 Group F-1. An automatic sprinkler system shall be provided
throughout all buildings containing a group F-1 occupancy.
[F] 903.2.4.1 Woodworking Operations. An automatic sprinkler system shall be
provided throughout all group F-1 occupancy fire areas.
[F] 903.2.4 Group H. Automatic sprinkler systems shall be provided in high-
hazard occupancies as required in sections 903.2.4.1 through 903.2.4.3.
[F] 903.2.4.1 General. An automatic sprinkler system shall be installed in
group H occupancies.
[F] 903.2.4.1 Group H-5. An automatic sprinkler system shall be installed
throughout buildings containing group H-5 occupancies. The design of the
sprinkler system shall not be less than that required by this code for the
occupancy hazard classifications in accordance with table 903.2.5.2. Where the
design area of the sprinkler system consists of a corridor protected by one row
of sprinklers, the maximum number of sprinklers required to be calculated is
13.
[F] TABLE 903.2.5.2
GROUP H-5 SPRINKLER DESIGN CRITERIA
LOCATION                          OCCUPANCY HAZARD
                                 CLASSIFICATION
Fabrication areas                 Ordinary hazard group 2
Service corridors                 Ordinary hazard group 2
Storage rooms without dispensing  Ordinary hazard group 2
Storage rooms with dispensing     Extra hazard group 2
Corridors                         Ordinary hazard group 2
 
[F] 903.2.5.3 Pyroxylin Plastics. An automatic sprinkler system shall be
provided in buildings, or portions thereof, where cellulose nitrate film or
pyroxylin plastics are manufactured, stored or handled in quantities exceeding
100 pounds (45 kg).
[F] 903.2.6 Group I. An automatic sprinkler system shall be provided throughout
buildings with a group I fire area.
   Exception: An automatic sprinkler system installed in accordance with
section 903.3.1.2 or 903.3.1.3 shall be allowed in group I-1 facilities.
[F] 903.2.7 Group M. An automatic sprinkler system shall be provided throughout
buildings containing a group M occupancy.
[F] 903.2.8 Group R. An automatic sprinkler system installed in accordance with
section 903.3 shall be provided throughout all buildings with a group R fire
area regulated by this code or any group R including single family that is
attached to any other use group.
[F] 903.2.9 Group S-1. An automatic sprinkler system shall be provided
throughout all buildings containing a group S-1 occupancy.
[F] 903.2.9.1 Repair Garages. An automatic sprinkler system shall be provided
throughout all buildings used as repair garages.
[F] 903.2.10 Group S-2. An automatic sprinkler system shall be provided
throughout buildings classified as enclosed parking garages in accordance with
section 406.6 or where located beneath other groups.
[F] 903.2.10.1 Commercial Parking Garages. An automatic sprinkler system shall
be provided throughout buildings used for storage of commercial trucks or
buses.
[F] 903.2.11.2 Rubbish And Linen Chutes. An automatic sprinkler system shall be
installed at the top of rubbish and linen chutes and in their terminal rooms.
Chutes extending through three or more floors shall have additional sprinkler
heads installed within such chutes at alternate floors. Chute sprinklers shall
be accessible for servicing.
[F] 903.2.12 During Construction. Automatic sprinkler systems required during
construction, alteration and demolition operations shall be provided in
accordance with the international fire code. (Ord. 991, 3-5-2008)
   903.2 Shall be amended by inserting the following:
[F] 903.2.13 Group B. An automatic sprinkler system shall be provided
throughout buildings containing a group B occupancy. (Ord. 994, 4-1-2008)
[F] 907.6.6 Shall be deleted in its entirety and the following inserted in lieu
thereof:
[F] 907.6.6 Monitoring. Fire alarm systems required by this chapter or the
international fire code shall be directly connected to the communications
center of the Manhattan fire protection district in a method approved by the
code official in accordance to provisions of NFPA 72.
   Exception: Supervisory service is not required for:
      1.   Single- and multiple-station smoke alarms required by section
907.2.10.
      2.   Smoke detectors in group I-3 occupancies.
      3.   Automatic sprinkler systems in one- and two-family dwellings. (Ord.
991, 3-5-2008)
   1101.1 Scope. The building official shall require that the provisions of the
current "Illinois accessibility code law" as presently in force or as the same
may be hereafter amended or modified and the same is hereby incorporated herein
by reference and adopted as the standard for the purposes of this ordinance.
Any conflicts concerning the provisions of these codes shall be determined by
the strictest standard contained in the code provisions.
   Delete Chapter 11.
   1801.1.2 Add the following: The use of wood footings or foundations is not
allowed.
   1901.8 Add the following:
   Cold weather is defined as a period when one (1) of the following conditions
exist for more than three (3) consecutive days:
      1.   Average air temperature is less than forty degrees Fahrenheit (40°
F);
      2.   Air temperature is less than forty degrees Fahrenheit (40° F) for
more than one-half (1/2) of any twenty-four (24) hour period.
   Average air temperature is the average of the highest and lowest temperature
occurring during the period from midnight to midnight. After the first cold
weather condition or after December 1st, whichever comes first, all concrete
shall be subject to cold weather requirements until April 1st.
   Footings shall be poured only on frost free soil when the temperature is not
less than twenty-five degrees Fahrenheit (25° F) and rising. Concrete must be
protected in forms for not less than two (2) days, with insulation blankets
only.
   Foundations shall be poured when the temperature is not less than twenty-
five degrees Fahrenheit (25° F) and rising. The pour shall be completed by noon
to maximize curing time prior to nighttime falling temperatures. Forms shall be
kept in place for not less than three (3) days and covered completely by
insulation blankets. Slab on grade foundations may be stripped after forty-
eight (48) hours, provided that the foundation will be completely back-filled
within six (6) hours of stripping forms.
   Flatwork: After the first frost, the building official shall determine
whether flatwork can continue. No flatwork is allowed on the outside of
buildings or garages from December 1st to April 1st without the approval of the
building official. Flatwork is allowed in the basement of a structure and in
attached garages if the ambient air temperature is maintained at fifty degrees
Fahrenheit (50° F). UL listed, vented type heaters are permitted for
supplemental heat provided the unit is adequately vented to the exterior of the
building.
   The use of salamanders (torpedo heaters) or other equipment that expel flue
gases into the area above concrete floors is prohibited because of the
carbonation to fresh concrete.
   Masonry: All masonry construction laid in temperatures of the outside air
below forty degrees Fahrenheit (40° F) shall be enclosed and heated for not
less than forty-eight (48) hours. Frozen materials shall not be used nor shall
frozen masonry be built upon.
   2304.1.14 Add section: "Wood Framing.
      1.   Bearing Walls: Studs in bearing walls and partitions shall be
constructed of at least two inch by four inch (2" x 4") material spaced a
maximum of sixteen inches (16") on center.
      2.   Non-Bearing Walls: Studs in non-bearing walls and partitions shall
be constructed of at least two inch by four inch (2" x 4") material spaced a
maximum of sixteen inches (16") on center with the wide dimension perpendicular
to the wall. A single top plate shall be prohibited except where such a plate
is installed in accordance with section 2308.9.2.1."
   2701.2 Add: "2701.2 Electric Wiring, Equipment And Systems Of The
International Building Code - 2021", which shall be amended by the inclusion of
the following paragraphs:
      1.   The village building official shall require that the provisions of
the 2023 edition of the "national electrical code" as presently in force or as
the same may be hereafter amended or modified, be incorporated herein by
reference and adopted as the standard and that all such installations shall
conform to the provisions of the "national electrical code" in addition to a
designation in chapter 35 of standards of NFPA 70. Any conflicts concerning the
provisions of these codes shall be determined by the strictest standard
contained in the provisions.
      2.   All electrical wiring in residential, commercial and industrial
buildings, all wiring within the building and all accessory structures shall be
enclosed in rigid metal conduit (article 344), or intermediate conduit (article
342), or electrical metal tubing (article 348) or flexible metal conduit
(article 348).
      3.   Add the following section to article 347-2: In exterior subgrade
location only. The transition to metal shall be below grade with a metallic
elbow.
   2901.1 Change the section as follows:
      The provisions of this chapter and the "Illinois plumbing code law", 225
ILCS 320/1 et seq., as presently in force or as the same may be hereafter
amended or modified and the same is hereby incorporated herein by reference and
adopted as the standard for the purposes of this ordinance shall govern the
erection, installation, alteration, repairs, relocation, replacement, addition
to, use, or maintenance of plumbing equipment and systems. Any conflicts
concerning the provisions of these codes shall be determined by the strictest
standard contained in the code provisions.
(Ord. 949, 3-20-2007, eff. 4-1-2007)
   Appendix. Adopt appendix H105, H107.
   Appendix C. Adopt appendix C "Agricultural Buildings".
   Appendix F. Adopt appendix F "Rodent Proofing".
(Ord. 949, 3-20-2007, eff. 4-1-2007; amd. Ord. 1459-24, 5-23-2024)
3-1-3: PENALTIES:
   A.   Penalties Generally: It shall be unlawful for any person, firm, or
corporation to violate any provisions of this chapter, and, except as otherwise
provided, any person, firm, or corporation guilty of violating any of the
provisions of this chapter shall be punishable as provided under section
1-4-1 of this code. Each day that a violation continues shall be deemed a
separate offense.
   B.   International Building Code Violations:
      1.   Unlawful Acts: It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or
corporation to erect, construct, alter, extend, repair, move, remove, demolish
or occupy any building, structure or equipment regulated by the international
building code or amendments to the international building code as set forth in
this chapter, or cause same to be done, in conflict with or in violation of any
of the provisions of the international building code or amendments to the
international building code as set forth in this chapter.
      2.   Notice Of Violation: The building official is authorized to serve a
notice of violation or order on the person responsible for the erection,
construction, alteration, extension, repair, moving, removal, demolition or
occupancy of a building or structure in violation of the provisions of the
international building code or amendments to the international building code as
set forth in this chapter, or in violation of a permit certificate issued under
the provisions of the international building code or amendments to the
international building code as set forth in this chapter. Such order shall
direct the discontinuance of the illegal action or condition and the abatement
of the violation. Administrative notices are attempts to secure voluntary
compliance and are not the start of prosecution for jurisdictional purposes.
      3.   Prosecution Of Violation: If the notice of violation is not complied
with promptly, the building commissioner is authorized to request the legal
counsel of the village to institute the appropriate legal proceedings at law or
in equity to restrain, correct or abate such violation, or to require the
removal or termination of the unlawful occupancy of the building or structure
in violation of the provisions of the international building code or amendments
to the international building code as set forth in this chapter or of the order
or direction made pursuant thereto.
      4.   Violation Penalties: Any person who violates a provision of the
international building code or amendments to the international building code as
set forth in this chapter or fails to comply with any of the requirements
thereof or who erects, constructs, alters or repairs a building or structure in
violation of the approved construction documents or directive of the building
commissioner, or of a permit or certificate issued under the provisions of the
international building code or amendments to the international building code as
set forth in this chapter, shall be subject to penalties as prescribed by law
and as provided under section
1-4-1 of this code. Each day that a violation continues shall be deemed a
separate offense. (Ord. 949, 3-20-2007, eff. 4-1-2007; amd. Ord. 1459-24, 5-23-
2024)
CHAPTER 2
INTERNATIONAL MECHANICAL CODE
SECTION:
3-2-1: Adoption
3-2-2: Amendments
3-2-3: Penalties
3-2-1: ADOPTION:
That certain documents, three (3) copies of which are on file in the office of
the village clerk, being marked and designated as the international mechanical
code 2021 published by the International Code Council be and are hereby
provided, and each and all of the regulations, provisions, penalties,
conditions and terms of said code are hereby referred to as adopted and made a
part hereof as if fully set out in this chapter, with the additions,
insertions, deletions and changes, if any, prescribed in section 
3-2-2  of this chapter. (Ord. 949, 3-20-2007, eff. 4-1-2007; amd. Ord. 1459-24,
5-23-2024)
3-2-2: AMENDMENTS:
The following words, provisions, and paragraphs shall be added to the following
designated sections of the code adopted in section
3-2-1  of this chapter. These provisions supersede the requirements of the
indicated provisions of such code.
   101.1 Village of Manhattan.
   103.1 Insert buildings and development department.
   109.2 See the village of Manhattan fee schedule.
   115.4 See the village of Manhattan fee schedule.
   The village board shall serve as the board of appeals.
   301.9 Appendix A. Adopt appendix A.
(Ord. 949, 3-20-2007, eff. 4-1-2007; amd. Ord. 1459-24, 5-23-2024)
3-2-3: PENALTIES:
   A.   Penalties Generally: It shall be unlawful for any person, firm, or
corporation to violate any provisions of this chapter, and, except as otherwise
provided, any person, firm, or corporation guilty of violating any of the
provisions of this chapter shall be punishable as provided under section
1-4-1 of this code. Each day that a violation continues shall be deemed a
separate offense.
   B.   International Mechanical Code Violations:
      1.   Unlawful Acts: It shall be unlawful for a person, firm or
corporation to erect, construct, alter, repair, remove, demolish or utilize a
mechanical system, or cause same to be done, in conflict with or in violation
of any of the provisions of the international mechanical code or amendments to
the international mechanical code as set forth in this chapter.
      2.   Notice Of Violation: The building commissioner shall serve a notice
of violation or order to the person responsible for the erection, installation,
alteration, extension, repair, removal or demolition of mechanical work in
violation of the provisions of the international mechanical code or amendments
to the international mechanical code as set forth in this chapter, or in
violation of a detail statement or the approved construction documents
thereunder, or in violation of a permit or certificate issued under the
provisions of the international mechanical code or amendments to the
international mechanical code as set forth in this chapter. Such order shall
direct the discontinuance of the illegal action or condition and the abatement
of the violation. Administrative notices are attempts to secure voluntary
compliance and are not the start of prosecution for jurisdictional purposes.
      3.   Prosecution Of Violation: If the notice of violation is not complied
with promptly, the building commissioner is authorized to request the legal
counsel of the village to institute the appropriate legal proceedings at law or
in equity to restrain, correct or abate such violation, or to require the
removal or termination of the unlawful occupancy of the structure in violation
of the provisions of the international mechanical code or amendments to the
international mechanical code as set forth in this chapter or of the order or
direction made pursuant thereto.
      4.   Violation Penalties: Persons who shall violate a provision of the
international mechanical code or amendments to the international mechanical
code as set forth in this chapter or shall fail to comply with any of the
requirements thereof or who shall erect, install, alter or repair mechanical
work in violation of the approved construction documents or directive of the
building commissioner, or of a permit or certificate issued under the
provisions of the international mechanical code or amendments to the
international mechanical code, as set forth in this chapter, shall be guilty of
a misdemeanor and punishable as prescribed by law and as provided under section
1-4-1 of this code. Each day that a violation continues after due notice has
been served shall be deemed a separate offense.
      5.   Stop Work Orders: Upon notice from the building commissioner that
mechanical work is being done contrary to the provisions of the international
mechanical code or amendments to the international mechanical code as set forth
in this chapter or in a dangerous or unsafe manner, such work shall immediately
cease. Such notice shall be in writing and shall be given to the owner of the
property, or to the owner's agent, or to the person doing the work. The notice
shall state the conditions under which work is authorized to resume. Where an
emergency exists, the building commissioner shall not be required to give a
written notice prior to stopping the work. Any person who shall continue any
work on the system after having been served with a stop work order, except such
work as that person is directed to perform to remove a violation or unsafe
condition, shall be punishable as prescribed by law and as provided under
section
1-4-1 of this code.
      6.   Abatement Of Violation: The imposition of the penalties herein
prescribed shall not prevent the building commissioner from requesting the
legal counsel of the village to institute the appropriate legal proceedings at
law or in equity to prevent unlawful construction or to restrain, correct or
abate a violation, or to prevent illegal occupancy of a building, structure or
premises, or to stop an illegal act, conduct, business or utilization of the
mechanical system on or about any premises.
      7.   Unsafe Mechanical Systems: A mechanical system that is unsafe,
constitutes a fire or health hazard, or is otherwise dangerous to human life,
as regulated by the international mechanical code or amendments to the
international mechanical code as set forth in this chapter, is hereby declared
as an unsafe mechanical system. Use of a mechanical system regulated by the
international mechanical code or amendments to the international mechanical
code as set forth in this chapter constituting a hazard to health, safety or
welfare by reason of inadequate maintenance, dilapidation, fire hazard,
disaster, damage or abandonment is hereby declared an unsafe use. Such unsafe
equipment and appliances are hereby declared to be a public nuisance and shall
be abated by repair, rehabilitation, demolition or removal.
      8.   Authority To Condemn Mechanical Systems: Whenever the building
commissioner determines that any mechanical system, or portion thereof,
regulated by the international mechanical code or amendments to the
international mechanical code as set forth in this chapter has become hazardous
to life, health, property, or has become insanitary, the building commissioner
shall order in writing that such system either be removed or restored to a safe
condition. A time limit for compliance with such order shall be specified in
the written notice. A person shall not use or maintain a defective mechanical
system after receiving such notice. When such mechanical system is to be
disconnected, written notice as prescribed in section 108.2 of the
international mechanical code shall be given. In cases of immediate danger to
life or property, such disconnection shall be made immediately without such
notice.
      9.   Authority To Order Disconnection Of Energy Sources: The building
commissioner shall have the authority to order disconnection of energy sources
supplied to a building, structure or mechanical system regulated by the
international mechanical code or amendments to the international mechanical
code as set forth in this chapter, when it is determined that the mechanical
system or any portion thereof has become hazardous or unsafe. Written notice of
such order to disconnect service and the causes therefor shall be given within
twenty four (24) hours to the owner and occupant of such building, structure or
premises, provided, however, that in cases of immediate danger to life or
property, such disconnection shall be made immediately without such notice.
Where energy sources are provided by a public utility, the building
commissioner shall immediately notify the serving utility in writing of the
issuance of such order to disconnect.
      10.   Connection After Order To Disconnect: A person shall not make
energy source connections to mechanical systems regulated by the international
mechanical code or amendments to the international mechanical code as set forth
in this chapter which have been disconnected or ordered to be disconnected by
the building official, or the use of which has been ordered to be discontinued
by the building commissioner until the building commissioner authorizes the
reconnection and use of such mechanical systems. When a mechanical system is
maintained in violation of the international mechanical code or amendments to
the international mechanical code as set forth in this chapter, and in
violation of a notice issued pursuant to the provisions of the international
mechanical code or amendments to the international mechanical code as set forth
in this chapter, the building commissioner is authorized to request the legal
counsel of the village to institute the appropriate legal proceedings at law or
in equity to prevent, restrain, correct or abate the violation. (Ord. 949, 3-
20-2007, eff. 4-1-2007; amd. Ord. 1459-24, 5-23-2024)
CHAPTER 3
NATIONAL ELECTRICAL CODE
SECTION:
3-3-1: Adoption
3-3-2: Amendments
3-3-3: Penalties
3-3-1: ADOPTION:
That certain documents, three (3) copies of which are on file in the office of
the village clerk, being marked and designated as the national electrical code
2023 (NFPA 70) published by the National Fire Protection Association be and are
hereby provided; and each and all of the regulations, provisions, penalties,
conditions and terms of said code are hereby referred to as adopted and made a
part hereof as if fully set out in this chapter, with the additions,
insertions, deletions and changes, if any, prescribed in section
3-3-2  of this chapter. (Ord. 949, 3-20-2007, eff. 4-1-2007; amd. Ord. 1459-24,
5-23-2024)
3-3-2: AMENDMENTS:
The following words, provisions, and paragraphs shall be added to the following
designated sections of the code adopted in section
3-3-1 of this chapter. These provisions supersede the requirements of the
indicated provisions of such code.
110-26(A) Add the following:
"In addition to the clearances shown in table 110-26(A)(1), the work space
shall not be less than thirty six inches (36") measured from each edge of all
electric equipment. There shall be no sump pits within the thirty six inches
(36") measured from both sides of the panel."
110-26 (2) Change thirty inches (30") to thirty six inches (36").
110-60 Add the following section:
"All electrical wiring within residential, commercial, and industrial, and all
accessory structures shall be enclosed in intermediate metal conduit (article
342), rigid metal conduit (article 344), flexible metal conduit (article 350)
or electrical metal tubing (article 358)."
Repairs And Alterations: Where the cost of remodeling or repairs will not
exceed fifty percent (50%) of the market valuation of the structure, non-
metallic sheathed cable may be used in lieu of conduit, unless conduit is
currently installed in the structure.
210-8(A) Change dwelling units to dwelling units and all other buildings.
230.85 Emergency disconnects delete the section.
352-2 Delete (A) and (C).
352-2(I) Add the following section: "In exterior sub-grade location only. The
transition to metal shall be below grade with a metallic elbow."
Conductor Material: Conductors used to conduct current shall be of copper. All
references to aluminum conductors shall be deleted.
(Ord. 949, 3-20-2007, eff. 4-1-2007; amd. Ord. 1459-24, 5-23-2024)
3-3-3: PENALTIES:
   A.   Penalties Generally: It shall be unlawful for any person, firm, or
corporation to violate any provisions of this chapter, and, except as otherwise
provided, any person, firm, or corporation guilty of violating any of the
provisions of this chapter shall be punishable as provided under section
1-4-1 of this code. Each day that a violation continues shall be deemed a
separate offense.
   B.   National Electrical Code Violations:
      1.   Penalties: Any person who fails to comply with the provisions of the
national electrical code or who fails to carry out an order made pursuant to
the national electrical code or amendments to the national electrical code as
set forth in this chapter or violates any condition attached to a permit,
approval or certificate shall be punishable as prescribed by law and as
provided under section
1-4-1 of this code.
      2.   Abatement Of Violation: The imposition of penalties shall not
prevent the building commissioner from requesting the legal counsel of the
village to institute the appropriate legal proceedings at law or in equity to
restrain, correct or abate such violation. Administrative notices are attempts
to secure voluntary compliance and are not the start of prosecution for
jurisdictional purposes.  (Ord. 949, 3-20-2007, eff. 4-1-2007; amd. Ord. 1459-
24, 5-23-2024)
CHAPTER 4
ILLINOIS PLUMBING CODE
SECTION:
3-4-1: Adoption
3-4-2: Amendments
3-4-3: Penalties
3-4-1: ADOPTION:
That certain documents, three (3) copies of which are on file in the office of
the village clerk, being marked and designated as the Illinois plumbing code
latest edition published by the state of Illinois be and are hereby provided;
and each and all of the regulations, provisions, penalties, conditions and
terms of said code are hereby referred to as adopted and made a part hereof as
if fully set out in this chapter, with the additions, insertions, deletions and
changes, if any, prescribed in section
3-4-2  of this chapter. (Ord. 949, 3-20-2007, eff. 4-1-2007; amd. Ord. 1459-24,
5-23-2024)
3-4-2: AMENDMENTS:
The following words, provisions, and paragraphs shall be added to the following
designated sections of the code adopted in section 3-4-1 of this chapter. These
provisions supersede the requirements of the indicated provisions of such code.
   890.210 c) Plastic Pipe Tubing And Fittings For Potable Water Piping is
added: "Plastic water supply lines and PEX water are prohibited within the
village."
   890.210 e)  "Water Distributing Pipe, Tubing And Fitting" is amended by
adding:
      "All copper water pipe or tubing placed under the basement floor shall be
class K and all sizes two-inches (2") and smaller above the basement floor
shall be class L or M."
      “Residential garages with floor drains shall have a gas and oil
interceptor.”
   890.1190 l) Water Meter Installation Requirements.
      All new construction serviced by the village of Manhattan water utility
shall install a water meter and associated equipment in accordance with village
of Manhattan public works requirements.
   890.1200 a) Change the minimum single-family residence service size to one-
inch (1") type K copper.
   890.1320 q) All sanitary building sewer service laterals shall have a
minimum of an eighteen-inch (18") fall from the lowest point of gravity service
in the building to the invert of the sanitary sewer main. In the event an
eighteen-inch (18") fall cannot be obtained, a pressure sewer system will be
required.
   890.1360 g) Drain Below Foundation.
      Wherever the point of influent disposal of sanitary waste such as, but
not limited to floor drains, sink traps or commodes is located or proposed to
be located below the top of foundation elevation, the waste disposal system
shall include an ejection system and back-flow preventer.   
(Ord. 949, 3-20-2007, eff. 4-1-2007; amd. Ord. 1459-24, 5-23-2024)
3-4-3: PENALTIES:
   A.   Penalties Generally: It shall be unlawful for any person, firm, or
corporation to violate any provisions of this chapter, and, except as otherwise
provided, any person, firm, or corporation guilty of violating any of the
provisions of this chapter shall be punishable as provided under section
1-4-1 of this code. Each day that a violation continues shall be deemed a
separate offense.
   B.   Illinois Plumbing Code Violations:
      1.   Penalty: Any person who fails to comply with the provisions of the
Illinois plumbing code or amendments to the Illinois plumbing code as set forth
in this chapter or who fails to carry out an order made pursuant to the
Illinois plumbing code or amendments to the Illinois plumbing code as set forth
in this chapter or violates any condition attached to a permit, approval or
certificate shall be punishable as prescribed by law and as provided under
section
 1-4-1 of this code.
      2.   Abatement Of Violation: The imposition of penalties shall not
prevent the building commissioner from requesting the legal counsel of the
village to institute the appropriate legal proceedings at law or in equity to
restrain, correct or abate such violation. Administrative notices are attempts
to secure voluntary compliance and are not the start of prosecution for
jurisdictional purposes. (Ord. 949, 3-20-2007, eff. 4-1-2007; amd. Ord. 1459-
24, 5-23-2024)
CHAPTER 5
ILLINOIS ACCESSIBILITY CODE
SECTION:
3-5-1: Adoption
3-5-2: Penalties
3-5-1: ADOPTION:
That certain documents, three (3) copies of which are on file in the office of
the village clerk, being marked and designated as the Illinois accessibility
code, latest edition, published by the state of Illinois be and are hereby
provided; and each and all of the regulations, provisions, penalties,
conditions and terms of said codes are hereby referred to as adopted and made a
part hereof as if fully set out in this chapter.
(Ord. 949, 3-20-2007, eff. 4-1-2007; amd. Ord. 1459-24, 5-23-2024)
3-5-2: PENALTIES:
   A.   Penalties Generally: It shall be unlawful for any person, firm, or
corporation to violate any provisions of this chapter, and, except as otherwise
provided, any person, firm, or corporation guilty of violating any of the
provisions of this chapter shall be punishable as provided under section
1-4-1 of this code. Each day that a violation continues shall be deemed a
separate offense.
   B.   Illinois Accessibility Code Violations:
      1.   Penalty: Any person who fails to comply with the provisions of the
Illinois accessibility code or who fails to carry out an order made pursuant to
the Illinois accessibility code or violates any condition attached to a permit,
approval or certificate shall be punishable as prescribed by law and as
provided under section
1-4-1 of this code.
      2.   Abatement Of Violation: The imposition of penalties shall not
prevent the building commissioner from requesting the legal counsel of the
village to institute the appropriate legal proceedings at law or in equity to
restrain, correct or abate such violation. Administrative notices are attempts
to secure voluntary compliance and are not the start of prosecution for
jurisdictional purposes.
(Ord. 949, 3-20-2007, eff. 4-1-2007; amd. Ord. 1459-24, 5-23-2024)
CHAPTER 6
INTERNATIONAL RESIDENTIAL CODE
SECTION:
3-6-1: Adoption
3-6-2: Amendments
3-6-3: Penalties
3-6-1: ADOPTION:
That certain documents, three (3) copies of which are on file in the office of
the village clerk, being marked and designated as the international residential
code 2021 published by the International Code Council be and are hereby
provided; and each and all of the regulations, provisions, penalties,
conditions and terms of said code are hereby referred to as adopted and made a
part hereof as if fully set out in this chapter, with the additions,
insertions, deletions and changes, if any, prescribed in section
3-6-2  of this chapter. (Ord. 949, 3-20-2007, eff. 4-1-2007; amd. Ord. 2024-24,
5-23-2024)
3-6-2: AMENDMENTS:
The following words, provisions, and paragraphs are to be added to the
following designated sections of the code adopted in section
3-6-1  of this chapter. These provisions supersede the requirements of the
indicated provisions of such code.
   R101.1 Insert: The village of Manhattan.
   103.1 Insert Buildings and Development Department for the department of
building safety.
   R105.2 Delete exemptions 1, 2, and 3.
   R105.2 Amend exemption 7 to read:
      Prefabricated temporary and blowup type swimming pools that are less than
thirty six (36) inches deep.
   R105.3.2 Amend to road:
      Time Limitation Of Application. An application for a permit for any
proposed work shall be deemed to have been abandoned 30 days after the date of
filing unless such application has been pursued in good faith or 60 days after
issuance if required fee is not paid.
   R105.5 Amend to read:
      Expiration. Every permit issued shall become invalid unless the work
authorized by such permit is commenced within 180 days after its issuance, or
if the work authorized by such permit is substantially suspended or abandoned
for a period of 180 days after the time the work is commenced. The building
official is authorized to grant, in writing, one or more extensions of time,
for periods not more than 180 days each. The extension shall be requested in
writing and justifiable cause demonstrated.
   R106.1 Amend to read:
      Submittal Documents. Construction documents, special inspection and
structural observation programs and other data shall be submitted in one or
more sets with each application for a permit. The construction documents for
new construction, alteration, repairs, expansion, addition or modification for
buildings or structures shall be prepared by a state of Illinois registere d
design professio nal. All construct ion documen ts required for a building
permit application shall be prepared by a state of Illinois registere d design
professio nal as required by Illinois laws or acts. Where special conditions
exist, the building official is authorized to require additional construct ion
documen ts to be prepared by a registere d design professio nal.
   R 112 Delete entire section and add the following:
      The village board shall serve as the board of appeals.
   R 301.2.1 The followin g informati on shall be inserted into the table:
   Table inset:
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/e82f668ac95262400ec0a90bb461a735129eaca9/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3034.png]
 
   R302.5.1 Opening Protection. Change the last line to read:
       "Other openings between the garage and the residence shall have a one
(1) hour fire rated door and wood frame."
   R309.2 Separation. Shall be changed as follows:
      "The garage shall be separated from the residence and its attic with an
assembly with not less than a one (1) hour rating."
   R309.1 Floor Surface. Change the first paragraph as follows:
      "The sills of all door openings between the garage and adjacent interior
spaces and all walls common with the dwelling unit shall be raised with a
concrete sill not less than four inches (4") (102 mm) above the concrete garage
floor. The floor finish of attached garages shall be concrete."
   R317.1 Delete exception 2.
   R302.2 Revise section to read:
      Townhouses.
      Each townhouse shall be considered as a separate building and shall be
separated from each other by wall and/or floor assemblies of not less than two-
hour fire resistance rating when tested in accordance with ASTM A-119. Fire
resistance rated floor-ceiling and wall assemblies shall extend from the
footing to the underside of the roof sheathing. All fire-resistive rated walls
shall be constructed of masonry and all fire resistive rated floor-ceiling
assemblies shall be of precast concrete type or poured in place concrete with a
two-hour fire rating and constructed to conform to the requirements of a fire
barrier.
   R313 Automatic sprinklers delete the entire section.
   R319.1 Revise section to read:
      Premises Identification.
      Buildings shall have approved address numbers, building numbers or
approved building identification placed in a position that is plainly legible
and visible from the street or road fronting the property. Residential
occupancies with garages serviced by a rear private drive, alley or parking lot
shall additionally place address numbers, building numbers or approved building
identification on the rear access visible from the rear private drive, alley or
parking lot. These numbers shall contrast with their background.
      Address numbers shall be Arabic numerals or alphabetical letters. Numbers
shall be a minimum of 4 inches (102 mm) high with a minimum stroke width of 0.5
inch (12.7 mm).
   R331 Add the new sections.
      Construction Regulations For Residential Districts.
   R331.1 Applicability Of This Section.
      Any principal residence that is located in a subdivision which received
final plat approval on or after January 1, 2005 shall comply with all terms and
provisions of this section.
   R331.225.2 Enforcement.
      Issuance of building and occupancy permits. No building or occupancy
permit shall be issued for the construction of any building in the residential
districts unless and until the provisions of this section and all other
relative ordinances are met. (Ord. 949, 3-20-2007, eff. 4-1-2007)
   R331.3 Building Materials Requirements.
      1. All roof shingles shall have a minimum 25 year warranty and be shadow
line granular design or equal. Cedar roof shingles, and roof tiles are allowed.
      2. All vinyl siding shall be a .044" thickness or greater.
      (Ord. 949, 3-20-2007, eff. 4-1-2007; amd. Ord. 1274, 6-5-2018)
   R401.1 Add the following: Wood foundations are prohibited.
   R403.14.2 The last section of the first line shall be changed as follows:
      "Except when erected upon solid rock or otherwise protected from frost,
foundation wall piers and other permanent supports of all buildings and
structures larger than six hundred (600) square feet in area shall extend to
the frost line of forty-two inches (42") and spread footings of adequate size
shall be provided where necessary to distribute properly the load within the
allowable bearing value of the soil."
      Add the following: "The placement of concrete in cold weather shall
follow the requirements outlined in the international building code with
amendments."
   R404.1 Add the following:
      The placement of concrete in cold weather shall follow the requirements
outlined in the international building code with amendments.
   R404.2 Wood foundations are prohibited. Delete the entire section.
   R506.1 Add the following:
      The placement of concrete in cold weather shall follow the requirements
outlined in the international building code with amendments.
   R602.3.1 Add the following:
      "Bearing Walls: Studs in bearing walls and partitions shall be
constructed of at least two inch by four inch (2" x 4") material spaced a
maximum of sixteen inches (16") on center with the wide dimension perpendicular
to the load.
      Non-Bearing Walls: Studs in non-bearing walls and partitions shall be
constructed of at least two inch by four inch (2" x 4") material spaced maximum
sixteen inches (16") on center with the wide dimension perpendicular to the
load." Note: This requirement supersedes the requirements in table 602.3.1.
   R602.10 Add the following: All exterior walls shall be solidly sheathed with
structural panels (plywood or listed OSB).
   Delete chapters 25 - 32.
   E3304.13 Add the following:
      "The circuit panel shall have a complete circuit chart showing the use
and circuit number for all circuits and over-current protection."
   E3305.3 Add the following sentence:
      There shall be no sump pits or other equipment in the required working
space and clearance.
   E3602.51 Add the following:
      Service Size. The minimum service size for a single family up to 1,500
square feet of habitable space is 100 amps. The minimum size service for a
single family home over 1,500 square feet of habitable space is 200 amp.
   E3406.1 Add the following sentence:
   E3401.1 Add the following:
      Conductor Material: Conductors used to conduct current shall be of
copper. All references to aluminum conductors shall be deleted.
   E3801.2 Add the following sentences:
      "All electrical wiring shall be enclosed in rigid metal conduit,
intermediate conduit, electrical metallic conduit or flexible metal conduit."
      "In exterior sub grade locations, the transition to metallic conduit from
below grade shall be below grade with a metallic elbow."
   Appendix A. Adopt appendix AA, AB, AC, AD, AK. (Ord. 949, 3-20-2007, eff. 4-
1-2007)
   AG 105.5 Revise section to read:
      Barrier Exceptions.
      1. Spas or hot tubs with a safety cover which complies with ASTM F1346,
shall be exempt from the provisions of this appendix.
      2. Non-permanent private residential swimming pools (inflatable portable
pools) which are covered whenever the pool is not in use shall be exempt from
the provisions of this appendix. The cover and locking device must comply with
ASTM F1346. (Ord. 1145, 5-7-2013)
(Ord. 949, 3-20-2007, eff. 4-1-2007; amd. Ord. 1459-24, 5-23-2024)
3-6-3: PENALTIES:
   A.   Penalties Generally: It shall be unlawful for any person, firm, or
corporation to violate any provisions of this chapter, and, except as otherwise
provided, any person, firm, or corporation guilty of violating any of the
provisions of this chapter shall be punishable as provided under section
1-4-1 of this code. Each day that a violation continues shall be deemed a
separate offense.
   B.   International Residential Code Violations:
      1.   Unlawful Acts: It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or
corporation to erect, construct, alter, extend, repair, move, remove, demolish
or occupy any building, structure or equipment regulated by the international
residential code or amendments to the international residential code as set
forth in this chapter, or cause same to be done, in conflict with or in
violation of any of the provisions of the international residential code or
amendments to the international residential code as set forth in this chapter.
      2.   Notice Of Violation: The building commissioner is authorized to
serve a notice of violation or order on the person responsible for the
erection, construction, alteration, extension, repair, moving, removal,
demolition or occupancy of a building or structure in violation of the
provisions of the international residential code or amendments to the
international residential code as set forth in this chapter, or in violation of
a detail statement or a plan approved thereunder, or in violation of a permit
or certificate issued under the provisions of the international residential
code or amendments to the international residential code as set forth in this
chapter. Such order shall direct the discontinuance of the illegal action or
condition and the abatement of the violation. Administrative notices are
attempts to secure voluntary compliance and are not the start of prosecution
for jurisdictional purposes.
      3.   Prosecution Of Violation: If the notice of violation is not complied
with within the time prescribed by such notice, the building commissioner is
authorized to request the legal counsel of the village to institute the
appropriate legal proceedings at law or in equity to restrain, correct or abate
such violation, or to require the removal or termination of the unlawful
occupancy of the building or structure in violation of the provisions of the
international residential code or amendments to the international residential
code as set forth in this chapter or of the order or direction made pursuant
thereto.
      4.   Violation Penalties: Any person who violates a provision of the
international residential code or amendments to the international residential
code as set forth in this chapter or fails to comply with any of the
requirements thereof or who erects, constructs, alters or repairs a building or
structure in violation of the approved construction documents or directive of
the building commissioner, or of a permit or certificate issued under the
provisions of the international residential code or amendments to the
international residential code as set forth in this chapter, shall be subject
to penalties as prescribed by law and as provided under section
1-4-1 of this code. Each day that a violation continues shall be deemed a
separate offense. (Ord. 949, 3-20-2007, eff. 4-1-2007; amd. Ord. 1459-24, 5-23-
2024)
CHAPTER 7
INTERNATIONAL PROPERTY MAINTENANCE CODE
SECTION:
3-7-1: Adoption
3-7-2: Amendments
3-7-3: Penalties
3-7-1: ADOPTION:
That certain documents, three (3) copies of which are on file in the office of
the village clerk, being marked and designated as the international property
maintenance code, 2021, published by the International Code Council be and are
hereby provided; and each and all of the regulations, provisions, penalties,
conditions and terms of said code are hereby referred to as adopted and made a
part hereof as if fully set out in this chapter, with the additions,
insertions, deletions and changes, if any, prescribed in section
3-7-2  of this chapter. (Ord. 949, 3-20-2007, eff. 4-1-2007; amd. Ord. 1459-24,
5-23-2024)
3-7-2: AMENDMENTS:
The following words, provisions, and paragraphs shall be added to the following
designated sections of the code adopted in section
3-7-1  of this chapter. These provisions supersede the requirements of the
indicated provisions of such code.
   101.1 Village of Manhattan.
   103.1 Insert Buildings and Development Department.
   104.1 See the village of Manhattan fee schedule.
   108.1 Membership. Said board shall consist at all time of the then duly
qualified and acting mayor of the village of Manhattan and the village board of
trustees of the village of Manhattan who shall appoint a person as "code
official" to perform the duties provided in this code for the code official.
(Ord. 949, 3-20-2007, eff. 4-1-2007)
   302.4 Shall be deleted in its entirety and the following inserted in lieu
thereof:
      302.4 Grass And Weeds.
      A.   Lawn grass shall include all species of grass normally grown as a
permanent lawn in the area, whether sodded, plugged, sprigged or seeded.
      B.   Lawn grass shall be installed and properly maintained on all
property within nine months after an occupancy permit has been issued.
      C.   All premises and exterior property shall be maintained free from
weeds or plant growth in excess of 8". All noxious weeds shall be prohibited.
Weeds shall be defined as all grasses, annual plants and vegetation, other than
trees or shrubs; provided however, this term shall not include cultivated
flowers, gardens and areas of native prairie plantings that have been approved
by the village.
      D.   The owner and/or occupant of any premises that abuts public
property, whether from the front, one of the sides or in the back between the
public street (a.k.a. the public right-of-way, parkway, shoulder, cause-way or
berm) and the private property line shall maintain the area between the edge of
pavement or curb and their property line, commonly known as parkway, in a neat,
clean and orderly condition and free of any weeds, and grass or plants in
excess of the provisions above. (Ord. 998, 6-17-2008)
      E.   The owner of any vacant premises, property or lot shall be served
with reasonable notice that if grass or weeds are permitted to grow in
violation of the provisions of section 302.4.C, the building official may cause
the grass or weeds to be cut without further notice. (Ord. 1063, 5-18-2010)
   304.14 May 1 to October 1.
   602.3 October 1 to April 1.
   602.4 October 1 to April 1.
(Ord. 949, 3-20-2007, eff. 4-1-2007; amd. Ord. 1459-24, 5-23-2024)
3-7-3: PENALTIES:
   A.   Penalties Generally: It shall be unlawful for any person, firm, or
corporation to violate any provisions of this chapter, and, except as otherwise
provided, any person, firm, or corporation guilty of violating any of the
provisions of this chapter shall be punishable as provided under section
1-4-1 of this code. Each day that a violation continues shall be deemed a
separate offense.
   B.   International Property Maintenance Code Violations:
      1.   Unlawful Acts: It shall be unlawful for a person, firm or
corporation to be in conflict with or in violation of any of the provisions of
the international property maintenance code or amendments to the international
property maintenance code as set forth in this chapter.
      2.   Notice Of Violation: The building official shall serve a notice of
violation or order in accordance with section 107 of the international property
maintenance code. Administrative notices are attempts to secure voluntary
compliance and are not the start of prosecution for jurisdictional purposes.
      3.   Prosecution Of Violation: Any person failing to comply with a notice
of violation or order served in accordance with section 107 of the
international property maintenance code shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor
and punishable as prescribed by law and as provided under section
1-4-1 of this code, and the violation shall be deemed a strict liability
offense. If the notice of violation is not complied with, the building
commissioner is authorized to request the legal counsel of the village to
institute the appropriate legal proceedings at law or in equity to restrain,
correct or abate such violation, or to require the removal or termination of
the unlawful occupancy of the structure in violation of the provisions of the
international property maintenance code or amendments to the international
property maintenance code as set forth in this chapter or of the order or
direction made pursuant thereto. Any action taken by the village on such
premises shall be charged against the real estate upon which the structure is
located and shall be a lien upon such real estate.
      4.   Violation Penalties: Any person who shall violate a provision of the
international property maintenance code or amendments to the international
property maintenance code as set forth in this chapter, or fail to comply
therewith, or with any of the requirements thereof, shall be punishable as
prescribed by law and as provided under section
1-4-1 of this code. Each day that a violation continues after due notice has
been served shall be deemed a separate offense.
      5.   Abatement Of Violation: The imposition of the penalties herein
prescribed shall not preclude the building commissioner from requesting the
legal counsel of the village to institute the appropriate legal proceedings at
law or in equity to restrain, correct or abate a violation, or to prevent
illegal occupancy of a building, structure or premises, or to stop an illegal
act, conduct, business or utilization of the building, structure or premises.
(Ord. 949, 3-20-2007, eff. 4-1-2007; amd. Ord. 1459-24, 5-23-2024)
CHAPTER 8
INTERNATIONAL FUEL GAS CODE
SECTION:
3-8-1: Adoption
3-8-2: Amendments
3-8-3: Penalties
3-8-1: ADOPTION:
That certain documents, three (3) copies of which are on file in the office of
the village clerk, being marked and designated as the international fuel gas
code 2021 published by the International Code Council be and are hereby
provided; and each and all of the regulations, provisions, penalties,
conditions and terms of said code are hereby referred to as adopted and made a
part hereof as if fully set out in this chapter, with the additions,
insertions, deletions and changes, if any, prescribed in section
3-8-2  of this chapter. (Ord. 949, 3-20-2007, eff. 4-1-2007; amd. Ord. 1459-24,
5-23-2024)
3-8-2: AMENDMENTS:
The following words, provisions, and paragraphs be added to the following
designated sections of the code adopted in section
3-8-1  of this chapter. These provisions supersede the requirements of the
indicated provisions of such code.
   101.1 Insert the village of Manhattan.
   103.1 Insert Buildings and Development Department.
   109.2 See the village of Manhattan fee schedule.
(Ord. 949, 3-20-2007, eff. 4-1-2007; amd. Ord. 1459-24, 5-23-2024)
3-8-3: PENALTIES:
   A.   Penalties Generally: It shall be unlawful for any person, firm, or
corporation to violate any provisions of this chapter, and, except as otherwise
provided, any person, firm, or corporation guilty of violating any of the
provisions of this chapter shall be punishable as provided under section
1-4-1 of this code. Each day that a violation continues shall be deemed a
separate offense.
   B.   International Fuel Gas Code Violations:
      1.   Unlawful Acts: It shall be unlawful for a person, firm or
corporation to erect, construct, alter, repair, remove, demolish or utilize an
installation, or cause same to be done, in conflict with or in violation of any
of the provisions of the international fuel gas code or amendments to the
international fuel gas code as set forth in this chapter.
      2.   Notice Of Violation: The building official shall serve a notice of
violation or order to the person responsible for the erection, installation,
alteration, extension, repair, removal or demolition of work in violation of
the provisions of the international fuel gas code or amendments to the
international fuel gas code as set forth in this chapter, or in violation of a
detail statement or the approved construction documents thereunder, or in
violation of a permit or certificate issued under the provisions of the
international fuel gas code or amendments to the international fuel gas code as
set forth in this chapter. Such order shall direct the discontinuance of the
illegal action or condition and the abatement of the violation. Administrative
notices are attempts to secure voluntary compliance and are not the start of
prosecution for jurisdictional purposes.
      3.   Prosecution Of Violation: If the notice of violation is not complied
with promptly, the building commissioner is authorized to request the legal
counsel of the village to institute the appropriate legal proceedings at law or
in equity to restrain, correct or abate such violation, or to require the
removal or termination of the unlawful occupancy of the structure in violation
of the provisions of the international fuel gas code or amendments to the
international fuel gas code as set forth in this chapter or of the order or
direction made pursuant thereto.
      4.   Violation Penalties: Persons who shall violate a provision of the
international fuel gas code or amendments to the international fuel gas code as
set forth in this chapter, fail to comply with any of the requirements thereof
or erect, install, alter or repair work in violation of the approved
construction documents or directive of the building commissioner, or of a
permit or certificate issued under the provisions of the international fuel gas
code or amendments to the international fuel gas code as set forth in this
chapter, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and punishable as prescribed by law
and as provided under section
1-4-1  of this code. Each day that a violation continues after due notice has
been served shall be deemed a separate offense.
      5.   Stop Work Orders: Upon notice from the building official that work
is being done contrary to the provisions of the international fuel gas code or
amendments to the international fuel gas code as set forth in this chapter or
in a dangerous or unsafe manner, such work shall immediately cease. Such notice
shall be in writing and shall be given to the owner of the property, the
owner's agent, or the person doing the work. The notice shall state the
conditions under which work is authorized to resume. Where an emergency exists,
the building commissioner shall not be required to give a written notice prior
to stopping the work. Any person who shall continue any work on the system
after having been served with a stop work order, except such work as that
person is directed to perform to remove a violation or unsafe condition, shall
be punishable as prescribed by law and as provided under section
1-4-1  of this code.
      6.   Abatement Of Violation: The imposition of the penalties herein
prescribed shall not prevent the building commissioner from requesting the
legal counsel of the village to institute the appropriate legal proceedings at
law or in equity to prevent unlawful construction, restrain, correct or abate a
violation, prevent illegal occupancy of a building, structure or premises, or
stop an illegal act, conduct, business or utilization of the installations on
or about any premises.
      7.   Unsafe Installations: An installation that is unsafe, constitutes a
fire or health hazard, or is otherwise dangerous to human life, as regulated by
the international fuel gas code or amendments to the international fuel gas
code as set forth in this chapter, is hereby declared an unsafe installation.
Use of an installation regulated by the international fuel gas code or
amendments to the international fuel gas code as set forth in this chapter
constituting a hazard to health, safety or welfare by reason of inadequate
maintenance, dilapidation, fire hazard, disaster, damage or abandonment is
hereby declared an unsafe use. Such unsafe installations are hereby declared to
be a public nuisance and shall be abated by repair, rehabilitation, demolition
or removal.
      8.   Authority To Condemn Installations: Whenever the building official
determines that any installation, or portion thereof, regulated by the
international fuel gas code or amendments to the international fuel gas code as
set forth in this chapter has become hazardous to life, health or property, he
or she shall order in writing that such installations either be removed or
restored to a safe condition. A time limit for compliance with such order shall
be specified in the written notice. A person shall not use or maintain a
defective installation after receiving such notice. When such installation is
to be disconnected, written notice as prescribed in section 108.2 of the
international fuel gas code shall be given. In cases of immediate danger to
life or property, such disconnection shall be made immediately without such
notice.
      9.   Authority To Disconnect Service Utilities: The building commissioner
shall have the authority to require disconnection of utility service to the
building, structure or system regulated by the technical codes in case of
emergency where necessary to eliminate an immediate hazard to life or property.
The building official shall notify the serving utility, and wherever possible,
the owner and occupant of the building, structure or service system of the
decision to disconnect prior to taking such action. If not notified prior to
disconnection, the owner or occupant of the building, structure or service
system shall be notified in writing, as soon as practicable thereafter.
      10.   Connection After Order To Disconnect: A person shall not make
energy source connections to installations regulated by the international fuel
gas code or amendments to the international fuel gas code as set forth in this
chapter which have been disconnected or ordered to be disconnected by the
building official, or the use of which has been ordered to be discontinued by
the building official until the building commissioner authorizes the
reconnection and use of such installations. When an installation is maintained
in violation of the international fuel gas code or amendments to the
international fuel gas code as set forth in this chapter, and in violation of a
notice issued pursuant to the provisions of this section, the building official
is authorized to request the legal counsel of the village to institute the
appropriate legal proceedings at law or in equity to prevent, restrain, correct
or abate the violation.
(Ord. 949, 3-20-2007, eff. 4-1-2007; amd. Ord. 1459-24, 5-3-2024)
CHAPTER 9
INTERNATIONAL SWIMMING POOL AND SPA CODE
SECTION:
3-9-1: Adoption
3-9-2: Amendments
3-9-3: Penalties
3-9-1: ADOPTION:
That certain documents, three (3) copies of which are on file in the office of
the Village Clerk, being marked and designated as the International Swimming
Pool and Spa Code 2021 published by the International Code Council be and are
hereby provided; and each and all of the regulations, provisions, penalties,
conditions and terms of said code are hereby referred to as adopted and made a
part hereof as if fully set out in this chapter, with the additions,
insertions, deletions and changes, if any, prescribed in section
3-9-2  of this chapter. (Ord. 1459-24, 5-23-2024)
3-9-2: AMENDMENTS:
The following words, provisions, and paragraphs shall be added to the following
designated sections of the code adopted in section
3-9-1  of this chapter. These provisions supersede the requirements of the
indicated provisions of such code.
   101.1 Insert the Village of Manhattan.
   103.1 Insert Buildings and Development Department.
   108.2  See village of Manhattan fee schedule.
   11 Delete the entire section and insert.
   The Village Board shall serve as the Appeals Board. 
(Ord. 1459-24, 5-23-2024)
3-9-3: PENALTIES:
   A.   Penalties Generally: It shall be unlawful for any person, firm, or
corporation to violate any provisions of this chapter, and, except as otherwise
provided, any person, firm, or corporation guilty of violating any of the
provisions of this chapter shall be punishable as provided under section
1-4-1  of this code. Each day that a violation continues shall be deemed a
separate offense.
   B.   International Swimming Pool and Spa Code Violations:
      1.   Penalties: Any person who fails to comply with the provisions of the
International Swimming Pool and Spa Code or amendments to the International
Swimming Pool and Spa Code as set forth in this chapter or who fails to carry
out an order made pursuant to the international electrical code or amendments
to the International Swimming Pool and Spa Code as set forth in this chapter or
violates any condition attached to a permit, approval or certificate shall be
punishable as prescribed by law and as provided under section
1-4-1  of this code.
      2.   Abatement of Violation: The imposition of penalties shall not
prevent the Building Official from requesting the legal counsel of the village
to institute the appropriate legal proceedings at law or in equity to restrain,
correct or abate such violation. Administrative notices are attempts to secure
voluntary compliance and are not the start of prosecution for jurisdictional
purposes.
(Ord. 1459-24, 5-23-2024)
CHAPTER 10
INTERNATIONAL FIRE CODE
SECTION:
3-10-1: Adoption
3-10-2: Amendments
3-10-3: Penalties
3-10-1: ADOPTION:
That certain documents, three (3) copies of which are on file in the office of
the village clerk, being marked and designated as the international fire code
2021 published by the International Code Council be and are hereby provided;
and each and all of the regulations, provisions, penalties, conditions and
terms of said code are hereby referred to as adopted and made a part hereof as
if fully set out in this chapter, with the additions, insertions, deletions and
changes, if any, prescribed in section
3-10-2  of this chapter. (Ord. 949, 3-20-2007, eff. 4-1-2007; amd. Ord. 1459-
24, 5-23-2024)
3-10-2: AMENDMENTS:
The following words, provisions, and paragraphs shall be added to the following
designated sections of the code adopted in section 3-10-1 of this chapter.
These provisions supersede the requirements of the indicated provisions of such
code.
   101.1 Insert the village of Manhattan.
   103.1 Insert Buildings and Development Department.
   107.2 See the village of Manhattan fee schedule.
   (Ord. 949, 3-20-2007, eff. 4-1-2007)
   506.1 Shall be deleted in its entirety and the following inserted in lieu
thereof:
   506.1 Where access to or within a structure or an area is restricted because
of secured openings or where immediate access is necessary for life-saving or
fire-fighting purposes a Knox box brand key vault/rapid entry system, also
known as a "Knox box" shall be installed in accordance with the following
requirements:
      1. All Knox boxes shall be installed on an exterior portion of a building
or structure in locations approved by the code official. This will typically be
at the front of the building and adjacent to the sprinkler control room or fire
department sprinkler connection.
      2. The Knox box shall be mounted at a height of between 60 and 72 inches
above the floor or finished grade.
      3. The Knox box shall contain keys allowing access to all common entry
doors to the building, the door to the automatic sprinkler fire suppression
system control room, elevator controls, electrical rooms, mechanical rooms and
the fire alarm panel servicing said building or structure.
      4. The total number of Knox boxes required for occupancy shall be
determined by the code official.
      5. The location of the Knox boxes shall be indicated on the construction
drawings.
   903.2 Shall be deleted in its entirety and the following inserted in lieu
thereof:
   AUTOMATIC SPRINKLER SYSTEMS
   [F] 903.2 Where Required. Approved automatic sprinkler systems in new
buildings and structures shall be provided in the locations described in this
section.
   Exception:
      1. Spaces or areas in telecommunications buildings used exclusively for
telecommunications equipment, associated electrical power distribution
equipment, batteries and standby engines, provided those spaces or areas are
equipped throughout with an automatic fire alarm system and are separated from
the remainder of the building by fire barriers consisting of not less than 1-
hour fire-resistance-rated walls and 2-hour fire-resistance-rated floor/ceiling
assemblies.
      2. Detached gazebos, temporary tents and ramadas for residential and
public use.
      3. Guardhouses that are less than 300 square feet in size used to control
access to or within residential and/or commercial developments of combustible
construction or 600 square feet or less that are of non-combustible
construction.
      4. Detached non-combustible canopies used exclusively for automotive,
motor fuel dispensing stations or detached non-combustible carports or parking
canopies.
      5. Detached equipment or storage buildings for commercial use not
exceeding 300 square feet or 600 square feet if more than 20 feet from the
principal commercial structure.
      6. Factory built buildings utilized as temporary office buildings similar
to real estate leasing offices and construction offices.
   [F] 903.2.1 Group A. An automatic sprinkler system shall be provided
throughout buildings and portions thereof used as group A occupancies as
provided in this section. For group A-1, A-2, A-3 and A-4 occupancies, the
automatic sprinkler system shall be provided throughout the floor area where
the group A-1, A-2, A-3 or A-4 occupancy is located, and in all floors between
the group A occupancy and the level of exit discharge. For group A-
5 occupancies, the automatic sprinkler system shall be provided in the spaces
indicated in section 903.2.1.5.
   [F] 903.2.1.1 Group A-1. An automatic sprinkler system shall be provided
throughout all group A-1 occupancies.
   [F] 903.2.1.2 Group A-2. An automatic sprinkler system shall be provided
throughout all group A-2 occupancies.
   [F] 903.2.1.3 Group A-3. An automatic sprinkler system shall provided
throughout all group A-3 occupancies.
      Exception: Areas used exclusively as participant sports areas where the
main floor area is located at the same level as the level of exit discharge of
the main entrance and exit.
   [F] 903.2.1.4 Group A-4. An automatic sprinkler system shall be provided
throughout all group A-4 occupancies.
      Exception: Areas used exclusively as participant sports areas where the
main floor area is located at the same level as the level of exit discharge of
the main entrance and exit.
   [F] 903.2.1.5 Group A-5. An automatic sprinkler system shall be provided for
group A-5 occupancies in the following areas: concession stands, retail areas,
press boxes and other accessory use areas in excess of 1,000 square feet (93
m2).
   [F] 903.2.1.6 Assembly occupancies on roofs. An automatic sprinkler system
shall be provided throughout all assembly occupancies on roofs.
   [F] 903.2.2 Ambulatory Health Facilities. An automatic sprinkler system
shall be provided throughout all ambulatory health care facilities.
   [F] 903.2.3 Group E. An automatic sprinkler system shall be provided for
throughout all group E occupancies.
   [F] 903.2.4 Group F-1. An automatic sprinkler system shall be provided
throughout all buildings containing a group F-1 occupancy.
   [F] 903.2.4.1 Woodworking Operations. An automatic sprinkler system shall be
provided throughout all group F-1 occupancy fire areas.
   [F] 903.2.5 Group H. Automatic sprinkler systems shall be provided in high-
hazard occupancies as required in sections 903.2.4.1 through 903.2.4.3.
   [F] 903.2.4.1 General. An automatic sprinkler system shall be installed in
group H occupancies.
   [F] 903.2.4.1 Group H-5. An automatic sprinkler system shall be installed
throughout buildings containing group H-5 occupancies. The design of the
sprinkler system shall not be less than that required by this code for the
occupancy hazard classifications in accordance with table 903.2.4.2. Where the
design area of the sprinkler system consists of a corridor protected by one row
of sprinklers, the maximum number of sprinklers required to be calculated is
13.
   [F] TABLE 903.2.4.1
   GROUP H-5 SPRINKLER DESIGN CRITERIA
GROUP H-5 SPRINKLER DESIGN CRITERIA
LOCATION                          OCCUPANCY HAZARD
                                 CLASSIFICATION
Fabrication areas                 Ordinary hazard group 2
Service corridors                 Ordinary hazard group 2
Storage rooms without dispensing  Ordinary hazard group 2
Storage rooms with dispensing     Extra hazard group 2
Corridors                         Ordinary hazard group 2
 
   [F] 903.2.5.3 Pyroxylin Plastics. An automatic sprinkler system shall be
provided in buildings, or portions thereof, where cellulose nitrate film or
pyroxylin plastics are manufactured, stored or handled in quantities exceeding
100 pounds (45 kg).
   [F] 903.2.6 Group I. An automatic sprinkler system shall be provided
throughout buildings with a group I fire area.
      Exception: An automatic sprinkler system installed in accordance with
section 903.3.1.2 or 903.3.1.3 shall be allowed in group I-1 facilities.
   [F] 903.2.7 Group M. An automatic sprinkler system shall be provided
throughout buildings containing a group M occupancy.
   [F] 903.2.8 Group R. An automatic sprinkler system installed in accordance
with section 903.3 shall be provided throughout all buildings with a group R
fire area regulated by this code or any group R use including single family
that is attached to any other use group.
   [F] 903.2.9 Group S-1. An automatic sprinkler system shall be provided
throughout all buildings containing a group S-1 occupancy.
   [F] 903.2.9.1 Repair Garages. An automatic sprinkler system shall be
provided throughout all buildings used as repair garages.
   [F] 903.2.10 Group S-2. An automatic sprinkler system shall be provided
throughout buildings classified as enclosed parking garages in accordance with
section 406.4 or where located beneath other groups.
   [F] 903.2.10.1 Commercial Parking Garages. An automatic sprinkler system
shall be provided throughout buildings used for storage of commercial trucks or
buses.
   [F] 903.2.11.2 Rubbish And Linen Chutes. An automatic sprinkler system shall
be installed at the top of rubbish and linen chutes and in their terminal
rooms. Chutes extending through three or more floors shall have additional
sprinkler heads installed within such chutes at alternate floors. Chute
sprinklers shall be accessible for servicing.
   [F] 903.2.12 During Construction. Automatic sprinkler systems required
during construction, alteration and demolition operations shall be provided in
accordance with the international fire code.
   [F] 903.2.11 Other Hazards. Automatic sprinkler protection shall be provided
for the hazards indicated in sections 903.2.12.1 and 903.2.12.2.
   [F] 903.2.11.1 Ducts Conveying Hazardous Exhausts.
      Where required by the international mechanical code, automatic sprinklers
shall be provided in ducts conveying hazardous exhaust, or flammable or
combustible materials.
      Exception: Ducts in which the largest cross-sectional diameter of the
duct is less than 10 inches (254 mm).
   [F] 903.2.11.2 Commercial Cooking Operations. An automatic sprinkler system
shall be installed in commercial kitchen exhaust hood and duct system where an
automatic sprinkler system is used to comply with section 904.
   [F] 903.2.11.6 Other Required Suppression Systems. In addition to the
requirements of section 903.2, the provisions indicated in table 903.2.11.6
also require the installation of a suppression system for certain buildings and
areas.
   [F] TABLE 903.2.11.6
ADDITIONAL REQUIRED SUPPRESSION SYSTEMS
SECTION           SUBJECT
402.8             Covered malls
403.2, 403.3      High-rise buildings
404.3             Atriums
405.3             Underground structures
407.5             Group I-2
410.6             Stages
411.4             Special amusement buildings
412.2.5, 412.2.6  Aircraft hangars
415.6.2.4         Group H-2
416.4             Flammable finishes
417.4             Drying rooms
507               Unlimited area buildings
508.2             Incidental use areas
1025.6.2.3        Smoke-protected assembly seating
IFC               Sprinkler system requirements as set forth in section
                   903.2.13 of the international fire code
 
   (Ord. 991, 3-5-2008)
   903.2 Shall be amended by inserting the following:
   [F] 903.2.13 Group B. An automatic sprinkler system shall be provided
throughout buildings containing a group B occupancy. (Ord. 994, 4-1-2008)
   903.2 Shall be amended by inserting the following:
   [F] 903.2.13 Group B. An automatic sprinkler system shall be provided
throughout buildings containing a group B occupancy.
   1201.1 Scope. The provisions of this Chapter shall apply to the
installation, operation, and maintenance of energy systems used for generating
or storing energy.
   1203.1.1 Stationary Generators. Stationary emergency and standby power
generators required by this Code shall be listed in accordance with UL 2200.
Associated flammable or combustible liquid tanks shall also comply with IFC
Chapters 50 and 57.
   1205.1.1 Permits. Permits shall be obtained for solar voltaic systems in
accordance with Section 105.6.20
      Exception: Solar photovoltaic systems with less than 3 Kw alternating
current nameplate rating.
   1205.1.2 Marking. Marking is required on the interior and exterior direct-
current (DC) conduit, enclosures, race-ways, cable assemblies, junction boxes,
combiner boxes, and disconnects.
   1205.1.2.1 Materials. The materials used for marking shall be reflective,
weather-resistant, and suitable for the environment. Marking as required in
Sections 1204.1.2 through 1204.1.6 shall have all letters capitalized with a
minimum height of 3/8 inch (9.5 mm) white on red background.
   1205.1.2.2 Marking Content. The marking shall contain the words "WARNING:
PHOTOVOLTAIC POWER SOURCE."
   1205.1.2.3 Main Service Disconnect. The marking shall be placed adjacent to
the main service disconnect in a location clearly visible from the location
where the disconnect is operated.
   1205.1.3 Location of Marking. Marking shall be placed on interior and
exterior DC conduit, raceways, enclosures and cable assemblies every 10 feet
(3,048 mm), within 1 foot (305 mm) of turns or bends and within 1 foot (305 mm)
above and below penetrations of roof/ceiling assemblies, walls or barriers.
   Amend Section 1205.2 as follows:
   1205.2 Access and Pathways. Roof access, pathways, and spacing requirements
shall be provided in accordance with Sections 1205.2.1 through 1205.3.3.
Pathways shall be over areas capable of supporting firefighters accessing the
roof. Pathways shall be located in areas with minimal obstructions, such as
vent pipes, conduit or mechanical equipment. Residential structures shall be
designed so that each photovoltaic array is not greater than 150 feet (45,720
mm) by 150 feet (45,720 mm) in either axis.
   1205.2.1, delete and replace with the following language:
   1205.2.1 Solar Photovoltaic Systems for Group R-3 Buildings. Solar
photovoltaic systems for Group R-3 buildings shall comply with Sections
1205.2.1.1 through 1205.2.1.5.
   1205.2.1.1 Roof Access Points. Roof access points shall be located in areas
that do not require the placement of ground ladders over openings such as
windows or doors and located at strong points of building construction in
locations where the access point does not conflict with overhead obstructions
such as tree limbs, wires, or signs.
   1205.2.1.2 Residential Buildings with Hip Roof Layouts. Panels or modules
installed on residential buildings with hip roof layouts shall be located in a
manner that provides two 3-foot-wide (914 mm) clear access pathway from the
eave to the ridge on each roof slope where panels or modules are located.
   1205.2.1.3 Residential Buildings with a Single Ridge. Panels/modules
installed on residential buildings with a single ridge shall be located in a
manner that provides two 3-foot-wide (914 mm) access pathways from the eave to
the ridge on each roof slope where panels/modules are located.
   1205.2.1.4 Residential Buildings with Roof Hips and Valleys. Panels or
modules installed on residential buildings with roof hips and valleys shall be
located not closer than 18 inches (457 mm) to a hip or a valley where panels or
modules are to be placed on both sides of a hip or valley. Where panels are to
be located on only one side of a hip or valley that is of equal length, the
panels shall be permitted to be placed directly adjacent to the hip or valley.
   1205.2.1.5 Residential Building Smoke Ventilation. Panels/modules installed
on residential buildings shall be located no higher than 3 feet (914 mm) below
the ridge in order to allow for fire department smoke ventilation operations.
   Amend Section 1205.3 as follows:
   1205.3 Other Than Group R-3 Buildings. Access to systems for buildings,
other than those containing Group R-3 occupancies, shall be provided in
accordance with Sections 1205.3.1 through 1205.3.3.
      Exception: Where it is determined by the fire code official that the roof
configuration is similar to that of a Group R-3 occupancy, the residential
access and ventilation requirements in Sections 1205.2.1.1 through 1205.2.1.5
are a suitable alternative.
   Amend Section 1205.3.2 as follows:
   1205.3.2 Interior Pathways. Interior pathways shall be provided between
array sections to meet the following requirements:
      1.   Pathways shall be provided at intervals not greater than 150 feet
(45,720 mm) throughout the length and width of the roof.
      2.   A pathway not less than 4 feet (1,219 mm) wide in a straight line to
roof standpipes or ventilation hatches.
      3.   A pathway not less than 4 feet (1,219 mm) wide around roof access
hatches, with no fewer than one such pathway to a parapet or roof edge.
      4.   The pathway shall be over areas capable of supporting the live load
of firefighters accessing the roof.
      5.   The centerline axis pathways shall be provided in both axes of the
roof. Centerline axis pathways shall run where the roof structure is capable of
supporting the live load of firefighters accessing the roof.
   Amend Section 1205.3.3 as follows:
   1205.3.3 Smoke Ventilation. The solar installation shall be designed to meet
the following requirements:
      3.   Arrays shall be not greater than 150 feet (45 720 mm) by 150 feet
(45 720 mm) in the distance in either axis in order to create opportunities for
fire department smoke ventilation operations.
   Amend Section 1207.1 as follows:
   1207.1 General. The provisions in this section are applicable to stationary
and mobile electrical energy storage systems (ESS). Approved signage is
required for all installations.
   1207.1.1 Scope. ESS having capacities of 3 kWh or more shall comply with
this section.
   Amend Section 1207.1.4 as follows:
   1207.1.4 Hazard Mitigation Analysis. A failure modes and effects analysis
(FMEA) or other approved hazard mitigation analysis shall be provided in
accordance with Section 104.7.2 under any of the following conditions.
      4.   Where required by the fire code official.
   Amend Section 1207.1.4.1 as follows:
   1207.1.4.1 Fault Condition. The hazard mitigation analysis shall evaluate
the consequences of the following modes, and others deemed necessary by the
fire code official. Only single failure modes shall be considered.
      8.   Failure of temperature control.
   Amend Section 1207.6.1.1 as follows:    
   1207.6.1.1 The exhaust ventilation system shall be designed to limit the
maximum concentration of flammable gas to 10 percent of the lower flammable
limit (LFL) of the total volume of the room, area or walk-in unit during the
worst-case event of simultaneous charging of batteries at the maximum charge
rate
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/e82f668ac95262400ec0a90bb461a735129eaca9/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3036.png]
 
   Adoption of the 2020 edition of NFPA 855.
      The [Jurisdiction] has adopted as though fully set forth herein the 2020
edition of the of NFPA 855.
      Except where otherwise expressly provided, where the regulations of the
adopted fire code are in conflict with any portion of this standard, the more
restrictive ordinances of the [Jurisdiction] shall govern.
   Amendments and additions.
   Amend Chapter 14 as follows:
   Amend 14.1.1(1) Areas within a facility that are operated in accordance with
procedures that provide for the state of charge of the lithium metal or
lithium-ion batteries and cells to be 30 percent or less. Procedures and test
reports documenting how the 30 percent or less state of charge is established
and how fire protection levels are determined shall be provided to the fire
code official for review and approval.
   Amend 14.1.1(2) Areas where fire and fault condition testing conducted or
witnessed and reported by an approved testing laboratory is provided showing
that a fire involving the batteries in storage will be limited to the design
area of an automatic sprinkler system installed in accordance with NFPA 13 and
FM Global 8-1 and will not adversely impact occupant egress from the building
or adversely impact adjacent stored materials or the building structure.
   Add 14.1.1(3) Batteries in original retail packaging that are rated at 300
watt-hours or less for lithium-ion batteries or contain 25 grams or less of
lithium metal for lithium metal batteries.
   Amend 14.2 All areas located indoors in any occupancy where used lithium
metal or lithium-ion batteries are collected from employees or the public shall
be provided with open-top noncombustible containers or containers designed to
preclude the release of contents resulting from battery thermal runaway or
containers approved for battery collection activities.
   Amend 14.2.1 Containers shall not exceed 1 ft3 (0.03 m3) in size. (Or 55
gallons (113.6L).
   Amend 14.3.2.1.1 The rooms or spaces shall be separated from the remainder
of the building areas by fire barriers with a 3-hour fire resistance rating and
with horizontal assemblies with a 3-hour fire resistance rating constructed in
accordance with the local building code.
   Amend 14.3.2.1.2 The room or space shall be protected by a radiant-energy
detection system installed in accordance with NFPA 72 and shall be protected by
an automatic sprinkler system designed and installed in accordance with NFPA 13
and FM Global 8-1.
   Amend 14.3.2.2 Batteries shall be permitted to be stored in approved
prefabricated portable buildings or containers not exceeding 200 ft2 (18.58 m2)
in gross floor area that are constructed with 2-hour fire resistance ratings
and provided with radiant-energy detection system installed in accordance with
NFPA 72 and an approved automatic fire suppression system installed in
accordance with NFPA 13 and FM Global 8-1.
   Amend 14.3.2.3 Batteries shall be permitted to be stored in metal drums with
batteries separated from each other by vermiculite or other approved material
packaged to prevent damage that could lead to a thermal event or in containers
approved for battery collection and storage activities.
   Amend 14.3.2.3.2 The collection and storage area shall be protected by a
radiant-energy detection system installed in accordance with NFPA 72 and an
approved automatic fire suppression system installed in accordance with NFPA 13
and FM Global 8-1.
   Amend 14.3.2.4 Batteries shall be permitted to be stored in containers
approved for use in transportation and/or approved by the fire code official
that will prevent an event from propagating beyond the container.
   Amend 14.3.2.4.2 The storage area shall be protected by a radiant-energy
detection system installed in accordance with NFPA 72 and an approved automatic
fire suppression system installed in accordance with NFPA 13 and FM Global 8-1.
   Amend 14.4.2 A plan that provides for the prevention of fire incidents and
includes early detection mitigation measures shall be provided to the fire code
official for review and approval. The owner is required to file the plan
annually.
   Amend 14.4.4.1 The building the battery storage is located in shall be
provided with an automatic fire suppression system installed in accordance with
NFPA 13 and FM Global 8-1.
   Add 14.5.1(3) Batteries shall be stored in non-combustible containers or
approved containers designed for storage of the batteries.
   Add 14.5.3 Weather Protection. Where weather protection is provided for
sheltering outdoor battery storage areas, such areas shall be considered
outdoor storage where the weather protection structure complies with 14.5.3.1
through 14.5.3.3.
      14.5.3.1 Walls shall not obstruct more than one side of the structure.
         Exception: Walls shall be permitted to obstruct portions of multiple
sides of the structure, provided that the obstructed area is not greater than
25 percent of the structure's perimeter.
      14.5.3.2 The distance from the structure to buildings, lot lines, public
ways or means of egress to a public way shall be not less than the distance
required for an outside hazardous material storage or use area without weather
protection.
      14.5.3.3 The overhead structure shall be of approved noncombustible
construction with a maximum area of 1,600 square feet (148.6 m2).
(Ord. 1459-24, 5-23-2024)
3-10-3: PENALTIES:
   A.   Penalties Generally: It shall be unlawful for any person, firm, or
corporation to violate any provisions of this chapter, and, except as otherwise
provided, any person, firm, or corporation guilty of violating any of the
provisions of this chapter shall be punishable as provided under section
1-4-1  of this code. Each day that a violation continues shall be deemed a
separate offense.
   B.   International Fire Code Violations:
      1.   Unlawful Acts: It shall be unlawful for a person, firm or
corporation to erect, construct, alter, repair, remove, demolish or utilize a
building, occupancy, premises or system regulated by the international fire
code or amendments to the international fire code as set forth in this chapter,
or cause same to be done, in conflict with or in violation of any of the
provisions of the international fire code or amendments to the international
fire code as set forth in this chapter.
      2.   Notice Of Violation: When the building official finds a building,
premises, vehicle, storage facility or outdoor area that is in violation of the
international fire code or amendments to the international fire code as set
forth in this chapter, the building commissioner is authorized to prepare a
written notice of violation describing the conditions deemed unsafe and, when
compliance is not immediate, specifying a time for reinspection. Administrative
notices are attempts to secure voluntary compliance and are not the start of
prosecution for jurisdictional purposes.
      3.   Service: A notice of violation issued pursuant to the international
fire code or amendments to the international fire code as set forth in this
chapter shall be served upon the owner, operator, occupant, or other person
responsible for the condition or violation, either by personal service, mail,
or by delivering the same to, and leaving it with, some person of
responsibility upon the premises. For unattended or abandoned locations, a copy
of such notice of violation shall be posted on the premises in a conspicuous
place at or near the entrance to such premises and the notice of violation
shall be mailed by certified mail with return receipt requested or a
certificate of mailing, to the last known address of the owner, occupant or
both.
      4.   Compliance With Orders And Notices: A notice of violation issued or
served as provided by the international fire code or amendments to the
international fire code as set forth in this chapter shall be complied with by
the owner, operator, occupant or other person responsible for the condition or
violation to which the notice of violation pertains.
      5.   Prosecution Of Violations: If the notice of violation is not
complied with promptly, the building commissioner is authorized to request the
legal counsel of the village to institute the appropriate legal proceedings at
law or in equity to restrain, correct or abate such violation or to require
removal or termination of the unlawful occupancy of the structure in violation
of the provisions of the international fire code or amendments to the
international fire code as set forth in this chapter or of the order or
direction made pursuant hereto.
      6.   Unauthorized Tampering: Signs, tags or seals posted or affixed by
the building official shall not be mutilated, destroyed or tampered with or
removed without authorization from the building commissioner.
      7.   Violation Penalties: Persons who shall violate a provision of the
international fire code or amendments to the international fire code as set
forth in this chapter or shall fail to comply with any of the requirements
thereof or who shall erect, install, alter, repair or do work in violation of
the approved construction documents or directive of the building commissioner,
or of a permit or certificate used under provisions of the international fire
code or amendments to the international fire code as set forth in this chapter,
shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and punishable as prescribed by law and as
provided under section
1-4-1  of this code. Each day that a violation continues after due notice has
been served shall be deemed a separate offense.
      8.   Abatement Of Violation: The imposition of the penalties herein
prescribed shall not prevent the building official from requesting the legal
counsel of the village to institute the appropriate legal proceedings at law or
in equity to prevent unlawful construction or to restrain, correct or abate a
violation; or to prevent illegal occupancy of a structure or premises; or to
stop an illegal act, conduct of business or occupancy of a structure on or
about any premises. (Ord. 949, 3-20-2007, eff. 4-1-2007; amd. Ord. 1459-24, 5-
23-2024)
CHAPTER 11
CONSTRUCTION DEBRIS ON VILLAGE PROPERTY
SECTION:
3-11-1: Requirements
3-11-2: Cleanup By Village
3-11-3: Payment Of Charges
3-11-4: Penalty
3-11-1: REQUIREMENTS:
The village building commissioner and/or other duly appointed agents of the
village shall require that the village property and/or rights of way shall be
kept free from construction debris, and that all construction debris shall be
contained on construction sites and not allowed to blow or otherwise move to
other properties. (Ord. 949, 3-20-2007, eff. 4-1-2007)
3-11-2: CLEANUP BY VILLAGE:
The village building commissioner shall require the builder to maintain his
building site accordingly and immediately remedy any building debris problems.
If the building permit holder fails to immediately remedy a debris problem, the
building commissioner shall charge the building permit holder for any and all
costs incurred by the village for the remedy of the problems. (Ord. 949, 3-20-
2007, eff. 4-1-2007)
3-11-3: PAYMENT OF CHARGES:
The village building commissioner shall withhold the issuance of an occupancy
permit until all payments due the village are paid pursuant to this section.
(Ord. 949, 3-20-2007, eff. 4-1-2007)
3-11-4: PENALTY:
In addition to all other remedies, any person who violates any provision of
this chapter shall be fined as established in section
1-4-1 of this code for each offense. Every day that a violation of this chapter
shall be permitted to continue shall constitute a separate offense. (Ord. 949,
3-20-2007, eff. 4-1-2007; amd. Ord. 1061, 4-20-2010)
CHAPTER 12
GRADING
SECTION:
3-12-1: Required Surveys For Individual Lots
3-12-2: Waiver
3-12-3: Occupancy Permit
3-12-4: Fees And Costs
3-12-5: Penalties Generally
3-12-1: REQUIRED SURVEYS FOR INDIVIDUAL LOTS:
The following surveys will be required for all individual lots within a
subdivision as part of the home building process:
   A.   Permit Plat: Two (2) copies of a permit plat, dated not more than six
(6) months from the date of submission, shall be submitted with the application
for principal structure permit to the building commissioner, containing the
following information:
      1.   Legal description of the property.
      2.   Lot number, street address, lot size and building setback line.
      3.   Location of existing utility, drainage or other easements.
      4.   North arrow and scale.
      5.   Bench mark, plainly labeled and within three hundred feet (300') of
the proposed developed lot.
      6.   Location and size of the proposed building on the lot, with
dimensions to the front, rear and side property lines indicated.
      7.   Proposed elevations for the top of foundation (including any steps)
and adjoining finished adjacent grade.
      8.   Proposed finished elevations for all property corners, side yard
summits, and any additional spot elevations required to indicate overland
drainage patterns. Any specific cross sectional details for overland flood
routing shall be indicated as well.
      9.   Elevations for the top of existing foundations in the adjacent
properties.
      10.   Proposed driveway and sidewalk placement, proposed driveway slope,
proposed sanitary sewer and water service locations, and soil erosion control
plan.
      11.   Indication of any special architectural features necessary to
ensure proper drainage for the site (i.e., dropped siding, brick ledge, or
retaining walls).
      12.   Stamp and signature of a registered land surveyor or registered
professional engineer (both Illinois certified).
   B.   Top Of Foundation Survey: Two (2) copies of a top of foundation survey
shall be submitted to the building commissioner after the foundation walls have
been completed and before further construction is undertaken, containing the
following information:
      1.   Exact location of the structure in relation to the lot lines.
      2.   Elevation of the top of foundation (including any steps).
      3.   Stamp and signature of a registered land surveyor or registered
professional engineer (both Illinois certified), including the following
statement: "The top of foundation survey substantially complies with the
approved Permit Plat for the lot." In the event that the final grading of the
lot differs from the approved permit plat, a statement must be made as to the
nature of the change. The village engineer may approve minor changes discovered
during this top of foundation survey preparation, providing that the changes do
not adversely affect the drainage on the land in question or other lands.
   C.   First Lot Grading Survey; Before Landscaping: Prior to issuance of a
certificate of occupancy for any building and after installation of topsoil and
prior to installation of landscaping, the builder shall be required to submit
two (2) copies of the first lot grading survey to the building commissioner,
containing the following information:
      1.   Legal description of the property.
      2.   Builder's name, unit number, lot number, street address and building
setback line.
      3.   Location of existing utility, drainage or other easements.
      4.   North arrow and scale.
      5.   Bench mark, plainly labeled and within three hundred feet (300') of
the proposed developed lot.
      6.   Existing elevation of the top of foundation (including any steps)
and adjoining finished adjacent grade.
      7.   Existing elevation of the garage floor at the front of the garage.
      8.   Location and elevation of any special architectural features (i.e.,
dropped siding, brick ledge, or retaining walls).
      9.   Indicate existing driveway slope measured along the centerline of
the driveway in percentage to house side edge of sidewalk, or to top of curb if
there is no sidewalk.
      10.   Existing finished elevations for all property corners, side yard
summits, and any additional spot elevations required to indicate overland
drainage patterns, as well as drainage arrows.
      11.   Elevations for the top of existing foundations in the adjacent
properties.
      12.   Location of water service B-box and location and elevation of any
additional utility structures on the lot.
      13.   Location with measurements of any additional accessory or detached
building.
      14.   All concrete, masonry or brick flatwork.
      15.   Stamp and signature of a registered land surveyor or registered
professional engineer (both Illinois certified), including the following
statement: "The final grading of the lot has been completed and substantially
complies with the Permit Plat for the lot." In the event that the final grading
of the lot differs from the approved permit plat, a statement must be made as
to the nature of the change. The village engineer may approve minor changes
discovered during this first lot grading survey preparation, providing that the
changes do not adversely affect the drainage on the land in question or other
lands.
   D.   Second Lot Grading Survey; After Landscaping: Prior to release of the
landscape guarantee deposit for any building, the homeowner shall be required
to submit two (2) copies of the second lot grading survey to the building
commissioner, containing the following information:
      1.   Legal description of the property.
      2.   Builder's name, unit number, lot number, street address and building
setback line.
      3.   Location of existing utility, drainage or other easements.
      4.   North arrow and scale.
      5.   Bench mark, plainly labeled and within three hundred feet (300') of
the proposed developed lot.
      6.   Existing elevation of the top of foundation (including any steps)
and adjoining finished adjacent grade.
      7.   Existing elevation of the garage floor at the front of the garage.
      8.   Location and elevation of any special architectural features (i.e.,
dropped siding, brick ledge, or retaining walls).
      9.   Indicate existing driveway slope measured along the centerline of
the driveway in percentage to house side edge of sidewalk, or to top of curb if
there is no sidewalk.
      10.   Existing finished elevations for all property corners, side yard
summits, and any additional spot elevations required to indicate overland
drainage patterns, as well as drainage arrows.
      11.   Elevations for the top of existing foundations in the adjacent
properties.
      12.   Location of water service B-box and location and elevation of any
additional utility structures on the lot.
      13.   Location with measurements of any additional accessory or detached
building.
      14.   All concrete, masonry or brick flatwork.
      15.   Stamp and signature of a registered land surveyor or registered
professional engineer (both Illinois certified), including the following
statement: "The final grading of the lot has been completed and substantially
complies with the Permit Plat for the lot." In the event that the final grading
of the lot differs from the approved permit plat, a statement must be made as
to the nature of the change. The village engineer may approve minor changes
discovered during this first lot grading survey preparation, providing that the
changes do not adversely affect the drainage on the land in question or other
lands. (Ord. 972, 8-21-2007)
3-12-2: WAIVER:
The building commissioner may waive the requirement for the "first lot grading
survey" upon application of the builder verifying that the applicant will be
performing both the final grading and landscaping. (Ord. 972, 8-21-2007)
3-12-3: OCCUPANCY PERMIT:
No final occupancy permit shall be issued for any lot within a subdivision
until the final grading survey has been received and approved by the village.
(Ord. 972, 8-21-2007)
3-12-4: FEES AND COSTS:
A grading fee of twenty five dollars ($25.00) plus the cost to the village for
the review of each topographical survey shall be assessed to each residential
building permit. (Ord. 972, 8-21-2007)
3-12-5: PENALTIES GENERALLY:
It shall be unlawful for any person, firm, or corporation to violation any
provisions of this chapter, and, except as otherwise provided, any person,
firm, or corporation guilty of violating any of the provisions of this chapter
shall be punishable as provided under section
 1-4-1 of this code. Each day that a violation continues shall be deemed a
separate offense. (Ord. 972, 8-21-2007)
CHAPTER 13
BUILDING PERMIT FEES
SECTION:
3-13-1: Building Permit Plan Review And Inspection Fees
3-13-1: BUILDING PERMIT PLAN REVIEW AND INSPECTION FEES:
   A.   Single-Family: Building permit fees for the construction, erection of
or addition to a residential use, building or structure shall be determined by
multiplying the fee amount listed below by the total square feet of the
building or structure, using exterior dimensions.
   Building permit/inspections: $0.272 with a minimum of one thousand two
hundred dollars ($1,200.00).
   Plan review: $0.198 with a minimum of six hundred thirty five dollars
($635.00).
   B.   Commercial, Industrial, Multi-Family: The building permit fee for the
construction, erection of or addition to a commercial, multi-family, or
industrial building or structure shall be determined by multiplying the total
square feet by:
Five cents ($0.05) per square foot with a minimum fee of five hundred dollars
($500.00); plus
Cost of third party consultant plan review and inspection.
   C.   Remodel, Addition, And Accessory Structures: The building permit fee
for all other alterations to property or structures, including, but not limited
to, accessory structures over two hundred (200) square feet in area, interior
remodeling, addition to primary structure, or construction of an accessory
structure shall be determined by multiplying the total square feet of the
improvement area by forty seven cents ($0.47) with a minimum fee of five
hundred dollars ($500.00).
Building permit/inspections: $0.272 with a minimum of three hundred dollars
($300.00).
Plan review: $0.198 with a minimum of two hundred dollars ($200.00).
   D.   Miscellaneous Improvements: The building permit fee for all other
alterations to property or structures, including, but not limited to, accessory
structures under two hundred (200) square feet in area, decks, gazebos,
porches, soffit systems, dormers, fences, re-roofs and siding, the fee shall be
based upon the following table:
   Total Fee Inspections
             No. Cost
                                                    Total Fee Inspections
                                                              No. Cost
Premanufactured shed over 60 square feet:                        
 Without foundation                                $ 90.00   1   $ 35.00
 With foundation                                   125.00    2   70.00
Nonpre-manufactured shed over 60 square feet:                    
 Without foundation                                90.00     1   35.00
 With foundation                                   160.00    3   105.00
Deck                                                160.00    3   105.00
Fence                                               90.00     1   35.00
Roof/gutters/siding                                 55.00     0   0.00
Furnace                                             90.00     1   35.00
Pergola                                             160.00    3   105.00
Pool:                                                            
 Aboveground pool over 36 inches in depth:                      
  Without deck                                    240.00    4   160.00
  With deck                                       345.00    7   265.00
 Inground pool                                     455.00    9   375.00
 Heater, separate from pool installation           90.00     1   35.00
Hot tub                                             170.00    3   115.00
Patio/flatwork/driveway:                                         
 Under 225 square feet - brick or paver            0.00      0   0.00
 Under 225 square feet - cement or asphalt         55.00     0   0.00
 Over 225 square feet no handrail or steps:                     
  Cement or asphalt                               90.00     1   35.00
  Brick or paver                                  55.00     0   0.00
 Over 225 square feet with steps/handrail:                      
  Cement or asphalt                               125.00    2   70.00
  Brick or paver                                  90.00     1   35.00
Electric service upgrade                            100.00    1   45.00
Generator                                           135.00    2   80.00
Windows:                                                         
 Exact replacement - not required                  0.00      0   0.00
 Requiring structure change                        90.00     1   35.00
Ground sign                                                      
 With electric                                     215.00    4   160.00
 Without electric                                  90.00     2   70.00
Wall sign                                                        
 With electric                                     135.00    2   80.00
 Without electric                                  90.00     1   35.00
Solar Panels                                        335.00    2   80.00
Inground sprinkler system                           105.00    1   50.00
Event tent                                          90.00     1   35.00
Other requiring 1 non-electric/plumbing inspection  90.00     1   35.00
Other requiring 2 non-electric/plumbing inspections 125.00    2   70.00
Other requiring 3 non-electric/plumbing inspections 160.00    3   105.00
Miscellaneous plumbing inspection                   50.00         
Miscellaneous electrical inspection                 45.00         
 
This section is not intended to conflict with the professional fee payment
procedures as outlined in section
 1-9-3 of this code.
   E.   Reinspection Fees: Reinspection fees shall be sixty dollars ($60.00)
per reinspection for subsections A, B, and C of this section and forty dollars
($40.00) per reinspection for subsection D of this section.
   F.   Payment Of Permit Fees: All building permit, inspection, and plan
review fees shall be paid at time of application of permit and are
nonrefundable. In the event a permit application is denied, the inspection
portion of the permit fee shall be refunded. All other fees, including
reinspection fees shall be paid prior to the issuance of a certificate of
occupancy.
   G.   Penalties: Any person who is in violation of this section shall be
subject to a penalty equal to the permit fee for the improvement(s) in addition
to the normal permit fee of the improvement(s). (Ord. 1168, 12-17-2013; amd.
Ord. 1320-20, 2-4-2020)
CHAPTER 14
INTERNATIONAL EXISTING BUILDING CODE
SECTION:
3-14-1:      Adoption
3-14-2:      Amendments
3-14-3:      Penalties
3-14-1: ADOPTION:
That certain documents, three (3) copies of which are on file in the office of
the Village Clerk, being marked and designated as the International Existing
Building Code 2021 published by the International Code Council be and are
hereby provided, and each and all of the regulations, provisions, penalties,
conditions and terms of said code are hereby referred to as adopted and made a
part hereof as if fully set out in this chapter, with the additions,
insertions, deletions and changes, if any, prescribed in section
3-14-2  of this chapter. (Ord. 1459-24, 5-23-2024)
3-14-2: AMENDMENTS:
The following words, provisions, and paragraphs shall be added to the following
designated sections of the code adopted in section
3-14-1  of this chapter. These provisions supersede the requirements of the
indicated provisions of such code.
   101.1 Village of Manhattan.
   103.1 Insert Buildings and Development Department.
   108.2 See the village of Manhattan fee schedule.
      The Village Board shall serve as the board of appeals.
   302.21 Change the International Plumbing Code to the Illinois Plumbing Code.
      Add section 1301.5.4 All local amendments shall be applied regardless of
the outcome of this evaluation. (Ord. 1459-24, 5-23-2024)
3-14-3: PENALTIES:
   A.   Penalties Generally: It shall be unlawful for any person, firm, or
corporation to violate any provisions of this chapter, and, except as otherwise
provided, any person, firm, or corporation guilty of violating any of the
provisions of this chapter shall be punishable as provided under section
1-4-1  of this code. Each day that a violation continues shall be deemed a
separate offense.
   B.   International Existing Building Code Violations:
      1.   Unlawful Acts: It shall be unlawful for a person, firm or
corporation to erect, construct, alter, repair, remove, demolish or cause same
to be done, in conflict with or in violation of any of the provisions of the
International Existing Building Code or amendments to the International
Existing Building Code set forth in this chapter.
      2.   Notice of Violation: The Building Official shall serve a notice of
violation or order to the person responsible for the erection, installation,
alteration, extension, repair, removal or demolition of work in violation of
the provisions of the International Existing Building Code or amendments to the
International Existing Building Code as set forth in this chapter, or in
violation of a detail statement or the approved construction documents
thereunder, or in violation of a permit or certificate issued under the
provisions of the International Existing Building Code or amendments to the
International Existing Building Code as set forth in this chapter. Such order
shall direct the discontinuance of the illegal action or condition and the
abatement of the violation. Administrative notices are attempts to secure
voluntary compliance and are not the start of prosecution for jurisdictional
purposes.
      3.   Prosecution of Violation: If the notice of violation is not complied
with promptly, the Building Official is authorized to request the legal counsel
of the village to institute the appropriate legal proceedings at law or in
equity to restrain, correct or abate such violation, or to require the removal
or termination of the unlawful occupancy of the structure in violation of the
provisions of the International Existing Building Code or amendments to the
International Existing Building Code as set forth in this chapter or of the
order or direction made pursuant thereto.
      4.   Violation Penalties: Persons who shall violate a provision of the
International Existing Building Code or amendments to the International
Existing Building Code as set forth in this chapter or shall fail to comply
with any of the requirements thereof or who shall erect, install, alter or
repair work in violation of the approved construction documents or directive of
the Building Official, or of a permit or certificate issued under the
provisions of the International Existing Building Code or amendments to the
International Existing Building Code, as set forth in this chapter, shall be
guilty of a misdemeanor and punishable as prescribed by law and as provided
under section
1-4-1  of this code. Each day that a violation continues after due notice has
been served shall be deemed a separate offense.
      5.   Stop Work Orders: Upon notice from the Building Official that work
is being done contrary to the provisions of the International Existing Building
Code or amendments to the International Existing Building Code as set forth in
this chapter or in a dangerous or unsafe manner, such work shall immediately
cease. Such notice shall be in writing and shall be given to the owner of the
property, or to the owner's agent, or to the person doing the work. The notice
shall state the conditions under which work is authorized to resume. Where an
emergency exists, the building commissioner shall not be required to give a
written notice prior to stopping the work. Any person who shall continue any
work on the system after having been served with a stop work order, except such
work as that person is directed to perform to remove a violation or unsafe
condition, shall be punishable as prescribed by law and as provided under
section
1-4-1  of this code.
      6.   Abatement of Violation: The imposition of the penalties herein
prescribed shall not prevent the building commissioner from requesting the
legal counsel of the village to institute the appropriate legal proceedings at
law or in equity to prevent unlawful construction or to restrain, correct or
abate a violation, or to prevent illegal occupancy of a building, structure or
premises, or to stop an illegal act, conduct, business or utilization of the
mechanical system on or about any premises. (Ord. 1459-24, 5-23-2024)
CHAPTER 15
INTERNATIONAL ENERGY CONSERVATION CODE
SECTION:
3-15-1:      Adoption
3-15-2:      Amendments
3-15-3:      Penalties
3-15-1: ADOPTION:
The State of Illinois Conservation Act references the International Energy
Conservation Code 2021 edition. That certain documents, three (3) copies of
which are on file in the office of the Village Clerk, being marked and
designated as the International Energy Conservation Code 2021 published by the
International Code Council be and are hereby provided, and each and all of the
regulations, provisions, penalties, conditions and terms of said code are
hereby referred to as adopted and made a part hereof as if fully set out in
this chapter, with the additions, insertions, deletions and changes, if any,
prescribed in section 3-15-2 of this chapter. (Ord. 1459-24, 5-23-2024)
3-15-2: AMENDMENTS:
The following words, provisions, and paragraphs shall be added to the following
designated sections of the code adopted in section
3-15-1  of this chapter. These provisions supersede the requirements of the
indicated provisions of such code.
   101.1 Village of Manhattan.
   103.1 Insert Buildings and Development Department.
All State of Illinois amendments, insertions and deletions shall be enforced.
(Ord. 1459-24, 5-23-2024)
3-15-3: PENALTIES:
   A.   Penalties Generally: It shall be unlawful for any person, firm, or
corporation to violate any provisions of this chapter, and, except as otherwise
provided, any person, firm, or corporation guilty of violating any of the
provisions of this chapter shall be punishable as provided under section
1-4-1  of this code. Each day that a violation continues shall be deemed a
separate offense. (Ord. 1459-24, 5-23-2024)
TITLE 4
ZONING REGULATIONS
CHAPTER 1
ZONING PURPOSE AND INTERPRETATION
SECTION:
4-1-1: Short Title
4-1-2: Intent and Purpose; Methods
4-1-3: Interpretation
4-1-4: Separability
4-1-5: Scope of Regulations
4-1-1: SHORT TITLE:
This Title shall be known, cited and referred to as the MANHATTAN ZONING
ORDINANCE. (Ord., 4-7-70)
4-1-2: INTENT AND PURPOSE:
   A.   It is the intent of this Title be adopted for the following purposes:
      1.   To provide that adequate light, pure air, and safety from fire and
other dangers may be secured.
      2.   To provide that the taxable value of land and buildings throughout
the Municipality may be conserved.
      3.   To provide that congestion in the public streets may be lessened or
avoided.
      4.   To provide that the hazards to persons and damage to property
resulting from the accumulation or runoff of storm or flood waters may be
lessened or avoided.
      5.   To provide that the public health, safety, comfort, morals, and
welfare may otherwise be promoted.
   B.   Methods of Accomplishing Purpose:
      1.   In order that the purposes of this Title may be fulfilled,
conditions, regulations, and requirements are set forth in the Title:
         a.   To regulate and limit the height and bulk of buildings hereafter
to be erected:
         b.   To establish, regulate and limit the building or setback lines on
or along any street, trafficway, drive, parkway or storm or floodwater runoff
channel or basin;
         c.   To regulate and limit the intensity of the use of lot areas, and
to regulate and determine the area of open spaces, within and surrounding
buildings;
         d.   To classify, regulate and restrict the location of trades and
industries and the location of buildings designed for specified industrial,
business, residential, and other uses;
         e.   To divide the entire Municipality into districts of such number,
shape, area, and of such different classes (according to use of land and
buildings, height and bulk of buildings, intensity of the use of lot area, area
of open spaces, or other classification) as may be deemed best suited to carry
out the purposes of this Title.
         f.   To fix standards to which buildings or structures therein shall
conform;
         g.   To prevent additions to and alteration or remodeling of existing
buildings or structures in such a way as to avoid the restrictions and
limitations lawfully imposed under this Title; and
         h.   To prohibit uses, buildings, or structures incompatible with the
character of such districts.
      2.   Also this Title, to fulfill its purpose, provides conditions,
regulations, and requirements:
         a.   To protect the character and the stability of the residential,
business and manufacturing areas and to promote the orderly and beneficial
development of such areas;
         b.   To provide convenient access to properties;
         c.   To provide for off-street parking and loading facilities;
         d.   To protect against noise, vibrations, noxious fumes, explosion
hazards, and other undesirable industrial and commercial hazards;
         e.   To prevent the overcrowding of land and undue concentration of
structures;
         f.   To provide for the elimination of nonconforming uses of land,
buildings and structures, which are incompatible and adversely affecting the
character and value of desirable development in each district;
         g.   To define and limit the powers and duties of the administrative
officers and bodies as provided herein;
         h.   To provide for the obtaining of permits and certificates; and
         i.   To prescribe penalties for the violation of the provisions of
this Title. (Ord., 4-7-70)
4-1-3: INTERPRETATION:
   A.   Minimum Requirements: In their interpretation and application, the
provisions of this Title shall be held to be the minimum requirements for the
promotion and protection of the public health, safety, morals, and welfare.
   B.   Conflicting Laws: Where the conditions imposed by any provisions of
this Title upon the: (1) use of land or buildings; (2) bulk of buildings; (3)
floor area requirements; (4) lot area requirements; and (5) yard requirements
are either more restrictive or less restrictive than comparable conditions
imposed by any other provision of this Title, or of any other law, ordinance,
resolution, rule or regulation of any kind, the regulations which are more
restrictive or which impose higher standards or requirements shall govern.
   C.   Existing Agreements: This Title is not intended to abrogate any
easement, covenant or other private agreement; provided, that where the
regulations of this Title are more restrictive or impose higher standards or
requirements than such easements, covenants or other private agreements, the
requirements of this Title shall govern.
   D.   Existing Violations: No building, structure or use, not lawfully
existing at the time of the adoption of this Title, shall become or be made
lawful solely by reason of the adoption of this Title and to the extent that,
and in any manner that, said unlawful building, structure or use is in conflict
with the requirements of this Title, said building, structure or use remains
unlawful hereunder. (Ord., 4-7-70)
4-1-4: SEPARABILITY:
It is hereby declared to be the intention of the President and Village Board of
the Village that the several provisions of this Title are separable, in
accordance with the following:
   A.   Title Provisions: If any court of competent jurisdiction shall adjudge
any provisions of this Title to be invalid, such judgment shall not affect any
other provision of this Title not specifically included in said judgment.
   B.   Property Application: If any court of competent jurisdiction shall
adjudge invalid the application of any provisions of this Title to a particular
property, building or other structure, such judgment shall not affect the
application of said provision to any other property, building or structure not
specifically included in said judgment. (Ord., 4-7-70)
4-1-5: SCOPE OF REGULATIONS:
It is hereby declared that the provisions of this Title shall apply to all
properties as hereinafter specifically provided:
   A.   New Uses: No building or structure or part thereof shall hereafter be
erected, constructed, reconstructed, enlarged, moved or structurally altered,
and no building, structure or land shall hereafter be used, occupied, or
arranged or designed for use or occupancy, nor shall any excavating or grading
be commenced in connection with any of the above matters, except as permitted
by the regulations of this Title for the zoning district in which such
building, structure or land is located.
   B.   Existing Uses: Except as may otherwise be provided, all structural
alterations or relocation of existing buildings occurring hereafter, and all
enlargements of or additions to existing uses occurring hereafter shall be
subject to all regulations herein which are applicable to the zoning districts
in which such buildings, uses or land shall be located.
   C.   Nonconforming Uses: Any lawful building, structure or use existing at
the time of the enactment of this Zoning Title may be continued, even though
such building, structure or use does not conform to the provisions herein for
the district in which it is located, and whenever a district shall be changed
hereafter, the then existing lawful use may be continued, subject to the
provisions in Chapter 8 of this Title.
   D.   Special Uses: Where a structure and use thereof of land lawfully exists
on the effective date of this Title, and is classified by this Title as a
special use in the district where it is located, such use shall be considered a
lawful special use. A special use permit issued in accordance with procedures
herein set forth shall be required only for any expansion or major alteration
of such existing legal special use.
   E.   Lots of Record: A lot of record at the time of the adoption of this
Title in a residence district which is unable to meet the requirements of this
Title as to area, lot width, and yard requirements may be used for a single-
family detached dwelling, provided it shall meet all the other requirements of
this Title.
   F.   Contiguous Parcels: When two (2) or more parcels of land, each of which
lacks adequate area and dimension to qualify for a permitted use under the
requirements of the use district in which they are located, are contiguous and
are held in one ownership, at the time of or subsequent to the adoption of this
Title or amendment, they shall be used as one zoning lot for such use.
   G.   Building Permits: Where a building permit for a building or structure
has been issued in accordance with law prior to the effective date of this
Title, and provided that construction is begun within ninety (90) days of such
effective date and diligently prosecuted to completion, said building or
structure may be completed in accordance with the approved plans on the basis
of which the building permit was issued, and further may upon completion be
occupied under a certificate of occupancy by the use for which originally
designated subject thereafter to the provisions of Chapter 12 of this Title.
This subsection shall also control building permits lawfully issued prior to
future amendments to this Title. (Ord., 4-7-70)
CHAPTER 2
RULES AND DEFINITIONS
SECTION:
4-2-1: General
4-2-2: Rules of Word Construction
4-2-3: Definitions
4-2-1: GENERAL:
The rules and definitions contained in this Chapter shall be observed and
applied in the interpretation of all other Chapters of this Title, except when
the context clearly indicates otherwise. (Ord., 4-7-70)
4-2-2: RULES OF WORD CONSTRUCTION:
   A.   Words used in the present tense shall include the future; words used in
the singular number shall include the plural number, and the plural the
singular.
   B.   The word "shall" is mandatory and not discretionary.
   C.   The word "may" is permissive.
   D.   The word "lot" shall include the words "plot", "piece", and "parcel";
the word "building" includes all other structures or improvements of every
kind, regardless of similarity to buildings; and the phrase "used for" shall
include the phrases "arranged for", "designed for", "intended for", "maintained
for", and "occupied for".
   E.   The word "person" includes a firm, association, organization,
partnership, trust, company or corporation as well as an individual.
   F.   The masculine gender includes the feminine and neuter. (Ord., 4-7-70)
4-2-3: DEFINITIONS:
The following words and terms, when used in this Title, shall have the meanings
set forth, except where otherwise specifically indicated.
   ABUTTING: To have a common property line or district line.
   ACCESSORY BUILDING OR USE: An "accessory building or use" is one which:
   A.   Is subordinate to and serves a principal building or principal use.
   B.   Is subordinate in area, extent, or purpose to the principal building or
principal use served.
   C.   Contributes to the comfort, convenience, or necessity of occupants of
the principal building or principal use served.
   D.   Is located on the same zoning lot as the principal building or
principal use served with the single exception of such accessory off- street
parking facilities as are permitted to locate elsewhere than on the same zoning
lot with the building or use served.
   E.   Occupies not more than ten percent (10%) of the area on which the main
building is situated, and which is not higher than the principal building, and
which conforms to all setback requirements, and in residentially zoned
districts shall not exceed fifteen feet (15') in height.
   AGRICULTURAL BUILDING OR STRUCTURE: For the purposes of this Title, shall
imply any building or structure existing or erected on land used principally
for agricultural purposes, with the exception of dwelling units.
   AGRICULTURE: The use of land for agricultural purposes, including farming,
dairying, pasturage, apiculture, horticulture, floriculture, viticulture, and
animal and poultry husbandry, and the necessary accessory uses for packing,
treating, or storing the produce; provided, however, that the operation of any
such accessory uses shall be secondary to that of the normal agricultural
activities.
   ALLEY: A public or private way, at the rear or side of property, permanently
reserved as a means of secondary vehicular access to abutting property.
Frontage on said alley shall not be construed as satisfying the requirements of
this title related to frontage on a dedicated street.
   ALTERATION: A change in size, shape, character, occupancy or use of a
building or structure.
   ANCHORED MASONRY: Masonry veneer secured to and supported laterally by the
backing through anchors and supported vertically by the foundation or other
structural elements.
   APARTMENT: One or more rooms in an apartment building or combination
apartment and commercial building, arranged, intended or designed or occupied
as a dwelling unit of a single family, an individual or a group of individuals.
   APARTMENT BUILDING: A multiple-family dwelling or originally designed and
constructed to accommodate three (3) or more apartments, designed with more
than one dwelling unit connecting to a common corridor or entrance way, in
contrast to single- or two-family dwellings converted for multiple- family use.
   AUTO REPAIR, MAJOR: Engine rebuilding or major reconditioning of worn or
damaged motor vehicles, or trailers; collision service, including body, frame
or fender straightening or repair, and overall painting of vehicles.
   AUTO REPAIR, MINOR: Incidental repairs, replacement of parts, and motor
service to automobiles but excluding any operation specified under the
definition of Auto Repair, Major.
   AUTOMOBILE LAUNDRY: A building, or portion thereof, containing facilities
for washing more than two (2) automobiles, using production line methods with a
chain conveyor, blower, steam cleaning device, or other mechanical devices.
   AUTOMOBILE SALVAGE YARD: Any place where two (2) or more motor vehicles not
in running condition, or parts thereof, are stored in the open and are not
being restored to operation, or any land, building or structure used for
wrecking or storing of such motor vehicles or farm machinery, or parts thereof,
stored in the open and not being restored to operating condition; and including
the commercial salvaging of any other goods, articles or merchandise.
   AUTOMOBILE SERVICE STATION: Any building or premises used for the
dispensing, sale or offering for sale at retail to the public, automobile fuels
stored only in underground tanks and located wholly within the lot lines;
lubricating oil or grease for the operation of automobiles; and the sale and
installation of tires, batteries, other minor accessories, and minor auto
repair, but not including a bulk plant, conduct or major auto repair,
automobile wrecking, automobile sales, or automobile laundries; provided,
however, that the washing of individual automobiles where no chain conveyor is
employed may be included.
   BASEMENT: A story having part but not more than one-half (1/2) of its height
below grade. A basement is counted as a story for the purpose of height
regulation if subdivided and used for dwelling purposes other than by janitor
employed on the premises.
   BILLBOARD: See definition of Sign, Advertising.
   BLOCK: That property abutting on one side of a street between two (2)
nearest intersecting streets, railroad rights of way, or natural barriers;
provided, however, that where a street curves so that any two (2) chords
thereof form an angle of one hundred twenty degrees (120o) or less, measured on
the lot side, such curve shall be constructed as an intersecting street.
   BOARDING HOUSE OR LODGING HOUSE: A building or premises where meals are
regularly served by prearrangement for definite periods for compensation for
three (3) or more persons, not a family but not exceeding twelve (12) persons,
not open to transient guests, in contradistinction to hotels or restaurants
open to transients.
   BOUNDARY LINE: A line on the zoning district map designating the edge of a
use district. Such boundary line may be a boundary line for two (2) use
districts depending on the particular use district located on each side of said
line.
   BRICK: A solid masonry unit of clay or shale formed into a rectangular prism
while plastic and burned or fired in a kiln, laid up in small, individual units
with concrete mortar joints and with a veneer depth of at least three inches
(3").
   BUILDABLE AREA: The space remaining on a zoning lot after the minimum open
space requirements of this title have been complied with.
   BUILDING: A structure having a roof, supported by columns or walls, for the
shelter, support, or enclosure of persons, animals, or chattels; and when
separated by division walls from the ground up and without openings, each
portion of such building shall be deemed as a separate building.
   BUILDING LINE: A line between which and any street line of a district, lot,
tract, or parcel of land, no buildings or parts of buildings may be erected,
altered, or maintained.
   BUILDING LINE SETBACK: The distance between the building line and the street
right of way line.
   BUILDING, NONCONFORMING: See definition of Nonconforming Building.
   BUILDING, PRINCIPAL: A nonaccessory building in which a principal use on the
zoning lot on which it is located is conducted.
   BUILDING, UNIT GROUP: Two (2) or more buildings (other than dwellings)
grouped upon a lot and held under one ownership, such as universities,
hospitals, institutions, churches and temples, and industrial plants and
shopping centers.
   BULK: The term used to indicate the size and setbacks of buildings or
structures and location of same with respect to one another and includes the
following:
   A.   Size and height of buildings.
   B.   Location of exterior walls at all levels in relation to lot lines,
streets, or to other buildings.
   C.   Gross floor area of buildings in relation to lot area (floor area
ratio).
   D.   All open spaces allocated to buildings.
   E.   Amount of lot area per dwelling unit.
   BULK STORAGE PLANT: Any place where flammable liquids of ten thousand
(10,000) gallons or more are received by tanker, barge, pipeline, tank car,
tank vessel or truck and are stored or blended in bulk for the purpose of
distributing such liquids by tank truck, pipeline, tank car, tank vessel or
container.
   BUSINESS; COMMERCE: When used in this title means the engaging in the
purchase, sale, barter, or exchange of goods, wares, or merchandise, or the
maintenance or operation of offices or recreational or amusement enterprises.
   CARGO CONTAINER: An industrial, standardized reusable vessel that was:
   A.   Originally, specifically or formerly designed for or used in the
packing, shipping, movement or transportation of freight, articles, goods or
commodities, and/or
   B.   Designed for or capable of being mounted or moved on a railcar, and/or
   C.   Designed for or capable of being mounted on a chassis or bogie for
movement by truck trailer or loaded on a ship.
   CARPORT: A roofed automobile shelter with one or more open sides.
   CELLAR: A story having more than one-half (1/2) of its height below the curb
level or below the highest level of the adjoining ground. A cellar shall not be
counted as a story for the purpose of height measurement.
   COMMON OPEN SPACE: Land unoccupied by structures, buildings, streets, rights
of way and automobile parking lots and designed and intended for the use or
enjoyment of residents of a planned development. Common open space may contain
structures for recreational use. No area within thirty feet (30') of any
building or structure except a structure used for recreational use shall be
includable as common open space.
   CORNER LOT: See "Lot, Corner".
   COURT: An open unoccupied space other than a yard on the same lot with a
building, which is totally or partially enclosed by a building or buildings and
is completely open to the sky.
   CURB LEVEL: The level of the established curb in front of the building
measured at the center of such front. Where a building faces on more than one
street, the "curb level" shall be the average of the levels of the curbs at the
center front of each street. Where no curb elevation has been established, the
level of the center line of the street shall be considered the "curb level".
   DENSITY: The numerical value obtained by dividing the total dwelling units
in a development by the gross area of the tract of land upon which the dwelling
units are located.
   DRIVE-IN ESTABLISHMENT: An establishment which is designed to provide,
either wholly or in part, service to customers while in their automobiles
parked upon the premises.
   DWELLING: A building or portion thereof, but not including a house trailer
or mobile home, designed or used exclusively for residential occupancy,
including one-family dwelling units, two-family dwelling units, and multiple-
family dwelling units, but not including hotels, boarding or lodging houses.
   DWELLING, ATTACHED (Group, Row or Town Houses): A dwelling containing two
(2) or more dwelling units and joined to other dwellings by party wall or
walls, originally constructed for said purposes.
   DWELLING, CONVERTED: Any building which was originally designed and
constructed as one-, two- or three-family dwelling, but which has been changed
or altered by the construction of additional dwelling units to provide for more
families than the original building.
   DWELLING, DETACHED: A dwelling which is surrounded on all sides by open
space on the same lot.
   DWELLING, GROUND FLOOR AREA: The first floor area in square feet measured
from the outside of the exterior walls but excluding cellars, basements, open
porches, breezeways, garages and other infrequently used spaces.
   DWELLING, MULTIPLE-FAMILY: A dwelling containing three (3) or more dwelling
units, originally constructed for said purpose, and not including converted
dwellings.
   DWELLING, SEMI-ATTACHED: A dwelling which is joined to another dwelling by a
garage, carport, recreation structure, or other nonresidential facility.
   DWELLING, SINGLE-FAMILY: A dwelling containing accommodations for and
occupied by one family only.
   DWELLING, TWO-FAMILY: A building designed exclusively for occupancy by two
(2) families living independently of each other.
   DWELLING UNIT: One or more rooms in a dwelling or apartment hotel designed
for occupancy by one family for living purposes and having its own permanently
installed cooking and sanitary facilities.
   EDUCATIONAL INSTITUTION: A public, parochial, charitable, or nonprofit
junior college, college, or university, other than trade or business schools,
including instructional and recreational uses, with or without living quarters,
dining rooms, restaurants, heating plants, and other incidental facilities for
students, teachers, and employees.
   EFFICIENCY UNIT: A dwelling unit consisting of one principal room, exclusive
of bathroom, kitchen, hallway, closets, or dining alcove, directly off the
principal room.
   FAMILY: An individual, or two (2) or more persons related by blood,
marriage, or adoption, or a group of not more than three (3) persons (excluding
servants), not related by blood, marriage, or adoption, living together as a
single housekeeping unit in a dwelling unit, but not including sororities,
fraternities, or other similar organizations.
   FENCE: Any construction of wood, metal, wire mesh, masonry, or other
material, erected for the purpose of assuring privacy or protection.
   FLOOR AREA (For determining floor area ratio): The sum of the gross
horizontal areas of the several floors of the building measured from the
exterior faces of the exterior walls or from the center line of walls
separating two (2) buildings. The "floor area of a building" shall include the
basement floor area when more than one-half (1/2) of the basement height is
above the established curb level; off-street parking space; elevator shafts,
and stairwells at each floor; floor space used for mechanical equipment,
(except equipment, open or enclosed, located on the roof), penthouses, attic
space having headroom of seven feet ten inches (7'10") or more; interior
balconies and mezzanines; enclosed porches; and floor area devoted to accessory
uses.
The "floor area" of structures devoted to bulk storage of materials including,
but not limited to, grain elevators and petroleum storage tanks shall be
determined on the basis of the height of such structures in feet; ten feet
(10') in height shall be deemed to be equal to one floor (if a structure
measures more than five feet (5') over such floor equivalent, it shall be
construed to have an additional floor).
   FLOOR AREA RATIO: The numerical value obtained by dividing the floor area
within a building or buildings on a lot by the area of such lot. The floor area
ratio as designated for each district, when multiplied by the lot area in
square feet, shall determine the maximum permissible floor area for the
building or buildings on the lot.
   FRONTAGE: All the property fronting on one side of a street between the two
(2) nearest intersecting streets, measured along the line of the street, or if
dead-ended, then all of the property abutting on one side between an
intersecting street and the dead end of the street.
   GARAGE, BUS or TRUCK: A building which is used or intended to be used for
the storage of motor trucks, truck trailers, tractors, and commercial vehicles
exceeding one and one-half (11/2) tons capacity.
   GARAGE, PRIVATE: A detached accessory building or portion of the main
building, designed, arranged, used, or intended to be used for the storage of
passenger automobiles of the occupants of the premises.
   GARAGE, PUBLIC: A building other than a private garage, used for the care,
incidental servicing, and sale of automobile supplies, or where motor vehicles
are parked or stored for remuneration, hire, or sale within the structure, but
not including trucks, tractors, and truck-trailers, and commercial vehicles
exceeding one and one-half (11/2) tons capacity.
   GRADE, STREET: Same as "Curb Level".
   GROUP HOME: A single dwelling unit occupied on a relatively permanent basis
in a family-like environment by unrelated persons with disabilities.
   HEIGHT OF BUILDING: The vertical distance from the average contact ground
level at the front wall of the building to the highest point of the coping of a
flat roof or to the deck line of a mansard roof, or to the mean height level
between eaves and ridge for gable, hip or gambrel roofs.
   HOME OCCUPATION: An occupation carried on in a dwelling by the resident
thereof, not involving the conduct of a retail business or manufacturing
business, the employment of any additional persons in the performance of such
services, excepting members of the immediate family residing on the premises
and one receptionist or office assistant; not using any mechanical equipment,
other than is usual for purely domestic or hobby purposes; nor exterior storage
of equipment or materials used in connection with the home occupation. Home
occupations, further, shall not utilize more than twenty five percent (25%) of
the total floor area of any one story.
   HOTEL: A building in which lodging or board and lodging are provided and
offered to the public for compensation and in which ingress and egress to and
from all rooms is made through an inside lobby or office supervised by a person
in charge at all hours. As such it is open to the public in contradistinction
to a boarding house, a lodging house, or an apartment hotel, which are
separately defined.
   HOTEL, APARTMENT: A hotel in which at least ninety percent (90%) of the
hotel accommodations are occupied by permanent guests.
   HOSPITAL or SANITARIUM: An institution devoted primarily to the maintenance
and operation of facilities for the diagnosis, treatment or care for not less
than twenty four (24) hours in any week, of three (3) or more nonrelated
individuals suffering from illness, disease, injury, deformity, and other
abnormal physical conditions. The term "hospital" as used in this Title does
not apply to institutions operating primarily for treatment of insane persons,
drug addicts, liquor addicts, or other types of cases necessitating restraint
of patients, and the term "hospital" shall not include convalescent, nursing,
shelter, or boarding houses.
   JUNK YARD: Any parcel of land where waste, scrap metal, paper, rags or
similar materials are bought, sold, exchanged, stored, baled, packed,
disassembled, or handled, including auto and building wrecking yards, but
excluding similar uses taking place entirely within a completely enclosed
building.
   JUNKER: An automobile, truck, or other motor vehicle which has been damaged
to such an extent that it cannot be operated under its own power and will
require major repairs before being made usable, or such a vehicle which does
not comply with State or Village laws or ordinances.
   KENNEL, COMMERCIAL: Any lot or premises or portion thereof on which more
than four (4) dogs or cats, or other household domestic animals, over four (4)
months of age, are kept or on which more than two (2) such animals are boarded
for compensation or kept for sale.
   LIMITED ACCESS HIGHWAY: A trafficway, including expressways and toll roads
for through traffic, in respect to which owners or occupants of abutting
property or lands and other persons have no legal right of access to or from
the same, except at such points only and in such manner as may be determined by
the public authority having jurisdiction over such trafficway.
   LOADING AND UNLOADING SPACE, OFF-STREET: An open, hard- surfaced area of
land, other than a street or public way, the principal use of which is for the
standing, loading, and unloading of motor trucks, tractors, and trailers. Such
space is not less than ten feet (10') in width, thirty five feet (35') in
length, and fourteen feet (14') in height, exclusive of access aisles and
maneuvering space.
   LOT: A parcel of land occupied or to be occupied by one building and
accessory buildings and uses or a unit group of buildings and including the
open spaces required under these regulations. A lot may be land so recorded on
official records or it may include parts or a combination of such lots when
adjacent to one another, provided such ground is used for only one improvement,
or may be a parcel of land described by metes and bounds.
   LOT AREA: The area of a horizontal plane bounded by the front, side and rear
lot lines.
   LOT, CORNER: A lot located at the intersection of two (2) streets or a lot
bounded on two (2) sides by a curving street and any two (2) chords of which
form an angle of one hundred twenty degrees (120°) or less measured on the lot
side.
   LOT COVERAGE: The area of a zoning lot occupied by the principal building or
buildings and accessory buildings.
   LOT DEPTH: The mean horizontal distance between the front and rear lot
lines.
   LOT, DOUBLE FRONTAGE: A lot other than a corner lot having frontage on two
(2) or more streets. An alley shall not be considered a street.
   LOT, FRONTAGE: The front of a lot shall be construed to be the portion
nearest the street. For the purpose of determining yard requirements on corner
lots and through lots, all sides of a lot adjacent to streets shall be
considered frontage, and yards shall be provided as indicated under "Yards" in
this Chapter.
   LOT, INTERIOR: A lot other than a corner or reversed corner lot.
   LOT LINE, FRONT: The front property line of a zoning lot.
   LOT LINE, INTERIOR: A side lot line common with another lot.
   LOT LINE, REAR: The rear lot line is the lot line or lot lines most nearly
parallel to and most remote from the front lot line. Lot lines other than front
or rear lot lines are side lot lines.
   LOT OF RECORD: A lot which is a part of a subdivision, the plat of which has
been legally recorded. A lot of record shall also include parts of lots of a
subdivision, the plat of which has been legally recorded, which cumulatively
have at least the same dimensions and area of a full lot in the same
subdivision.
   LOT, REVERSED CORNER: A corner lot at right angles or approximately right
angles to the general pattern of the area, the street side lot line of which is
substantially a continuation of the front lot line of the front lot to the
rear. The rear of the corner lot is adjacent to the side of another lot,
whether across an alley or not.
   LOT WIDTH: The horizontal distance between the side lot lines measured at
right angles to the lot depth at the established front building line.
   MARQUEE OR CANOPY: A rooflike structure of a permanent nature which projects
from the wall of a building and overhangs the public way.
   MOTEL: An establishment consisting of a group of attached or detached living
or sleeping accommodations with bathroom and closet space, located on a single
zoning lot and designed for use by transient automobile tourists. A "motel"
furnishes customary hotel services such as maid service and laundering of
linen, telephone and secretarial or desk service, and the use and upkeep of
furniture. In a "motel" less than fifty percent (50%) of the living and
sleeping accommodations are occupied or designed for occupancy by persons other
than transient automobile tourists.
   MOTOR VEHICLE: Any passenger vehicle, truck, tractor, tractor- trailer,
truck-trailer, trailer, or semi-trailer propelled or drawn by mechanical power.
   MOTOR VEHICLE REPAIR, MAJOR and MINOR: See "Auto Repair, Major and Minor".
   NONCONFORMING BUILDING: A building or structure or portion thereof lawfully
existing at the time of adoption of this Title, or amendment thereto, which was
designed, erected, or structurally altered for a use that does not conform to
the use regulations of the district in which it is located.
   NONCONFORMING USE: A use which lawfully occupies a building or land at the
time of adoption of this Title, or amendment thereto, and which does not
conform with the use regulations of the district in which it is located.
   NURSERY, CHILD CARE: An establishment for the part-time care of five (5) or
more children of pre-elementary school age in addition to the members of the
family residing therein.
   NURSING HOME: A home for the ages, chronically ill, care of children, infirm
or incurable persons, or a place of rest for those suffering bodily disorders
in which three (3) or more persons, not members of the immediate family
residing on the premises, are received, kept or provided with food and shelter
or care, but not including hospitals, clinics or similar institutions devoted
primarily to the diagnosis and treatment of disease or injury, maternity cases
or mental illness.
   OPEN SALES LOT: Land used or occupied for the purpose of buying or selling
merchandise stored or displayed out-of-doors prior to sale. (Such merchandise
includes, but is not limited to passenger cars, trucks, motor scooters,
motorcycles, boats, and monuments.)
   PARKING SPACE, AUTOMOBILE: Space within a public or private parking area of
not less than one hundred eighty (180) square feet (9 feet by 20 feet)
exclusive of access drives for the storage of one passenger automobile or
commercial vehicle under one and one-half (11/2) tons capacity.
   PERFORMANCE STANDARD: A criterion established to control noise, odor, smoke,
toxic or noxious matter, vibration, fire and explosive hazards, or glare or
heat generated by, or inherent in, uses of land or buildings. The more
frequently used performance criteria include:
      Active to Intense Burning: The rate of combustion described by materials
that burns with a high degree of activity and is consumed rapidly. Examples
include sawdust, powdered magnesium and pyroxylin.
      Closed Cup Flash Point: The lowest temperature at which a combustible
liquid, under prescribed conditions will give off a flammable vapor which will
burn momentarily.
      Decibel: A unit which describes the sound pressure level or intensity of
sound. A sound level meter is calibrated in decibels.
      Detonable Materials: Materials which decompose by detonation. Such
materials include explosives, unstable compounds, and fissionable matter.
      Earthborne Vibrations: The periodic displacement, measured in inches, of
earth.
      Fireproof Containers: Enclosures of steel or concrete but not lead or
other low-melting metals or alloys, unless the lead or low-melting metal or
alloys are completely encased in steel.
      Flash Point: The lowest temperature at which a flammable liquid will
momentarily burn under prescribed conditions. The Tag flash point testers shall
be authoritative.
      Foot Candle: A unit of illumination; technically, the illumination of all
points one foot distance from a uniform point source at one candle power.
      Free Burning: Implies a rate of combustion described by a material which
burns actively, and easily supports combustion.
      Frequency: Signifies the number of oscillations per second in a sound
wave and is an index of the pitch of the resulting sound.
      Impact Noise: A short duration sound such as those from a forging hammer
or punch press.
      Impulsive Noise: A sound which is no longer than two (2) seconds in
duration, followed by no less than a two (2) second rest.
      Intense Burning: Implies a rate of combustion described by a material
that burns with a high degree of activity and is consumed rapidly.
      Microcurie: One millionth of a curie, which is a standard unit of
radioactivity.
      Moderate Burning: Implies a rate of combustion described by a material
which supports combustion and is consumed slowly as it burns.
      Noxious Matter: A material which is capable of causing injury to living
organisms by chemical reaction or is capable of causing detrimental effects
upon the physical or economic well-being of individuals.
      Octave Band: A prescribed interval of sound frequencies which classifies
sound according to its pitch.
      Odor Threshold: The lowest concentration of odorous matter in air that
will produce an olfactory response in a human being.
      Odorous Matter: Any matter or material that yields an odor which is
offensive in any way.
      Particulate Matter: Material, other than water, which is suspended in or
discharged into the atmosphere in a finely divided form as a liquid or solid.
      Preferred Frequency Octave Bands: A standardized series of octave bands
prescribed by the U.S.A.S.I. in S1.6-1967, Preferred Frequencies for Acoustical
Measurements.
      Pre-1960 Octave Bands: A standardized series of octave bands prescribed
by the U.S.A.S.I. in Z24.10-1953, Octave Band Filter Set.
      Ringelmann Chart: One which is described in the United States Bureau of
Mines Information Circular 6888 or its successor, and on which are illustrated
graduated shades of grey for use in estimating the light-obscuring capacity of
smoke.
      SCF (Standard cubic feet): The measure of the volume of a gas, at any
other conditions, reduced to fourteen and seventy three one-hundredths (14.73)
pounds per square inch absolute and sixty degrees (60o) Fahrenheit.
      Slow Burning or Incombustible: Implies materials which do not in
themselves constitute an active fuel for the spread of combustion. A material
which will not ignite, nor actively support combustion during an exposure for
five (5) minutes to a temperature of twelve hundred degrees (1200o) Fahrenheit
shall be designated "incombustible".
      Smoke: Small gasborne particles, other than water, that form a visible
plume in the air.
      Smoke and Particulate Matter (Ringelmann Number): The shade of smoke as
it appears on the standard Ringelmann chart published by the United States
Bureau of Mines.
      Sound Level: The "sound level" of an operation or use is the intensity of
sound, measured in decibels, produced by such operation or use.
      Sound Level Meter: An electronic instrument which includes a microphone,
an amplifier and an output meter which measures noise and sound pressure levels
in a specified manner. It may be used with the octave band analyzer that
permits measuring the sound pressure level in discrete octave bands.
      Sound Pressure Level: The intensity of a sound measured in decibels
mathematically described as twenty (20) times the logarithm to the base ten
(10) of the ratio of the pressure of the sound to a reference pressure of
0.0002 microbar.
      Threshold Limit Value: The maximum allowable airborne concentration of
toxic material, as established by the American Conference of Governmental
Industrial Hygienists.
      Toxic Matter: Materials which are capable of causing injury to living
organisms by chemical means when present in relatively small amounts.
      United States of America Standards Institute (U.S.A.S.I.): A national
organization promulgating authoritative standards in many technical fields.
Formerly American Standards Association.
      Vibration: The periodic displacement or oscillation of the earth.
   PILOT PLANT: A building or group of buildings in which a test, sample, or
experimental manufacturing or assembling is operated until such time as the
process is perfected. This use is not to provide for the continuing operation
of a manufacturing or assembling use.
   PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT PLAT: A drawing or map made to a measurable scale
upon which is presented a description and definition of the way in which the
design requirements of the planned unit development are to be met and intended
for recording with the County Recorder of Deeds.
   PORCH: A roofed-over structure projecting out from the wall or walls of a
main structure and commonly open to the weather in part.
   PROPERTY LINE: An imaginary line at the edge or boundary of a zoning lot.
   PUBLIC UTILITY: Any person duly authorized to furnish under public
regulation to the public, electricity, gas, steam, telephone, telegraph,
transportation, water or sewerage systems.
   PUBLIC WAY: Any sidewalk, street, alley, highway, or other public
thoroughfare.
   RAILROAD RIGHT OF WAY: A strip of land with tracks and auxiliary facilities
for track operation, but not including freight depots, or stations, loading
platforms, train sheds, warehouses, car or locomotive shops, or car yards.
   REST HOME OR NURSING HOME: A private home for the care of children or the
aged or infirm or any other person in need of nursing care. Such home does not
contain equipment for surgical care or for treatment of disease or injury, and
is not primarily designed for mental patients or alcoholics.
   RESTAURANT: A business where the dispensing of edible foodstuff and/or
beverage on the premises is the principal business operation; including a cafe,
cafeteria, coffee shop, lunch room, tearoom, and dining room, but not including
a drive-in restaurant.
   RESTAURANT, DRIVE-IN OR CARRYOUT: A restaurant, whose principal business
operation is the dispensing of edible foodstuff and/or beverage, ready for
consumption on the premises, in automobiles, at outdoor tables, or at stand up
counters, or to be carried off the premises. One or the other of the following
conditions shall prevail:
   A.   Total seating area located within the enclosed portion of the premises
shall be less than fifty percent (50%) of the total floor area.
   B.   Total automobile parking spaces on the premises shall exceed the total
indoor seats provided for customers.
   RETAIL, RETAIL STORE: Sale to the ultimate consumer for direct consumption
and not for resale.
   SCHOOL: A public or private institution which offers instruction in any of
the branches of learning and study comparable to that taught in the public
schools under the Illinois school laws, including prekindergarten,
kindergarten, elementary school, and junior and senior high school, but
excluding trade, business, or commercial schools.
   SELF-STORAGE WAREHOUSE ESTABLISHMENTS: A building or group of buildings in a
controlled access and fenced compound that contains varying sizes of
individual, compartmentalized, and controlled access stalls or lockers for the
storage of customers' goods or wares.
   SETBACK: The minimum horizontal distance between the street wall of a
building and the street property line.
   SETBACK, ESTABLISHED BUILDING: When fifty percent (50%) or more of the lots
fronting on one side of a street with a block are improved the existing
building setbacks of such improved lots shall be the "established building
setback" for determining the required setbacks for the remainder of the lots
along such street frontage, as regulated in this title.
   SIGN: A name, identification, description, display, or illustration which is
affixed to or painted or represented directly or indirectly upon a building,
structure, or piece of land and which directs attention to an object, product,
place, activity, person, institution, organization, or business.
   SIGN, ADVERTISING: A sign which directs attention to a business, commodity,
service, or entertainment conducted, sold, or offered elsewhere than upon the
premises where such sign is located or to which it is affixed.
   SIGN, FLASHING: Any illuminated sign on which the artificial light is not
maintained stationary and/or is constant in intensity and color at all times
when such sign is in use. For the purpose of this title, any revolving,
illuminated sign shall be considered a "flashing sign".
   SIGN, GROSS SURFACE AREA OF: The entire area within a single continuous
perimeter enclosing the extreme limits of a sign and in no case passing through
or between any adjacent elements of the same. However, such perimeter shall not
include any structural or framing elements lying outside the limits of such
sign and not forming an integral part of the display. In the case of a sign
with two (2) visible surfaces, the gross surface area shall be the sum of both
sides of the sign.
   SPECIAL USE: A specific use of land or buildings, or both, described and
permitted herein, subject to special provisions and which because of its unique
characteristics cannot be properly classified as a permitted use.
   STONE: A natural stone or a manufactured cement based architectural product
made to match the appearance of natural stone and laid up in small individual
units with a veneer depth of at least two inches (2").
   STORAGE, OUTDOOR: The outdoor accumulation of vehicles, equipment, or
products, or materials for permanent or temporary holding.
   STORY: That portion of a building included between the surface of any floor
and the surface of the floor next above it, or if there be no floor above it,
then the space between the floor and the ceiling next above it. Any portion of
a story exceeding fourteen feet (14') in height shall be considered as an
additional story for each fourteen feet (14') or fraction thereof.
   STORY, HALF: That portion of a building under a gable, hip, or mansard roof,
the wall plates of which, on at least two (2) opposite exterior walls, are not
more than four and one-half feet (41/2') above the finished floor of such
story. In the case of one-family dwellings, two-family dwellings, and multiple-
family dwellings less than three (3) stories in height, a half story in a
sloping roof shall not be counted as a story for the purposes of this title. In
the case of multiple-family dwellings three (3) or more stories in height, a
half story shall be counted as a story.
   STREET: All property dedicated or intended for public highway, freeway, or
roadway purposes or subject to public easements.
   STREET FRONTAGE: All of the property fronting on one side of a street
between two (2) intersecting streets, or in the case of a dead end street, all
of the property along one side of a street between an intersecting street and
the end of such dead end street.
   STREET LINE: The division line between private property and a dedicated
street or way, usually uninterrupted from corner to corner in any given block.
   STRUCTURAL ALTERATIONS: Any change in the supporting members of a building
such as bearing walls or partitions, columns, beams, or girders, excepting such
alterations as may be required for the safety of the building.
   STRUCTURE: Anything constructed or erected, the use of which requires
permanent location on the ground or attached to something having a permanent
location on the ground, including, but without limiting, the generality of the
foregoing, to advertising signs, billboards, backstops for tennis courts, and
pergolas.
   TEMPORARY MOBILE SIGN: An advertising device of a not permanent type, used
principally for commercial purposes.
   TEMPORARY PORTABLE STORAGE UNIT: A box like container without permanently
attached wheels which is transported by truck to and from desired locations and
is used primarily for storage, commonly known as PODS (portable on demand
storage). Cargo containers shall not be considered temporary portable storage
units.
   TERRACE, OPEN, AND PATIO: A level plane or platform which, for the purpose
of this title, is located adjacent to one or more faces of the principal
structure and which is constructed not more than four feet (4') in height above
the average level of adjoining ground.
   THROUGH LOT: A lot having its front and rear lot lines on adjacent and
substantially parallel streets, otherwise known as a double frontage lot.
   TRAILER: A vehicle without motive power used or adaptable for living,
sleeping, business, or storage purposes, having no foundation other than
wheels, blocks, skids, jacks, horses, or skirting, and has been or reasonably
may be equipped with wheels or other devices for transporting the structure
from place to place. The term "trailer" shall include "camp car" and "house
car". A permanent foundation shall not change its character unless the entire
structure is erected in accordance with the village building code.
   TRAILER HOUSE, OR MOBILE HOME: Any "trailer" as defined herein used for
residential purposes.
   UNIFIED CONTROL: The combination of two (2) or more tracts of land wherein
each owner has agreed that his tract of land shall be developed as part of a
planned unit development and shall be subject to the control applicable to the
planned development.
   USE: The purposes for which land or a building thereon is designed,
arranged, or intended, or for which it is occupied, maintained, let or leased.
   USE, PERMITTED: A use which may be lawfully established in a particular
district or districts, provided it conforms with all requirements, regulations,
and performance standards (if any) of such district.
   USE, PRINCIPAL: The main use of land or buildings as distinguished from a
subordinate or accessory use. A "principal use" may be either a "permitted use"
or a "special use".
   USE, SPECIAL: See definition of Special Use.
   USED CAR LOT: A zoning lot on which used or new cars, trailers, or trucks
are displayed for sale or trade outside of buildings.
   VALUATION: For the purpose of this title, valuation of a building shall be
the assessed valuation, or where no assessed valuation exists, its appraised
valuation.
   WAREHOUSE AND STORAGE FACILITIES: A building used in the storage, wholesale,
and distribution of manufactured products, supplies, and equipment, but
excluding bulk storage of materials that are flammable or explosive or that
create hazardous or commonly recognized offensive conditions.
   WHOLESALE: Sale for resale not for direct consumption.
   YARD: An open space on the same zoning lot with a principal building or
group of buildings which is unoccupied and unobstructed from its lowest level
upward, except as otherwise permitted in this title, and which extends along a
lot line and at right angles thereto to a depth or width specified in the yard
regulations for the district in which the zoning lot is located.
   YARD, FRONT: A yard extending across the full width of the zoning lot in
accordance with the setback requirements of this title. See definition of
Setback.
   YARD, REAR: A yard extending across the rear of the lot between the side
yards. Double frontage and reverse corner lots will have no rear yard.
   YARD, SIDE: A yard extending from the rear line of the front yard to the lot
line most nearly parallel to that rear line.
   ZONING LOT: A parcel of land of sufficient size to meet the minimum
requirements of this title concerning use, coverage, width, area, yards and
other open space and having frontage on an improved public street.
   ZONING MAP: The map or maps incorporated into this title as a part thereof,
designating zoning districts. (Ord., 4-7-1970; amd. Ord. 560, 1-7-1992; Ord.
634, 9-17-1996; Ord. 700, 7-6-1999; Ord. 929, 11-21-2006; Ord. 1031, 8-4-2009)
CHAPTER 3
GENERAL ZONING PROVISIONS
SECTION:
4-3-1: Lots
4-3-2: Open Space On Lots
4-3-3: Building Height
4-3-4: Accessory Buildings
4-3-5: Agricultural Exemptions
4-3-6: Flood Plain Reservation Areas
4-3-7: Lighting Standards
4-3-8: Screening
4-3-1: LOTS:
   A.   Number Of Buildings On A Lot: Except in the case of a planned
development, not more than one principal detached single-family residential
building shall be located on a residential lot, nor shall a principal detached
single-family residential building be located on the same zoning lot with any
other principal building.
   B.   Division Of Lots: No lot shall hereafter be divided into two (2) or
more lots for the purpose of transfer of ownership, unless all lots resulting
from each such division shall conform with all the applicable regulations
required by this Title.
   C.   Through Lots: On vacant through lots the front lot lines shall be along
the street right of way designated by the Building Commissioner except that
when a front lot line has been established on one or more lots in the same
block and all have front lot lines established along the same street right-of-
way line, the street right-of-way line designated as the front lot line for
such lot or lots shall be the front line on all vacant through lots in such
block. Only such obstructions as herein permitted in front yards shall be
located in that part of a rear yard adjoining a street that is equivalent in
depth to a required front yard, except for lots backing to thoroughfares in
subdivisions where no-access strips have been provided on the recorded plats.
   D.   Corner Lots: On a corner lot, the front lot line shall be the lot line
having the shortest dimension along the street right-of- way line. The required
front yard setback on corner lots shall apply to each side of the lot facing a
street.
   E.   Two Uses On A Lot: Where two (2) or more permitted or special uses,
each requiring a minimum lot area, are provided in the same building or on the
same lot, the required lot area shall be the sum of the areas required for each
use individually.
   F.   Lots Without Street Frontage: Every structure or group of structures,
and every use or group of uses, shall be located upon a lot. Where unique land
planning designs are employed in a subdivision or planned development to
conserve the natural character of the land or to create a functional or
compatible arrangement of structures or uses, a lot which does not abut upon a
public or private street may be permitted provided that:
      1.   Adequate provision is made for free access to the lot for the
property owner, or in the case of a nonresidential lot, for these persons who
would normally require access to the lot.
      2.   Adequate provision is made for the unobstructed access of
firefighting services, police protection, mail carrier letter service, rubbish
collection and other governmental services.
      3.   Adequate provision is made for the extension and maintenance of
public and private utility services.
      4.   The arrangement will not contribute toward congestion in nearby
streets as a result of delivery services, lack of guest parking or other
reasons.
      5.   The character of proposed structures and landscaping are of a
quality which will minimize maintenance. (Ord., 4-7-1970)
4-3-2: OPEN SPACE ON LOTS:
The following general provisions dealing with open spaces, lot coverage, yards,
setbacks, vision clearance, and permitted obstructions are provided for
herewith:
   A.   Maintenance of Open Spaces: The maintenance of yards, courts and other
open spaces and minimum lot area legally required for a building shall be a
continuing obligation of the owner of such building or of the property on which
it is located, as long as the building is in existence. Furthermore, not
legally required yards, courts or other open space, or minimum lot area
allocated to any building, shall by virtue of change of ownership or for any
other reason, be used to satisfy yard, court, other open space or minimum lot
area requirements for any other building.
   B.   Location of Open Spaces: All yards, courts and other open space
allocated to a building or group of buildings shall be located on the same
zoning lots as such building or group of buildings.
   C.   Yards for Existing Buildings: No yards now or hereafter provided for a
building existing on the effective date hereof shall subsequently be reduced
below if already less than, the minimum yard requirements of this Title for
equivalent new construction. However, a yard adjoining a street may be reduced
to provide right of way for a street widening.
   D.   Required Setbacks: Minimum setbacks on lots abutting a street or
thoroughfare shall be the distance required for a front yard, or side yard,
adjoining a street, in the districts where such lots are located, measured from
the existing right-of-way line as designated on the official map, and as duly
established by other ordinances or as established by County or State highway
authorities, whichever has the greater right-of-way width requirements.
   E.   Exceptions for Established Setbacks:
      1.   Where fifty percent (50%) or more of the frontage on one side of a
street between two (2) intersecting streets is developed with buildings that
have observed (within a variation of 5 feet or less) a front yard greater in
depth than required herein, new buildings shall not be erected closer to the
street than the average front yard so established by the existing buildings.
      2.   Where fifty percent (50%) or more of the frontage on one side of a
street between two (2) intersecting streets is developed with buildings that
have not observed a front yard as herein required, then:
         a.   Interior Lots:
            (1)   Where a building is to be erected within one hundred feet
(100') of existing buildings on both sides, the minimum front yard shall be a
line drawn between the closest front corners of the two (2) existing buildings.
            (2)   Where a building is to be erected within one hundred feet
(100') of an existing building on one side only, it may be erected as close to
the street as the existing building.
         b.   Corner Lots: The depth of the setback lines shall be as normally
required in the district where the lot is located.
   F.   Vision Clearance; Corner Lots: On corner lots no structures or plant
materials shall obstruct a clear path of motor vehicle drivers' vision of
approaching vehicles within twenty five feet (25') of the street intersections.
In any business district the distance may be reduced to ten feet (10') and
shall not apply to that part of a building above the first floor.
   G.   Permitted Obstructions in Required Yards: No obstruction shall be
permitted in any required yard except as follows:
      1.   In All Yards:
         a.   Open terraces not over four feet (4') above the average level of
the adjoining ground, but not including permanently roofed over terrace or
porch.
         b.   Awnings and canopies, but not projecting more than ten feet
(10'), and at least seven feet (7') above the average level of the adjoining
ground.
         c.   Steps, four feet (4') or less above grade, which are necessary
for access to a permitted building or for access to a zoning lot from a street
or alley.
         d.   Chimneys projecting eighteen inches (18") or less than into the
yard.
         e.   Arbors, trellises, flag poles, fountains, sculptures, plant boxes
and other similar ornamental objects.
         f.   Fences and walls, as follows:
            i.   In front yards: no fence or wall located in a front yard may
exceed three feet (3') in height above natural grade level, except that a fence
located in a yard bordering the side wall of a residential dwelling may be
constructed in excess of three feet (3') but not to exceed five feet (5') so
long as said fence is open-style and visibility at right angles to any surface
of such fence not be reduced by more than forty percent (40%).
            ii.   In rear and side yards: no fence or wall located in any rear
or side yard may exceed six feet (6') in height.
            iii.   No fence or wall, or part thereof, may be located less than
twenty feet (20') from any part of the pavement of any public or private road
on which the applicable speed limit is thirty-five miles per hour (35 mph) or
greater.
      2.   In Front Yards: One-story bay windows projecting three feet (3') or
less into the yards; and overhanging eaves and gutters projecting three feet
(3') or less into the yard.
      3.   In Rear Yards: Enclosed, attached or detached off-street parking
spaces, accessory shed, tool rooms and similar buildings or structures for
domestic or agricultural storage; balconies, breezeways and open porches, one-
story bay windows projecting three feet (3') or less into the yard; overhanging
eaves and gutters projecting three feet (3') or less into the yard. In any
residential district, no accessory buildings shall be nearer than five feet
(5') to the rear lot line, nor nearer than ten feet (10') to any principal
building unattached.
      4.   In Side Yards: Overhanging eaves and gutters projecting into the
yard for a distance not exceeding forty percent (40%) of the required yard
width, but in no case exceeding two feet (2'). (Ord., 4-7-1970; amd. Ord. 1376-
21, 12-7-2021)
4-3-3: BUILDING HEIGHT:
The following requirements qualify or supplement, as the case may be, the
district regulations appearing elsewhere in this Title.
   A.   Public, semi-public hospitals, institutions, schools or public utility
and service buildings, when permitted in a district, may be erected to a height
not exceeding sixty feet (60'), provided said specified buildings shall be set
back from the front, rear and side lot lines on the ratio of two feet (2') for
every one foot (1') of building height greater than forty feet (40'); provided,
however, that said specified requirements shall apply to setbacks and for rear
and side yards specifically set forth in this Title.
   B.   Chimneys, parapet walls, skylights, steeples, flag poles, smokestacks,
cooling towers, elevator bulkheads, fire towers, monuments, water towers,
stacks, stage towers or scenery lofts, tanks, ornamental towers and spires,
wireless towers, necessary mechanical appurtenances, may be erected above the
height limits herein prescribed.
   C.   Planned unit developments may exceed the height limits established for
the district in which the structure is located. (Ord., 4-7-1970)
4-3-4: ACCESSORY BUILDINGS:
Accessory buildings and uses are allowed in the various districts as prescribed
in each district and shall be compatible with the principal use.
   A.   Location: When a side yard is required, no part of an accessory
building shall be located closer than five feet (5') to the side lot line along
such side yard. When a rear yard is required, no part of an accessory building
shall be located closer than five feet (5') to the rear lot line or to those
portions of the side lot lines abutting such required rear yard. In a
residential district, no detached accessory building shall be closer than ten
feet (10') to the principal building and each foot over twenty feet (20') in
length that the wall of an accessory structure parallels and is next to the
principal structure, the required distance between the structures shall be
increased by an additional foot.
   B.   Time Of Construction: No accessory building or structure shall be
constructed on any lot prior to the start of construction of the principal
building to which it is accessory.
   C.   Rear Yard: No accessory building or buildings shall occupy more than
forty percent (40%) of the area of a required rear yard.
   D.   Height In Rear Yards: No accessory building or portion thereof located
in a required rear yard shall exceed fifteen feet (15') in height.
   E.   Reversed Corner Lots: On a reversed corner lot in a residential
district, no accessory building or portion thereof located in a required rear
yard shall be closer to the side lot line abutting the street than the required
front yard on the adjacent lot to the rear. Further, in the above instance, no
such accessory building shall be located within five feet (5') of any part of a
rear lot line which coincides with a side lot line or portion thereof of
property in a residential district.
   F.   Swimming Pool: Noncommercial swimming pools in residence districts
shall have a safety fence surrounding the pool. (Ord., 4-7-1970)
   G.   Cargo Containers:
      1.   The storage and use of cargo containers are a prohibited use in all
agricultural districts.
      2.   The storage and use of cargo containers are a prohibited use in all
residential districts.
      3.   The storage and use of cargo containers may be permitted as a
special use in the C-2 (community shopping district) and the C-3 (general
commercial district), but are a prohibited use in all other commercial
districts.
      4.   The storage and use of cargo containers are a prohibited use in the
I-1 office, research and light industrial district.
      5.   The storage and use of cargo containers are a prohibited use in the
I-2 light industrial district.
      6.   The storage and use of cargo containers are a permitted use in the
I-3 heavy industrial district, subject to the following conditions:
         a.   Cargo containers may only be stored on the same site and in
conjunction with an intermodal facility or a manufacturing facility.
         b.   Cargo containers may only be stored on a parcel of property that
is no less than twenty (20) acres in size.
         c.   The area for storage of cargo containers shall be limited to less
than thirty percent (30%) of the buildable area of the site.
         d.   Cargo containers shall not be stacked greater than three (3)
containers in height.
         e.   Cargo containers shall be stored on a paved surface.
         f.   Screening shall be provided with a minimum width of one hundred
feet (100') around the entire perimeter of any facility with cargo container
storage. Screening shall be a combination of fencing, berming, natural
vegetation and landscaping. A berm shall contain a three to one (3:1) slope and
a minimum height of fifteen feet (15').
         g.   Cargo containers shall not be used as accessory structures for
the purpose of the storage of materials.
      7.   Licensed and bonded contractors may use cargo containers in any
zoning district for temporary storage of equipment and/or materials at a
construction site during construction that is authorized by a village building
permit for a period of up to one year. A licensed or bonded contractor may
reapply for a permit after the one year period. A permit is valid until ninety
percent (90%) of the building permits have been issued for a development. The
area containing the cargo containers must be kept in a neat and orderly
fashion.
   H.   Temporary Portable Storage Units: Temporary portable storage units
delivered to and picked up from a site on a temporary basis by a storage
company such as, but not limited to, PODS, are allowed in all zoning districts
subject to the following conditions:
      1.   Temporary portable storage units shall not be placed on village
owned property or public right of way.
      2.   In residential zoning districts, temporary portable storage units
shall only be placed on driveways.
      3.   No more than one temporary portable storage unit may be placed on
any individual property at any one time.
      4.   Temporary portable storage units shall not be allowed for periods
greater than seventy two (72) hours.
      5.   Temporary portable storage units may be placed on a specific lot on
not more than three (3) occasions in any one year period.
(Ord. 929, 11-21-2006; amd. Ord. 1468-24, 8-6-2024)
4-3-5: AGRICULTURAL EXEMPTIONS:
The provisions of this title shall not be exercised so as to impose regulations
or require permits with respect to land used or to be used for agricultural
purposes; or with respect to the erection, maintenance, repair, alteration,
remodeling or extension of buildings or structures used or to be used for
agricultural purposes upon such land, except that such buildings or structures
for agricultural purposes shall conform to buildings or setback lines. In the
event that the land ceases to be used solely for agricultural purposes, then
and only then shall the provisions of this title apply. (Ord., 4-7-1970)
4-3-6: FLOODPLAIN RESERVATION AREAS:
In order to protect watershed areas subject to periodic flooding or other
hazards resulting from interruption of flood flow, spreading or overflow of
streams or channels, certain areas may be established as floodplain reservation
areas, and be so designated upon the zoning district map. No building or
portion thereof which is designed for living purposes as a dwelling, school,
hospital, institution or home for the treatment of convalescent persons,
children, aged persons or for any combination thereof shall be built and no
existing building may be altered so as to be used in whole or in part for any
one or more of such uses where the land to be covered by such building or
portion thereof is unfit for human habitation. (Ord., 4-7-1970)
4-3-7: LIGHTING STANDARDS:
At the expense of the developer, all roads, driveways, sidewalks, parking lots
and other common areas and facilities in unsubdivided and other developments
shall be sufficiently illuminated to ensure the security of property and the
safety of persons using such roads, driveways, sidewalks, parking lots and
other common areas and facilities. Without limiting the generality of the
foregoing standards, the following minimum standards shall apply:
   A.   For residential uses, lights shall be installed in parking areas
containing five (5) or more parking spaces and shall be illuminated between
dusk and dawn. For nonresidential uses, lights shall be installed in all
parking areas containing five (5) or more parking spaces and shall be
illuminated between dusk and dawn, whenever said premises are open for
operation. "Open for operation" shall be construed to mean any time that a
retail business is open for the sale of goods or services or a retail, office
or industrial facility actually has employees working within or upon said
premises, other than guards or watchmen. Lights shall not be more than fifteen
feet (15') in height in residential zoning districts, and not more than thirty
feet (30') in height in other zoning districts.
   B.   Where lighted areas are required, lighting shall be provided as
follows:
 
                            Minimum*  Maximum*
Residential zoning districts 1.0       2.0
Commercial zoning districts  1.0       3.0
Industrial zoning districts  2.5       5.0
 
*Average ground level foot-candles.
 
   C.   Average foot-candles at property line shall not exceed 0.5 foot-candles
as measured at the property line.
   D.   All lighting shall be constructed, positioned and maintained in such a
way so as not to reflect light either directly or indirectly onto adjacent
properties. (Ord. 700, 7-6-1999)
4-3-8: SCREENING:
   A.   Screening Of Mechanical Equipment: All rooftop building service
equipment must be screened from view from the grade level of any street,
parking lot, or from other properties within the district. All mechanical
equipment shall be screened or colored to blend in with the field color of the
building. Rooftop equipment may be permitted without screening if it is of a
low profile design, in a location on the roof which is not visible from
adjoining properties, and is of a color which blends with the building color.
   B.   Screening Of Trash Enclosures: All trash enclosure areas and containers
shall be fully screened from streets and adjacent properties with a six foot
(6') high sight obscuring fence, wall or landscaped area placed around said
facility. All trash enclosures must be placed on a concrete pad sufficient to
support said enclosure to the satisfaction of the zoning administrator.
   C.   Sidewalks: Sidewalks shall be constructed for all nonresidential uses
which require the use of off street parking facilities. Such construction shall
include, but not be limited to, connections between all parking lots, principal
structures and adjacent rights of way. Sidewalks shall be five feet (5') in
width.
   D.   Screening Of Outdoor Storage: All permanent outdoor storage areas of
goods, products, materials, supplies, machinery equipment or overnight parking
of commercial vehicles shall not be allowed in the front yard. Where permitted,
permanent outdoor storage areas of goods, products, materials, supplies,
machinery equipment or overnight parking of commercial vehicles shall be
enclosed to a height of eight feet (8') above grade and screened to an opacity
of not less than seventy five percent (75%).
These requirements can be achieved by using any one or a combination of the
following methods:
      1.   The storage area can be screened with trees having a leafy structure
or with fences having structural components through which only twenty five
percent (25%) of the image is visible.
      2.   Fences, berms and/or landscaping can be installed to a height where
only twenty five percent (25%) of the image is visible.
      3.   Fences, berms and/or landscaping can be installed having a width or
design where only twenty five percent (25%) of the remaining horizontal image
is visible. (Ord. 700, 7-6-1999)
CHAPTER 4
ZONING DISTRICTS AND MAP
SECTION:
4-4-1: Districts Established
4-4-2: Zoning Map
4-4-3: District Boundaries
4-4-4: Entire Area Zoned
4-4-5: Annexed Territory
4-4-6: Commercial And Industrial Table Of Permitted And Special Uses
4-4-1: DISTRICTS ESTABLISHED:
The village, for the purpose of this title, is hereby divided into the
following zoning districts:
   A.   Agricultural districts:
   A-1 Agricultural district
   CR Conservation/recreation district
   B.   Residential districts:
   ER Estate residential district
   GR General residential district
   R-1 Single-family residence district
   R-2 Multi-family residence district
   R-3 Multi-family residence district
   R-4 Two-family residence district
   R-5 Multiple-family residence district
   R-6 Residential apartment district
   C.   Commercial districts:
   C-1 Local shopping district
   C-2 Community shopping district
   C-3 General commercial district
   CBD Central business district
   BP Business park district
   DD Downtown district
   D.   Industrial districts:
   I-1 Office, research and light industrial district
   I-2 Light industrial district
   I-3 Heavy industrial district
   E.   Overlay districts: Manhattan lowland conservancy overlay district.
(Ord., 4-7-1970; amd. Ord. 587, 6-1-1993; Ord. 591, 11-16-1993; Ord. 633, 9-17-
1996; Ord. 634, 9-17-1996; Ord. 642, 12-3-1996; Ord. 700, 7-6-1999; Ord. 1083,
7-19-2011; Ord. 1112, 6-19-2012)
4-4-2: ZONING MAP:
   A.   Authorization: The location and boundaries of the districts established
by this title are indicated upon the map entitled, "official zoning map,
village of Manhattan, Illinois", which, together with all explanatory matter
thereon, is hereby adopted by reference and declared to be a part of this
title.
   B.   Location Of Map: The official zoning map shall be located in the office
of the village clerk and shall be the final authority as to the current zoning
status of land and buildings, subject to such authorized amendments which may
be in effect. (Ord., 4-7-1970)
4-4-3: DISTRICT BOUNDARIES:
   A.   Interpretation Of District Boundaries: Where uncertainty exists as to
the boundaries of districts as shown on the official zoning map, the following
rules shall apply:
      1.   Boundaries indicated as approximately following the centerlines of
streets, highways, or alleys shall be construed to follow such centerlines.
      2.   Boundaries indicated as approximately following village limits shall
be construed as following village limits.
      3.   Boundaries indicated as following railroad lines shall be construed
to be midway between the main tracks.
      4.   Boundaries indicated as approximately following the centerlines of
streams shall be construed to follow such centerlines.
      5.   Boundaries indicated as parallel to or extensions of features
indicated in subsections A1 through A4 of this section shall be so construed.
Distances not specifically indicated on the official zoning map shall be
determined by dimensions shown on the map, or in the absence of dimensions, by
the scale of the map.
      6.   All streets, alleys, public ways, and railroad rights of way, if not
otherwise specifically designated, shall be deemed to be in the same zone as
the property immediately abutting upon such alleys, streets, public ways and
railroad rights of way. The centerline of a street, alley, public way or
railroad right of way, unless otherwise specifically designated, shall be
deemed to be the district boundary.
      7.   Streets or alleys which are shown on the map and which have
heretofore been vacated, or which are vacated hereafter, shall be in the same
district as the land abutting both sides of the street or alley. If the land
abutting each side of the street or alley was located in different districts
before the street or alley was vacated, the centerline of the vacated street or
alley shall be the district boundary.
      8.   Where physical or cultural features existing on the ground are at
variance with those shown on the official zoning map, or in other circumstances
not covered by subsections A1 through A5 of this section, the zoning board of
appeals shall interpret the district boundaries.
   B.   Changes: If, by amendment to this title, any change is made in any
district boundary or in any other matter shown on the official zoning map, such
change shall be indicated on the map promptly after the amendment is adopted.
The date of the latest updating of the official zoning map shall be shown on
the face of the map. (Ord., 4-7-1970)
4-4-4: ENTIRE AREA ZONED:
It is the intent that the entire area of zoning jurisdiction, including all
land and water areas, rivers, streets, alleys, and railroad and other rights of
way, be included in the districts established by this title. If any area is not
shown on the official zoning map as being included in any district, it shall be
deemed to be in the R-1 single-family residence district. (Ord., 4-7-1970)
4-4-5: ANNEXED TERRITORY:
Any territory hereafter annexed shall, upon annexation, be automatically
classified in the ER estate residential district, until such territory is
reclassified in a manner provided by law. If within ninety (90) days after
annexation, no application for reclassification of the property has been filed,
the plan commission shall on its own motion schedule a public hearing on the
advisability of the zoning classification of the property and thereafter, if
needed, make recommendations for the reclassification of the property. This
section shall not apply to territory annexed with a valid preannexation
agreement adopted pursuant to 65 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/11-15.1-1 et seq.
(Ord. 645, 6-3-1997)
4-4-6: COMMERCIAL AND INDUSTRIAL TABLE OF PERMITTED AND SPECIAL USES:
 
S = Special use required P = Permitted use Blank cell = Prohibited
Use C-1 C-2 C-3 CBD BP I-1 I-2 I-3
Use                                              C-1 C-2 C-3 CBD BP I-1 I-2 I-3
Retail businesses:                                                    
 Adult-use cannabis dispensing organization           S      S  S   S    
  Amusement establishments including, but not
  limited to, batting cages, bowling alleys,
 pool halls, dance halls, miniature golf,          S   P   P   P  P   P    
  skating rinks, video arcades and banquet
  facilities
  Amusement parks, including, but not limited
 to, permanent carnivals, kiddie parks and            S      S  P   P    
  other similar outdoor amusements
 Apparel store                                  P   P   P   P   P         
  Automobile service stations, repair facilities
 and car washes when used in conjunction with      S   P      P  P   P    
  the automobile service station
 Automobile, truck and recreational vehicle           P   S   P  P   P   P
  sales and rental
 Automobile, truck and recreational vehicle                      P   P
  service
 Bakeries manufacturing products for off site      S   P   P   P         
  sales as a primary use
 Bakery, in which the manufacture of goods is   P   P   P   P   P         
  limited to goods retailed on the premises only
 Bars, taverns and package liquor stores        S   S   P   P   P         
 Bicycle sales, rental and repair stores           P   P   P   P         
 Boat showrooms, sales and repairs                    P      P  P   P    
 Book and stationery store                      P   P   P   P   P         
  Building contractor's office and material
  storage; provided, however, that all equipment
 and vehicles are stored or parked indoors or         S      P         
  adequately screened from view of the right of
  way
  Building material and products, sales, storage
 and accessory manufacturing of building              S      S     P   P
  components
 Camera store                                   P   P   P   P   P         
 Candy and confectionery store                  P   P   P   P   P         
 Cargo containers as an accessory building used    S   S               
  for storage purposes
 Catering establishments, including pizza          P   P   P   P         
  delivery
 Clothing and shoe stores, costume rental and      P   P   P   P         
  sales
 Convenience store not associated with          S   S   P   S   P         
  automobile fuel sales
 Dairy products store                           P   P   P   P   P         
 Delicatessen                                   P   P   P   P   P         
 Department, discount and general retail stores    P   P   P   P         
 Drive-through as an accessory use                 S   S   S   S         
 Drugstore                                      P   P   P   P   P         
 Dry goods store                                P   P   P   P   P         
 Electric appliance stores including radio and     P   P   P   P         
  television sales and repair
 Electrical showrooms and shops                       P      P         
 Farm equipment sales and service                     S           P   P
 Farm implement, feed and seed stores                 P      P         
 Firearm range, indoor                                S      S  S   S    
 Firearm range, outdoor                                          S   S
 Firearm sales and service, including off             S      S  S   S    
  premises FFL sales
 Floral shop                                    P   P   P   P   P         
  Furniture stores, including upholstering when
 conducted as part of the retail operation and     P   P   P   P         
  secondary to the principal use
 Greenhouses, nurseries, garden supply, tool       P   P   P   P         
  and seed stores
 Grocery and food store                         P   P   P   P   P         
 Hardware store                                 P   P   P   P   P         
 Household appliance stores, sales, service and    P   P   P   P         
  rental
 Ice cream store                                P   P   P   P   P         
  Interior decorating shops, including
  upholstering and making of draperies,
 slipcovers, and other similar articles, when      P   P   P   P         
  conducted as a part of the retail operation
  and secondary to the principal use
 Jewelry store                                  P   P   P   P   P         
 Lumberyards                                          P   S   P     P   P
 Meat market                                    P   P   P   P   P         
 Medical cannabis dispensary                          S      S  S   S    
 Musical instrument sales and repair               P   P   P   P         
 Office supply stores                              P   P   P   P         
 Pawnshops                                                  S  S   S    
 Pet stores and animal grooming shops              P   P   P   P         
 Plumbing and heating service and equipment           P      P         
  stores
 Restaurants, drive-in                          S   P   P   P   P  S   S    
 Restaurants, excluding drive- in or drive-     P   P   P   P   P  S   S    
  through service
 Restaurants which include drive-through              S      S  S   S    
  facilities
 Restaurants with alcohol brewing as an               S   S   S         
  accessory use
 Shoe store                                     P   P   P   P   P         
 Showrooms and retail outlets                                    P   P
 Sporting goods store                           P   P   P   P   P         
 Theaters, indoor                                  P   P   P   P         
 Theaters, outdoor and drive-in                       S      S         
 Tire stores, sales and service                       P      P     P   P
 Tobacco and/or vape store                         S   P      S         
 Tobacco, for use on site as a primary or                   S  S   S    
  accessory use
 Toy store                                      P   P   P   P   P         
 Variety store                                  P   P   P   P   P         
 Wireless communications sales and service      P   P   P   P   P         
Personal service establishments:                                      
 Barbershop                                     P   P   P   P   P         
 Beauty parlor                                  P   P   P   P   P         
 Body piercing and/or tattooing establishments              S  S   S   S
 Car washes                                        S   S      S     S   S
 Clubs, lodges and meeting halls                   P   P   P   P  S   S    
 Dancing school or studio                       P   P   P   P   P         
 Daycare centers                                S   P   P      S         
 Daycare centers and early childhood learning                 S       
  facilities
 Day spa/massage establishments                       S      S  S   S    
 Dry cleaner, but not a central plant serving   P   P   P   P   P         
  more than 1 retail outlet
 Funeral homes, mortuaries, cemeteries and         P   P   P   P         
  mausoleums
  Garages for repair and servicing of motor
 vehicles, including body repair, painting and        P      P         
  engine rebuilding
 Hotels and motels                                 S   P   P   P  P       
 Laundry and dry cleaner, self- service only    P   P   P   P   P         
 Music school                                   P   P   P   P   P         
 Photographic studio                            P   P   P   P   P         
 Printing and publishing and duplicating           P   P   P   P         
  establishments
 Recreational centers and facilities, health       P   P   P   P     S    
  and fitness centers and athletic clubs
 Schools for business, professional or             P   P   P   P     P   P
  technical training, music or dance
 Self-storage warehouse establishments                S      S     P   P
 Shoe repair shop                               P   P   P   P   P         
 Tailor shop                                    P   P   P   P   P         
 Taxidermists                                         P      P         
  Union halls, hiring halls and trade
 association offices/                                 P   P   P     P   P
  meeting rooms
 Warehouse and storage facilities                     S   S   S         
Business service establishments:                                      
 Bank, not including drive-in facilities        P   P   P   P   P  P   P   P
 Banks and financial institutions with drive-   S   S   S   S   S  S   S   S
  through facilities
 Cash for gold business                                     S  S   S    
 Currency exchange                                    P   P   P  P   P    
 Financial institution                          P   P   P   P   P         
 Insurance agency                               P   P   P   P   P         
 Loan company                                   P   P   P   P   P         
 Real estate office                             P   P   P   P   P         
 Savings and loan, not including drive-in       P   P   P   P   P         
  facilities
 Title/payday loan store                                    S  S   S    
Professional office establishments:                                   
 Animal hospitals                                  S   P      P         
 Attorney and law offices                       P   P   P   P   P  P   P   P
 Chiropractor's office                          P   P   P   P   P  P   P   P
 Dentist's office                               P   P   P   P   P  P   P   P
 Doctor's, surgeon's and/or physician's offices P   P   P   P   P  P   P   P
 Medical and dental clinics, licensed           P   P   P   P   P  P   P   P
 Newspaper offices                                    P   P   P  P   P   P
 Office building, general                       P   P   P   P   P  P   P   P
 Optician's office                              P   P   P   P   P  P   P   P
 Osteopath's office                             P   P   P   P   P  P   P   P
 Private clinic                                 P   P   P   P   P  P   P   P
Public, quasi-public and governmental buildings                       
and facilities:
 Airports, heliports and landing strips                          P   P
 Bus and train stations                               S   S   S         
 Church                                         P   P   P   P   P         
 Convention centers                                   S      P  P   P    
 Essential services: gas regulator stations,    S   S   S   S   S  S   S   S
  telephone exchanges and/or electric substation
 Filtration plant, pumping station, well and    S   S   S   S   S  P   S   S
  water reservoir
  Golf courses and other open space and
 recreational uses typically allowed in the                      P   P
  conservation recreation zoning district
  Governmental and public utility uses on lots
 having areas, widths, yards and other          S   S   S   S   S  S   S   S
  conditions as approved by the village board
 Hospitals                                            P   P   P         
 Microwave relay tower                          S   S   S   S   S  S   S   S
 Museums and art galleries                         P   P   P   P         
 Off street parking facility as an accessory    P   P   P   P   P  P   P   P
  use
 Parking lots and parking structures as a             P   P   P  P   P   P
  principal use
 Post office                                    P   P   P   P   P         
 Power plants                                                    S   P
 Radio and television stations and recording       P   P   P   P         
  studios
 Sewage treatment plant                                       S   S   S
 Stadiums and arenas                                  S      S  S   S    
 Training and educational facilities                          P       
Industrial:                                                           
 Adult-use cannabis craft grower                      S      S  S   S    
 Adult-use cannabis cultivation center                      S  S   S   S
 Adult-use cannabis infuser organization              S      S  S   S    
 Adult-use cannabis processing organization                 S  S   S    
 Adult-use cannabis transporting organization               S  S   S    
 Cartage and express facilities                       S      S     P   P
 Electronic industries                                      P  P   P   P
 Experimental product development                           P  P   P   P
 Foundries, forges and smelters                                     S
 Industrial design firms                                    P  P   P   P
 Junkyards, salvage yards and automobile                         S   S
  graveyards
  Laboratories, excluding any outdoor testing of
 animal, plant or other biological and genetic              P  P   P   P
  research
 Light assembly operations                                  P  P   P   P
  Light industrial, assembly and laboratory
  facilities, as such uses relate to the
 production of products and parts; excluding,               P  P   P   P
  however, uses that require EPA or NPDES
  approval
  Light industrial, assembly and laboratory
 facilities, as such uses relate to the                     S  P   P   P
  production of products and parts that require
  EPA or NPDES approval
 Machine shops                                                   P   P
  Manufacturing activities, including electronic
  and scientific precision instruments
  manufacture and light machinery production and
 assembly, but excluding those uses which may               P  P   P   P
  be obnoxious or pose a nuisance for any reason
  including emission of toxic or hazardous
  substances, odor, noise, dust, smoke or gas
  Manufacturing, compounding, processing and
 storage of flammable liquids, gasses,                              S
  chemicals, acids, fertilizers
  Manufacturing, heavy, which includes the
  fabricating, assembly, disassembly, processing
 or treatment of goods and products, including,                     P
  but not limited to: asphalt products; concrete
  and cement products; construction equipment;
  motor vehicles; and paints, inks
  Manufacturing, light, which includes the
  fabricating, assembly, disassembly, processing
  or treatment of goods and products, including,
  but not limited to: appliances; books, printed
  materials; bottling companies; clothing and
 textiles; drugs; electrical components; food                    P   P
  processing, food manufacture; furniture,
  bedding, and carpet manufacture; glass and
  ceramics; paper and paper products; plastic
  and fiberglass; sheet metal; tools; and wood
  assembly and finishing
 Medical cannabis cultivation center                             S   S
 Mining operations                                                  S
 Motor and rail freight terminals                                P   P
 Newspaper and magazine publishing                               P   P
  Outdoor storage, as a principal use, except
 junkyards, salvage yards, and wrecked vehicle                   P   P
  storage yards
 Petroleum production, refining and storage                         S
 Pharmaceutical industries                                  P  P   P   P
  Pilot plants in which processes planned for
  use in production elsewhere can be treated to
 the extent reasonably necessary for full                   P  P   P   P
  investigation of the merits of a product or
  process including commercial viability
  Production of prototype products when limited
 to the scale reasonably necessary for full                 P  P   P   P
  investigation of the merits of a product,
  including commercial viability
  Railroad yard, including switching, storage,
  loading, unloading and maintenance facilities,
 except those considered accessory to a                          S   P
  permitted use, which shall be considered as a
  permitted use
 Recycling centers                                               S   P
  Sanitary landfills, solid waste transfer
  stations, composting, energy reclamation
 facilities, incinerators, and similar uses,                     S   S
  but excluding hazardous or radioactive waste
  disposal
 Steel mills                                                        S
 Synthetic natural gas plants                                       S
 Technology and research centers, including                 P  P   P   P
  medical and hospital research establishments
 Warehousing and distribution facilities                         P   P
 Warehousing and distribution facilities, but                 P   P   P
  excluding motor freight terminals
 Welding                                                         P   P
  Wholesale establishments, storage, warehousing
  and distribution centers (excluding "motor
  freight terminals", defined as "a building or
  area in which trucks, including tractor
  trailer units are parked, stored or serviced,
 including the transfer, loading or unloading               P  P   P   P
  of goods. A terminal may include facilities
  for the temporary storage of loads prior to
  transport") in conjunction with an office use
  or wholesale establishment. The storage of
  fuel oil shall be prohibited, unless
  incidental to the on site operation
 Woodworking                                                     P   P
Other:                                                                
 Buildings whose height exceeds the maximum                   S       
  building height in the I-1 district
 Buildings whose height exceeds the maximum                      S    
  building height in the I-2 district
 Comprehensive sign plan                        S   S   S   S   S  S   S   S
  Dwelling units when located above the ground
 floor only when utilized as a mixed use in     P   P   P   P            
  conjunction with a commercial use
  Dwelling units when located on the ground
 floor only when utilized as a mixed use in     S   S   S   S            
  conjunction with a commercial use
  Planned unit developments (in accordance with
 the applicable regulations of chapter 9 of     S   S   S   S   S  S   S   S
  this title)
  Residence (1 only) of the proprietor,
 caretaker, or watchman, when located on the                  S   S   S
  premises
 Uses whose lot area is less than the minimum                       S
  lot area required in the I-3 district
  Other uses which are of the same general
 character as the above permitted uses or       S   S   S   S   S  S   S   S
  special uses, as determined by the zoning
  administrator
 
(Ord. 1235, 9-20-2016; amd. Ord. 1307-09, 11-19-2019; Ord. 1334-20, 10-6- 2020;
Ord. 1468-24, 8-6-2024)
CHAPTER 4.1
AGRICULTURAL DISTRICTS
SECTION:
4-4.1-1: Purpose
4-4.1-1: PURPOSE:
The Agricultural District regulations are intended to govern the location,
intensity and method of development of the agricultural areas of the Village.
The regulations preserve lands optimally suited for agricultural and allied
uses and prohibit the intrusion of residential and other noncompatible uses
into the agricultural area. There is one agricultural district. (Ord. 591, 11-
16-93)
ARTICLE A. A-1 AGRICULTURAL DISTRICT
SECTION:
4-4.1A-1: Purpose
4-4.1A-2: Policy
4-4.1A-3: Uses Permitted
4-4.1A-4: Special Uses Permitted
4-4.1A-5: Temporary Permit Uses Permitted
4-4.1A-6: Accessory Uses
4-4.1A-7: Prohibited Uses
4-4.1A-8: Site and Structure Requirements
4-4.1A-9: Special Provisions
4-4.1A-1: PURPOSE:
   A.   The A-1 Agricultural Zoning District is hereby established to further
the use of lands optimally suited for agriculture use because of location,
topography, soil characteristics, wetness, vegetation or other natural or man-
induced factors.
   B.   To provide lands for agricultural uses which are the optimum use due to
topography, soils, natural characteristics, man-made features and/or location
and existing uses.
   C.   To provide the opportunity to keep horses or other large animals and
the right to practice agriculture, floriculture, horticulture, silvaculture,
cultivation of field or garden crops and similar related activities. (Ord. 591,
11-16-93)
4-4.1A-2: POLICY:
To achieve the purpose of the A-1 Agricultural District, it shall be the policy
of the Village to:
   A.   Foster uses where adequate police and fire protection are available.
   B.   Require a minimum, continuous area for the A-1 Agricultural District to
be ten (10) acres in area.
   C.   Zone as A-1 lands adaptable for sustained long-term agriculture uses
because of location, topography, geology, soil types, other natural features of
the land or surrounding land use. (Ord. 591, 11-16-93)
4-4.1A-3: USES PERMITTED:
No land shall be used or occupied, and no building, structure or premises shall
be erected, altered, enlarged, occupied or used, except as otherwise provided
in this Title for other than one or more of the following specified uses:
   A.   Residential Uses:
One farm homestead for each forty (40) acres of land area.
   B.   Agricultural Uses:
Gardening and general farming, either commercial or private, including poultry
and livestock.
Farms and farm buildings, provided no building in which livestock or poultry
are housed, shall be located within three hundred feet (300') of any existing
adjacent residence or abutting property in any existing residential
subdivision.
Care and raising of animals provided that there shall be not more than one
animal unit per acre or part thereof plus one additional animal unit per
parcel. The following table shows the value in animal units for mature animals:
Animal Number of Animal Units
Animal              Number of Animal Units
Horse, mule         1.00
Cow                 1.00
Sheep               0.40
Goat                0.40
Pig                 1.00
Fowl, poultry       0.05
Fur-bearing animals 0.05
 
 
The Zoning Administrator shall be empowered to determine the value in animal
units for mature animals not listed above.
   C.   Nurseries.
   D.   Greenhouses. (Ord. 591, 11-16-93)
4-4.1A-4: SPECIAL USES PERMITTED:
The following uses shall be permitted only if specifically authorized by the
Board as allowed:
   A.   Similar and compatible uses to those allowed as "permitted uses" in
this District.
   B.   Clubhouses, country clubs, private or public golf courses, tennis
clubs, swimming pools and similar recreational uses.
   C.   Railroad right of way and passenger stations, but not including
railroad yards and shops.
   D.   Public utility buildings and structures.
   E.   Cemeteries.
   F.   Riding academy.
   G.   Kennels. (Ord. 591, 11-16-93)
4-4.1A-5: TEMPORARY PERMIT USES PERMITTED:
Upon application to and issuance by the Zoning Official of any permit thereof,
the following uses may be operated as temporary uses:
Temporary building, trailer or yard for construction materials and/or
equipment, both incidental and necessary to construction in the zoning
district. Each permit shall specify the location of both building or yard and
the area of permitted operation. Each such permit shall be valid for a period
of not more than six (6) calendar months and shall not be renewed for more than
four (4) successive periods at the same location. (Ord. 591, 11-16-93)
4-4.1A-6: ACCESSORY USES:
Accessory uses, buildings or other structures customarily incidental to and
commonly associated with a principal or conditioned permitted use may be
permitted; provided they are operated and maintained under the same ownership
and on the same lot as the permitted use and do not include structural features
inconsistent with the permitted use.
   A.   Garages, carports or other parking spaces for the exclusive use of
residents or occupants of the premises.
   B.   Barns, stables, greenhouses and other similar structures for the
exclusive use of the occupants of the premises, which are incidental to the use
of the property.
   C.   Home occupations. (Ord. 591, 11-16-93)
4-4.1A-7: PROHIBITED USES:
All uses not expressly authorized are prohibited. (Ord. 591, 11-16-93)
4-4.1A-8: SITE AND STRUCTURE REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   Minimum Lot Area: A separate ground area of not less than ten (10)
acres shall be designated, provided and continuously maintained for agriculture
uses or land containing a permitted or special use.
   B.   Minimum Lot Width: A minimum lot width of three hundred feet (300')
shall be provided for each parcel containing a permitted or special use.
   C.   Front Yard: All structures shall set back at least fifty feet (50')
from the front lot line.
   D.   Side Yard: All structures shall be set in from the side lot line a
distance of not less than forty feet (40') from the side lot line.
   E.   Rear Yard: All structures shall be set in a distance of not less than
forty feet (40') from the rear lot line.
   F.   Maximum Height: No principal structure shall exceed thirty five feet
(35') in height, and no accessory structure shall exceed twenty feet (20') in
height.
   G.   Floor Area Ratio: Not to exceed 0.3.
   H.   Single-Family Dwellings: Each single-family detached dwelling, and any
other structure occupied in whole or in part for residential purposes, shall
contain, at least one thousand four hundred (1,400) square feet of liveable
floor area, exclusive of garages and any story below grade. (Ord. 591, 11-16-
93)
4-4.1A-9: SPECIAL PROVISIONS:
   A.   Parking Requirements: In accordance with applicable regulations set
forth in Chapter 10 of this Title.
   B.   Sign Requirements: In accordance with the applicable regulations set
forth in Chapter 11 of this Title. (Ord. 591, 11-16-93)
ARTICLE B. CR CONSERVATION/RECREATION DISTRICT
SECTION:
4-4.1B-1: Description Of District
4-4.1B-2: Uses Permitted
4-4.1B-3: Special Uses Permitted
4-4.1B-4: Temporary Uses Permitted
4-4.1B-5: Accessory Uses Permitted
4-4.1B-6: Prohibited Uses
4-4.1B-7: Site And Structure Requirements
4-4.1B-8: Special Provisions
4-4.1B-1: DESCRIPTION OF DISTRICT:
The Conservation/Recreation District is established to encourage the
development of lands for both passive and active recreational opportunities as
well as the preservation of natural resources. The only structures permitted in
this District are those which supplement and are incidental to the principal
open use. (Ord. 633, 9-17-1996)
4-4.1B-2: USES PERMITTED:
No land shall be used or occupied and no building, structure, or premises shall
be erected, altered, enlarged, occupied, or used, except as otherwise provided
in this Title, for other than one or more of the following specified uses:
   A.   General farming, including one single-family residence and incidental
agricultural structures, provided on a tract a minimum of ten (10) acres in
size.
   B.   Forest preserves.
   C.   Parks and playgrounds.
   D.   Golf courses. (Ord. 633, 9-17-1996)
4-4.1B-3: SPECIAL USES PERMITTED:
The following uses shall be permitted only if specifically authorized by the
Village Board as allowed in Section
4-12-5 of this Title:
   A.   Similar and compatible uses to those allowed as "permitted uses" in
this District.
   B.   Restaurants and banquet facilities when in conjunction with a golf
course and when in conformance with all other applicable codes.
   C.   Public utility and governmental service uses on lots having areas,
widths, yards, and other conditions as approved by the Village Board.
Including, but not limited to:
      Electric substations and booster stations.
      Filtration plants, pumping stations, water reservoirs, and wells.
      Gas regulator stations.
      Police and fire stations.
      Sewage treatment plant.
      Telephone exchange and microwave relay towers.
      Other government and utility service uses. (Ord. 633, 9-17-1996)
4-4.1B-4: TEMPORARY USES PERMITTED:
Upon application to and issuance by the Building Commissioner of a permit
therefor, the following uses may be operated as temporary uses:
Temporary building or yard for construction materials and/or equipment, both
incidental and necessary to construction in the Zoning District. Each permit
shall specify the location of the building or yard and the area of permitted
operation. Each such permit shall be valid for a period of not more than one
year and shall not be renewed for more than six (6) calendar months and shall
not be renewed for more than four (4) successive periods at the same location.
(Ord. 633, 9-17-1996)
4-4.1B-5: ACCESSORY USES PERMITTED:
Accessory uses, buildings or other structures customarily incidental to and
commonly associated with a principal or special permitted use may be permitted,
provided, that they are operated and maintained under the same ownership and on
the same lot as the permitted use, and do not involve the conduct of any
business, trade or industry. Accessory uses may include, but are not limited
to:
   A.   Parking.
   B.   Maintenance and storage buildings. (Ord. 633, 9-17-1996)
4-4.1B-6: PROHIBITED USES:
All uses not expressly authorized in Sections 4-4.1B-2, 4-4.1B-3, 4-4.1B-4 and
4-4.1B-5 of this Article, including, but not limited to:
Residential uses.
Commercial uses.
Hotels and motels.
Industrial uses.
Billboards. (Ord. 633, 9-17-1996)
4-4.1B-7: SITE AND STRUCTURE REQUIREMENTS:
Except as otherwise provided herein, a separate ground area called the zoning
lot shall be designated, provided and continuously maintained for each
structure or land containing a permitted or special use.
   A.   Minimum Lot Area: Not less than five (5) acres.
   B.   Minimum Lot Width: Not less than three hundred feet (300') in buildable
area.
   C.   Yards: All structures must be set back a minimum of one hundred feet
(100') from the property line.
   D.   Building Height: No building shall exceed thirty five feet (35') in
height. (Ord. 633, 9-17-1996)
4-4.1B-8: SPECIAL PROVISIONS:
   A.   Parking Requirements: In accordance with the applicable regulations set
forth in Chapter 10 of this Title.
   B.   Sign Requirements: In accordance with the applicable regulations set
forth in Chapter 11 of this Title. (Ord. 633, 9-17-1996)
CHAPTER 5
RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS
SECTION:
4-5-1: Purpose
4-5-1: PURPOSE:
The residential district regulations are intended to govern the location,
intensity and method of development of the residential areas of Manhattan. The
regulations of each district are designed to provide for the protection of
existing residential areas and to provide for new residential growth in accord
with the design and density objectives of the community. There are eight (8)
residential districts:
   ER Estate Residential District
   GR General Residential District
   R-1 Single-Family Residence District
   R-2 Multi-Family Residence District
   R-3 Multi-Family Residence District
   R-4 Two-Family Residence District
   R-5 Multiple-Family Residence District
   R-6 Residential Apartment District
(Ord. 634, 9-17-1996)
ARTICLE A. ER ESTATE RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT
SECTION:
4-5A-1: Description Of District
4-5A-2: Uses Permitted
4-5A-3: Special Uses Permitted
4-5A-4: Temporary Uses Permitted
4-5A-5: Accessory Uses Permitted
4-5A-6: Prohibited Uses
4-5A-7: Site And Structure Requirements
4-5A-8: Special Provisions
4-5A-1: DESCRIPTION OF DISTRICT:
The Estate Residential District is established to provide for detached, single-
family residential developments having a low density and a rural character.
(Ord. 634, 9-17-1996)
4-5A-2: USES PERMITTED:
No land shall be used or occupied and no building, structure, or premises shall
be erected, altered, enlarged, occupied, or used, except as otherwise provided
in this Title, for other than one or more of the following specified uses:
   A.   Single-family detached dwellings.
   B.   General farming, provided on a tract a minimum of ten (10) acres in
size. (Ord. 634, 9-17-1996)
4-5A-3: SPECIAL USES PERMITTED:
The following uses shall be permitted only if specifically authorized by the
Village Board as allowed in Section
4-12-5 of this Title:
   A.   Similar and compatible uses to those allowed as "permitted uses" in
this District.
   B.   Churches, temples, synagogues, or other places of worship.
   C.   Cemeteries on a lot not less than ten (10) acres and provided no
building shall be located less than three hundred feet (300') from a lot line.
   D.   Golf courses, public or private, but not including Par 3 courses,
commercially operated driving ranges, or miniature golf courses; and provided
that no clubhouse or accessory building shall be located less than two hundred
feet (200') from a property line.
   E.   Planned unit developments.
   F.   Public land, including, but not limited to, parks, playgrounds, forest
preserves, recreational areas, and public golf courses.
   G.   Public utility and governmental service uses on lots having areas,
widths, yards, and other conditions as approved by the Village Board.
Including, but not limited to:
      Electric substations and booster stations.
      Filtration plants, pumping stations, water reservoirs, and wells.
      Gas regulator stations.
      Police and fire stations.
      Sewage treatment plant.
      Telephone exchange and microwave relay towers.
      Other government and utility service uses.
   H.   Schools, public or private.
   I.   Seminaries, convents, monasteries, and similar religious institutions
on a lot not less than five (5) acres in area and provided no building or
structure shall be located less than one hundred feet (100') from a lot line.
   J.   Public libraries.
   K.   Group homes subject to the following additional standards:
      1.   Group homes must be licensed and/or certified by the appropriate
Federal, State or local agencies.
      2.   All group homes must conform to the requirements set forth in the
BOCA National Property Maintenance Code.
      3.   No proposed group home shall be located within one thousand feet
(1,000') of an existing group home as measured from the lot line.
      4.   Group home structures and sites must be visually and structurally
compatible with the surrounding area.
      5.   Only one identification sign, not to exceed two (2) square feet, may
be displayed on the lot.
      6.   Paid professional support staff, provided by a sponsoring agency,
either living with the residents on a twenty four (24) hour basis or present
whenever residents are present at the dwelling, shall be required unless an
additional special use permit is obtained to eliminate the requirement of
supervision. A "group home" shall comply with the zoning regulations for the
district in which the site is located.
      7.   There shall be not less than one off-street parking space per
bedroom. (Ord. 634, 9-17-1996)
4-5A-4: TEMPORARY USES PERMITTED:
Upon application to and issuance by the Building Commissioner of a permit
therefor, the following uses may be operated as temporary uses:
   A.   Temporary building or yard for construction materials and/or equipment,
both incidental and necessary to construction in the Zoning District. Each
permit shall specify the location of the building or yard and the area of
permitted operation. Each such permit shall be valid for a period of not more
than one year and shall not be renewed for more than six (6) calendar months
and shall not be renewed for more than four (4) successive periods at the same
location.
   B.   Temporary office, both incidental and necessary for the sale or rental
of real property. Each permit shall specify the location of the office and the
area of permitted operation. Each such permit shall be valid for a period of
not more than one year and shall not be renewed for more than five (5)
successive periods at the same location.
   C.   Real estate subdivision sign not to exceed one hundred (100) square
feet for each face. Sign shall be nonilluminated. Each permit shall specify the
location of the sign. Each such permit shall be valid for a period of not more
than one year and shall not be renewed for more than five (5) successive
periods at the same location.
   D.   Trailer, to be used during the construction of a residence by the
trailer owner and not to exceed one year. (Ord. 634, 9-17-1996)
4-5A-5: ACCESSORY USES PERMITTED:
Accessory uses, buildings or other structures customarily incidental to and
commonly associated with a principal or special permitted use may be permitted,
provided, that they are operated and maintained under the same ownership and on
the same lot as the permitted use, and do not involve the conduct of any
business, trade or industry. Accessory uses may include, but are not limited
to:
   A.   Garages, carports, or other parking spaces for the exclusive use of
residents or occupants of the premises.
   B.   Gardening (the raising of vegetables and fruits) and keeping of
household pets exclusively for the use or personal enjoyment of residents of
the premises and not for commercial purposes.
   C.   Home occupations.
   D.   Living quarters of persons employed on the premises, and not rented or
otherwise used as a separate dwelling.
   E.   Real estate signs, not exceeding twelve (12) square feet for each face
and set back from every property line at least ten feet (10').
   F.   Roomers and boarders, not to exceed two (2).
   G.   Swimming pools, exclusively for the use of the residents and their
guests and set back from every property line at least ten feet (10'). (Ord.
634, 9-17-1996)
4-5A-6: PROHIBITED USES:
All uses not expressly authorized in sections
4-5A-2,
4-5A-3,
4-5A-4 and
4-5A-5 of this article, including, but not limited to:
   Commercial uses.
   Hotels and motels.
   Industrial uses.
   Mobile homes.
   Signs and billboards. (Ord. 634, 9-17-1996)
4-5A-7: SITE AND STRUCTURE REQUIREMENTS:
Except as otherwise provided herein, a separate ground area called the zoning
lot shall be designated, provided and continuously maintained for each
structure or land containing a permitted or special use.
   A.   Minimum lot area:
      Single-family detached dwelling: Twenty thousand (20,000) square feet.
      Special uses: Forty thousand (40,000) square feet.
   B.   Minimum lot width:
      Single-family detached dwelling: One hundred feet (100').
      Special uses: One hundred forty feet (140'). (Ord. 634, 9-17-1996)
   C.   Yards:
      Front: Not less than thirty feet (30').
      Side: Not less than ten feet (10').
      Rear: Not less than forty feet (40'). (Ord. 820, 8-3-2004)
   D.   Building height:
      Principal building: Not greater than two and one-half (21/2) stories (35
feet).
      Accessory buildings: Not greater than one story (15 feet).
   E.   Floor area ratio: Not applicable to residential, but all others 0.25.
(Ord. 634, 9-17-1996)
   F.   Minimum size of dwelling:
      1.   All land, parcels or lots for which a final plat of subdivision has
been approved and recorded prior to December 1, 2005, shall be improved in
accordance with the following:
         a.   Each single-family detached dwelling and any other structure
occupied in whole or in part for residential purposes shall contain at least
one thousand (1,000) square feet of finished livable floor area, exclusive of
basement or garage space.
      2.   All land, parcels or lots for which a final plat of subdivision has
been approved and recorded after December 1, 2005, shall be improved in
accordance with the following:
         a.   Each one-story single-family detached dwelling shall contain at
least one thousand five hundred (1,500) square feet of livable floor area,
exclusive of basement and garage space.
         b.   Each multi-story single-family detached dwelling shall contain at
least one thousand eight hundred (1,800) square feet of livable floor area,
exclusive of basement and garage space.
         c.   Each one-story single-family detached dwelling and two-story
single-family detached dwelling must include a basement equal in square footage
to at least one-half (1/2) the ground floor square footage. (Ord. 879, 1-3-
2006)
         d.   Each dwelling unit must include an attached garage with a minimum
width of twenty feet (20') and a minimum total size of four hundred eighty
(480) square feet. (Ord. 1031, 8-4-2009)
         e.   Each dwelling unit must include a paved driveway designed and
constructed specifically for use by motorized vehicles as a path for the
vehicle to be driven across or as a location at which a vehicle could be parked
or stored. The paving material for a "paved driveway" shall consist of
concrete, asphalt, paving bricks or similar material. The minimum width of the
paved driveway between the property line and the building line shall be
eighteen feet (18'). (Ord. 1047, 2-2-2010)
4-5A-8: SPECIAL PROVISIONS:
   A.   Parking Requirements: In accordance with the applicable parking
regulations set forth in chapter 10 of this title.
   B.   Sign Requirements: In accordance with the applicable sign regulations
set forth in chapter 11 of this title. (Ord. 634, 9-17-1996)
   C.   Trucks: No truck tractor of any size, apportioned power unit,
semitrailer, stinger steered semitrailer, road tractor, pole trailer, converter
dolly, apportioned trailer, apportioned semitrailer, type B or greater bus,
whether privately owned or a school bus, implement of husbandry or any vehicle
requiring an Illinois registration plate suffix of "H" or greater, including
foreign registered vehicles, which would require such registration, if
registered in Illinois, any vehicle required to have mileage plates of "MG"
suffix or greater, farm plates of "VG" or greater, or tow trucks capable of
towing any vehicle which is prohibited under this section, shall at any time be
parked or stored within any residential district. (Ord. 1048, 2-2-2010)
   D.   Mobile Travel Trailers, Camper Trailers And Boats: Only one mobile
travel trailer, camper trailer or boat may be parked or stored on a lot in the
ER district, except that additional mobile travel trailers, camper trailers,
and/or boats may be parked or stored on the lot only when located in a garage
or other fully enclosed structure.
   E.   Tents: Tents shall not be erected, used or maintained in any lot,
except such small tents that are customarily used for temporary recreational
purposes. (Ord. 634, 9-17-1996)
   F.   Design Requirements: All land, parcels or lots for which a final plat
of subdivision has been approved and recorded after December 1, 2005, shall be
improved in accordance with the following: (Ord. 878, 1-3-2006)
      1.   Anchored masonry including, but not limited to, brick, stone or cut
stone shall be placed on all four (4) sides of all dwellings. The amount of
required masonry shall be, at minimum, fifty percent (50%) of the building's
exterior surface area, excluding doors and windows. The village prefers a more
varied elevation design, rather than a horizontal brick line at the top of the
first floor. If the brick line is varied including some two-story brick
portions, the balance of the building shall have a minimum of a three foot (3')
brick wainscot. Ranch style dwellings shall be full masonry. If an elevation
includes brick, stone or masonry which is adjacent to and extends above the top
plane of a window, the brick, stone or masonry must be included above the
window. (Ord. 1102, 3-3-2012)
      2.   Brick or stone that is used on a front elevation shall minimally
incorporate a return around the corners of all structures. (Ord. 878, 1-3-2006)
ARTICLE B. GR GENERAL RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT
SECTION:
4-5B-1: Description Of District
4-5B-2: Uses Permitted
4-5B-3: Special Uses Permitted
4-5B-4: Temporary Uses Permitted
4-5B-5: Accessory Uses Permitted
4-5B-6: Prohibited Uses
4-5B-7: Site And Structure Requirements
4-5B-8: Special Provisions
4-5B-1: DESCRIPTION OF DISTRICT:
The General Residential District is established to provide for the development
of detached single-family dwellings at a medium suburban density. (Ord. 634, 9-
17-1996)
4-5B-2: USES PERMITTED:
No land shall be used or occupied and no building, structure, or premises shall
be erected, altered, enlarged, occupied, or used, except as otherwise provided
in this Title, for other than one or more of the following specified uses:
   A.   Single-family detached dwellings.
   B.   General farming, provided on a tract a minimum of ten (10) acres in
size. (Ord. 634, 9-17-1996)
4-5B-3: SPECIAL USES PERMITTED:
The following uses shall be permitted only if specifically authorized by the
Village Board as allowed in Section\ of this Title:
Special uses permitted in the GR District shall be the same as in the ER
District. (Ord. 634, 9-17-1996)
4-5B-4: TEMPORARY USES PERMITTED:
Upon application to and issuance by the Building Commissioner of a permit
therefor, the following uses may be operated as temporary uses:
   A.   Temporary building or yard for construction materials and/or equipment,
both incidental and necessary to construction in the Zoning District. Each
permit shall specify the location of the building or yard and the area of
permitted operation. Each such permit shall be valid for a period of not more
than one year and shall not be renewed for more than six (6) calendar months
and shall not be renewed for more than four (4) successive periods at the same
location.
   B.   Temporary office, both incidental and necessary for the sale or rental
of real property. Each permit shall specify the location of the office and the
area of permitted operation. Each such permit shall be valid for a period of
not more than one year and shall not be renewed for more than five (5)
successive periods at the same location.
   C.   Real estate subdivision sign not to exceed one hundred (100) square
feet for each face. Sign shall be nonilluminated. Each permit shall specify the
location of the sign. Each such permit shall be valid for a period of not more
than one year and shall not be renewed for more than five (5) successive
periods at the same location.
   D.   Trailer, to be used during the construction of a residence by the
trailer owner and not to exceed one year. (Ord. 634, 9-17-1996)
4-5B-5: ACCESSORY USES PERMITTED:
Accessory uses, buildings or other structures customarily incidental to and
commonly associated with a principal or special permitted use may be permitted,
provided, that they are operated and maintained under the same ownership and on
the same lot as the permitted use, and do not involve the conduct of any
business, trade or industry. Accessory uses may include, but are not limited
to:
   A.   Garages, carports, or other parking spaces for the exclusive use of
residents or occupants of the premises.
   B.   Gardening (the raising of vegetables and fruits) and keeping of
household pets exclusively for the use or personal enjoyment of residents of
the premises and not for commercial purposes.
   C.   Home occupations.
   D.   Living quarters of persons employed on the premises, and not rented or
otherwise used as a separate dwelling.
   E.   Real estate signs, not exceeding twelve (12) square feet for each face
and set back from every property line at least ten feet (10').
   F.   Roomers and boarders, not to exceed two (2).
   G.   Swimming pools, exclusively for the use of the residents and their
guests and set back from every property line at least ten feet (10'). (Ord.
634, 9-17-1996)
4-5B-6: PROHIBITED USES:
All uses not expressly authorized in sections
4-5B-2,
4-5B-3,
4-5B-4 and
4-5B-5 of this article, including, but not limited to:
   Commercial uses.
   Hotels and motels.
   Industrial uses.
   Mobile homes.
   Signs and billboards. (Ord. 634, 9-17-1996)
4-5B-7: SITE AND STRUCTURE REQUIREMENTS:
Except as otherwise provided herein, a separate ground area called the zoning
lot shall be designated, provided and continuously maintained for each
structure or land containing a permitted or special use.
   A.   Minimum lot area:
      Single-family detached dwelling: Twelve thousand five hundred (12,500)
square feet
      Special uses: Forty thousand (40,000) square feet
   B.   Minimum lot width:
      Single-family detached dwelling: Eighty five feet (85')
      Special uses: One hundred forty feet (140')
(Ord. 634, 9-17-1996)
   C.   Yards:
      Front: Not less than thirty feet (30')
      Side: Not less than ten feet (10')
      Rear: Not less than thirty feet (30')
(Ord. 820, 8-3-2004)
   D.   Building height:
      Principal building: Not greater than two and one-half (21/2) stories (35
feet)
      Accessory buildings: Not greater than one story (15 feet)
   E.   Floor area ratio: Not applicable to residential, but all others 0.25.
(Ord. 634, 9-17-1996)
   F.   Minimum size of dwelling:
      1.   All land, parcels or lots for which a final plat of subdivision has
been approved and recorded prior to December 1, 2005, shall be improved in
accordance with the following:
         a.   Each single-family detached dwelling and any other structure
occupied in whole or in part for residential purposes shall contain at least
one thousand (1,000) square feet of finished livable floor area, exclusive of
basement or garage space.
      2.   All land, parcels or lots for which a final plat of subdivision has
been approved and recorded after December 1, 2005, shall be improved in
accordance with the following:
         a.   Each one-story single-family detached dwelling shall contain at
least one thousand five hundred (1,500) square feet of livable floor area,
exclusive of basement and garage space.
         b.   Each multi-story single-family detached dwelling shall contain at
least one thousand eight hundred (1,800) square feet of livable floor area,
exclusive of basement and garage space.
         c.   Each one-story single-family detached dwelling and two-story
single-family detached dwelling must include a basement equal in square footage
to at least one-half (1/2) the ground floor square footage. (Ord. 879, 1-3-
2006)
         d.   Each dwelling unit must include an attached garage with a minimum
width of twenty feet (20') and a minimum total size of four hundred eighty
(480) square feet. (Ord. 1031, 8-4-2009)
         e.   Each dwelling unit must include a paved driveway designed and
constructed specifically for use by motorized vehicles as a path for the
vehicle to be driven across or as a location at which a vehicle could be parked
or stored. The paving material for a "paved driveway" shall consist of
concrete, asphalt, paving bricks or similar material. The minimum width of the
paved driveway between the property line and the building line shall be
eighteen feet (18'). (Ord. 1047, 2-2-2010)
4-5B-8: SPECIAL PROVISIONS:
   A.   Parking Requirements: In accordance with the applicable parking
regulations set forth in chapter 10 of this title.
   B.   Sign Requirements: In accordance with the applicable sign regulations
set forth in chapter 11 of this title. (Ord. 634, 9-17-1996)
   C.   Trucks: No truck tractor of any size, apportioned power unit,
semitrailer, stinger steered semitrailer, road tractor, pole trailer, converter
dolly, apportioned trailer, apportioned semitrailer, type B or greater bus,
whether privately owned or a school bus, implement of husbandry or any vehicle
requiring an Illinois registration plate suffix of "H" or greater, including
foreign registered vehicles, which would require such registration, if
registered in Illinois, any vehicle required to have mileage plates of "MG"
suffix or greater, farm plates of "VG" or greater, or tow trucks capable of
towing any vehicle which is prohibited under this section, shall at any time be
parked or stored within any residential district. (Ord. 1048, 2-2-2010)
   D.   Mobile Travel Trailers, Camper Trailers And Boats: Only one mobile
travel trailer, camper trailer or boat may be parked or stored on a lot in the
GR district, except that additional mobile travel trailers, camper trailers,
and/or boats may be parked or stored on the lot only when located in a garage
or other fully enclosed structure.
   E.   Tents: Tents shall not be erected, used or maintained in any lot,
except such small tents that are customarily used for temporary recreational
purposes. (Ord. 634, 9-17-1996)
   F.   Design Requirements: All land, parcels or lots for which a final plat
of subdivision has been approved and recorded after December 1, 2005, shall be
improved in accordance with the following: (Ord. 878, 1-3-2006)
      1.   Anchored masonry including, but not limited to, brick, stone or cut
stone shall be placed on all four (4) sides of all dwellings. The amount of
required masonry shall be, at minimum, fifty percent (50%) of the building's
exterior surface area, excluding doors and windows. The village prefers a more
varied elevation design, rather than a horizontal brick line at the top of the
first floor. If the brick line is varied including some two-story brick
portions, the balance of the building shall have a minimum of a three foot (3')
brick wainscot. Ranch style dwellings shall be full masonry. If an elevation
includes brick, stone or masonry which is adjacent to and extends above the top
plane of a window, the brick, stone or masonry must be included above the
window. (Ord. 1102, 3-3-2012)
      2.   Brick or stone that is used on a front elevation shall minimally
incorporate a return around the corners of all structures. (Ord. 878, 1-3-2006)
ARTICLE C. R-1 SINGLE-FAMILY RESIDENCE DISTRICT
SECTION:
4-5C-1: Description Of District
4-5C-2: Uses Permitted
4-5C-3: Special Uses Permitted
4-5C-4: Temporary Uses Permitted
4-5C-5: Accessory Uses Permitted
4-5C-6: Prohibited Uses
4-5C-7: Site And Structure Requirements
4-5C-8: Special Provisions
4-5C-1: DESCRIPTION OF DISTRICT:
The R-1 Single-Family Residence District is established to provide for
detached, single-family residential dwellings at a medium to high suburban
density. (Ord. 634, 9-17-1996)
4-5C-2: USES PERMITTED:
No land shall be used or occupied and no building, structure, or premises shall
be erected, altered, enlarged, occupied, or used, except as otherwise provided
in this Title, for other than one or more of the following specified uses:
Single-family detached dwellings. (Ord. 634, 9-17-1996)
4-5C-3: SPECIAL USES PERMITTED:
The following uses shall be permitted only if specifically authorized by the
Village Board as allowed in Section
4-12-5 of this Title:
Special uses permitted in the R-1 District shall be the same as in the ER
District. (Ord. 634, 9-17-1996)
4-5C-4: TEMPORARY USES PERMITTED:
Upon application to and issuance by the Building Commissioner of a permit
therefor, the following uses may be operated as temporary uses:
   A.   Temporary building or yard for construction materials and/or equipment,
both incidental and necessary to construction in the Zoning District. Each
permit shall specify the location of the building or yard and the area of
permitted operation. Each such permit shall be valid for a period of not more
than one year and shall not be renewed for more than six (6) calendar months
and shall not be renewed for more than four (4) successive periods at the same
location.
   B.   Temporary office, both incidental and necessary for the sale or rental
of real property. Each permit shall specify the location of the office and the
area of permitted operation. Each such permit shall be valid for a period of
not more than one year and shall not be renewed for more than five (5)
successive periods at the same location.
   C.   Real estate subdivision sign not to exceed one hundred (100) square
feet for each face. Sign shall be nonilluminated. Each permit shall specify the
location of the sign. Each such permit shall be valid for a period of not more
than one year and shall not be renewed for more than five (5) successive
periods at the same location.
   D.   Trailer, to be used during the construction of a residence by the
trailer owner and not to exceed one year. (Ord. 634, 9-17-1996)
4-5C-5: ACCESSORY USES PERMITTED:
Accessory uses, buildings or other structures customarily incidental to and
commonly associated with a principal or special permitted use may be permitted;
provided, that they are operated and maintained under the same ownership and on
the same lot as the permitted use, and do not involve the conduct of any
business, trade or industry. Accessory uses may include, but are not limited
to:
   A.   Garages, carports, or other parking spaces for the exclusive use of
residents or occupants of the premises.
   B.   Gardening (the raising of vegetables and fruits) and keeping of
household pets exclusively for the use or personal enjoyment of residents of
the premises and not for commercial purposes.
   C.   Home occupations.
   D.   Living quarters of persons employed on the premises, and not rented or
otherwise used as a separate dwelling.
   E.   Real estate signs, not exceeding twelve (12) square feet for each face
and set back from every property line at least ten feet (10').
   F.   Roomers and boarders, not to exceed two (2).
   G.   Swimming pools, exclusively for the use of the residents and their
guests and set back from every property line at least ten feet (10'). (Ord.
634, 9-17-1996)
4-5C-6: PROHIBITED USES:
All uses not expressly authorized in sections
4-5C-2,
4-5C-3,
4-5C-4 and
4-5C-5 of this article, including, but not limited to:
   Commercial uses.
   Hotels and motels.
   Industrial uses.
   Mobile homes.
   Signs and billboards. (Ord. 634, 9-17-1996)
4-5C-7: SITE AND STRUCTURE REQUIREMENTS:
Except as otherwise provided herein, a separate ground area called the zoning
lot shall be designated, provided and continuously maintained for each
structure or land containing a permitted or special use.
   A.   Minimum lot area:
      Single-family detached dwelling: Ten thousand (10,000) square feet
      Special uses: Forty thousand (40,000) square feet
   B.   Minimum lot width:
      Single-family detached dwelling: Seventy five feet (75')
      Special uses: One hundred forty feet (140')
(Ord. 634, 9-17-1996)
   C.   Yards:
      Front: Not less than thirty feet (30')
      Side: Not less than ten feet (10')
      Rear: Not less than thirty feet (30')
(Ord. 820, 8-3-2004)
   D.   Building height:
      Principal building: Not greater than two and one-half (21/2) stories (35
feet)
      Accessory buildings: Not greater than one story (15 feet)
   E.   Floor area ratio: Not applicable to residential, but all others 0.25.
(Ord. 634, 9-17-1996)
   F.   Minimum size of dwelling:
      1.   All land, parcels or lots for which a final plat of subdivision has
been approved and recorded prior to December 1, 2005, shall be improved in
accordance with the following:
         a.   Each single-family detached dwelling and any other structure
occupied in whole or in part for residential purposes shall contain at least
one thousand (1,000) square feet of finished livable floor area, exclusive of
basement or garage space.
      2.   All land, parcels or lots for which a final plat of subdivision has
been approved and recorded after December 1, 2005, shall be improved in
accordance with the following:
         a.   Each one-story single-family detached dwelling shall contain at
least one thousand five hundred (1,500) square feet of livable floor area,
exclusive of basement and garage space.
         b.   Each multi-story single-family detached dwelling shall contain at
least one thousand eight hundred (1,800) square feet of livable floor area,
exclusive of basement and garage space.
         c.   Each one-story single-family detached dwelling and two-story
single-family detached dwelling must include a basement equal in square footage
to at least one-half (1/2) the ground floor square footage. (Ord. 879, 1-3-
2006)
         d.   Each dwelling unit must include an attached garage with a minimum
width of twenty feet (20') and a minimum total size of four hundred eighty
(480) square feet. (Ord. 1031, 8-4-2009)
         e.   Each dwelling unit must include a paved driveway designed and
constructed specifically for use by motorized vehicles as a path for the
vehicle to be driven across or as a location at which a vehicle could be parked
or stored. The paving material for a "paved driveway" shall consist of
concrete, asphalt, paving bricks or similar material. The minimum width of the
paved driveway between the property line and the building line shall be
eighteen feet (18'). (Ord. 1047, 2-2-2010)
4-5C-8: SPECIAL PROVISIONS:
   A.   Parking Requirements: In accordance with the applicable parking
regulations set forth in chapter 10 of this title.
   B.   Sign Requirements: In accordance with the applicable sign regulations
set forth in chapter 11 of this title. (Ord. 634, 9-17-1996)
   C.   Trucks: No truck tractor of any size, apportioned power unit,
semitrailer, stinger steered semitrailer, road tractor, pole trailer, converter
dolly, apportioned trailer, apportioned semitrailer, type B or greater bus,
whether privately owned or a school bus, implement of husbandry or any vehicle
requiring an Illinois registration plate suffix of "H" or greater, including
foreign registered vehicles, which would require such registration, if
registered in Illinois, any vehicle required to have mileage plates of "MG"
suffix or greater, farm plates of "VG" or greater, or tow trucks capable of
towing any vehicle which is prohibited under this section, shall at any time be
parked or stored within any residential district. (Ord. 1048, 2-2-2010)
   D.   Mobile Travel Trailers, Camper Trailers And Boats: Only one mobile
travel trailer, camper trailer or boat may be parked or stored on a lot in the
R-1 district, except that additional mobile travel trailers, camper trailers,
and/or boats may be parked or stored on the lot only when located in a garage
or other fully enclosed structure.
   E.   Tents: Tents shall not be erected, used or maintained in any lot,
except such small tents that are customarily used for temporary recreational
purposes. (Ord. 634, 9-17-1996)
   F.   Design Requirements: All land, parcels or lots for which a final plat
of subdivision has been approved and recorded after December 1, 2005, shall be
improved in accordance with the following: (Ord. 878, 1-3-2006)
      1.   Anchored masonry including, but not limited to, brick, stone or cut
stone shall be placed on all four (4) sides of all dwellings. The amount of
required masonry shall be, at minimum, fifty percent (50%) of the building's
exterior surface area, excluding doors and windows. The village prefers a more
varied elevation design, rather than a horizontal brick line at the top of the
first floor. If the brick line is varied including some two-story brick
portions, the balance of the building shall have a minimum of a three foot (3')
brick wainscot. Ranch style dwellings shall be full masonry. If an elevation
includes brick, stone or masonry which is adjacent to and extends above the top
plane of a window, the brick, stone or masonry must be included above the
window. (Ord. 1102, 3-3-2012)
      2.   Brick or stone that is used on a front elevation shall minimally
incorporate a return around the corners of all structures. (Ord. 878, 1-3-2006)
ARTICLE D. R-2 MULTI-FAMILY RESIDENCE DISTRICT
SECTION:
4-5D-1: Description Of District
4-5D-2: Uses Permitted
4-5D-3: Special Uses Permitted
4-5D-4: Temporary Uses Permitted
4-5D-5: Accessory Uses Permitted
4-5D-6: Prohibited Uses
4-5D-7: Site And Structure Requirements
4-5D-8: Special Provisions
4-5D-1: DESCRIPTION OF DISTRICT:
This District is composed of certain medium-density residential areas
representing a compatible commingling of single-family, two-family and multi-
family dwellings, including certain open areas where similar residential
development appears likely to occur. It is the intent of this District to
provide for an environment of medium-density dwellings plus certain additional
uses such as schools, parks, churches, and certain public facilities which
serve the residents living in the District. Large apartments, with
corresponding proportions of open space, may also be developed under prescribed
standards of density and open space. In addition to large areas allocated for
this District, it has useful application as a buffer or transition zone along
highways, major streets, and bordering shopping centers. (Ord. 634, 9-17-1996)
4-5D-2: USES PERMITTED:
   A.   Permitted Uses: As of September 17, 1996, no land shall be used or
occupied and no building, structure or premises shall be erected or used as
provided in this Article except in the following conditions:
      1.   An existing use in an R-2 District as of September 17, 1996, may be
continued provided that the use conforms to the requirements for the use as
provided in this Article. No other use than that which existed at the
aforementioned date is permitted under this Article.
      2.   Any R-2 parcel for which a preliminary plat has been approved by the
Village Board in accordance with the requirements set forth in Chapter 3 of the
Subdivisions Regulations Ordinance 1  may be improved and developed in
accordance with the approved preliminary plat and the regulations provided in
this Article.
All vacant land in an R-2 District for which no formally approved preliminary
plat exists as of September 17, 1996, may only be used or occupied as provided
in the R-1 or R-4 Districts.
   B.   Residential Uses:
      Single-family detached dwellings.
      Two-family dwellings.
      Multi-family dwellings.
   C.   Public, Quasi-Public, And Governmental Buildings And Facilities: Such
as, but not limited to:
      Public, quasi-public, and governmental buildings permitted in the R-
1 District.
      Churches and other places of worship, provided the property for said use
fronts on a primary or secondary thoroughfare so designated in the
Comprehensive Plan.
   D.   Agriculture Uses: Such as, but not limited to:
      Gardening and general farming.
      Greenhouses.
      Nurseries. (Ord. 634, 9-17-1996)
 
Notes
1 1. See Title 5 of this Code.
4-5D-3: SPECIAL USES PERMITTED:
The following uses shall be permitted only if specifically authorized by the
Village Board as allowed in Section
4-12-5 of this Title:
   A.   Similar and compatible uses to those allowed as "permitted uses" in
this District.
   B.   Clubs, lodges, social or recreational buildings or properties; not-for-
profit.
   C.   Convalescent or nursing home.
   D.   Country clubs, tennis clubs, swimming pools, and similar recreational
uses.
   E.   Hospitals, clinics, and sanitariums.
   F.   Mobile home parks.
   G.   Nursery school, day nursery, and child care center; at least one
hundred fifty (150) square feet of outdoor play area must be provided for each
child that is cared for.
   H.   Planned unit developments.
   I.   Private schools or colleges. (Ord. 634, 9-17-1996)
4-5D-4: TEMPORARY USES PERMITTED:
Upon application to and issuance by the Building Commissioner of a permit
therefor, the following uses may be operated as temporary uses:
Temporary uses permitted in the R-1 District. (Ord. 634, 9-17-1996)
4-5D-5: ACCESSORY USES PERMITTED:
Accessory uses, buildings or other structures customarily incidental to and
commonly associated with a principal or special permitted use may be permitted;
provided that they are operated and maintained under the same ownership and on
the same lot as the permitted use, do not include structures or structural
features inconsistent with the permitted use, and do not involve the conduct of
any business, trade or industry. Accessory uses may include, but are not
limited to:
   A.   Accessory uses permitted in the ER District.
   B.   Professional office or resident in his dwelling involving the
employment of not to exceed one person not a resident on the premises.
   C.   Roomers or boarders, not to exceed four (4) by a resident family. (Ord.
634, 9-17-1996)
4-5D-6: PROHIBITED USES:
All uses not expressly authorized in Sections
4-5D-2 through
4-5D-5 of this Article, including, but not limited to:
   A.   Commercial uses.
   B.   Hotels and motels.
   C.   Industrial uses.
   D.   Signs and billboards. (Ord. 634, 9-17-1996)
4-5D-7: SITE AND STRUCTURE REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   Minimum Lot Area: A separate ground area of not less than seven
thousand two hundred (7,200) square feet for single- family use, nine thousand
(9,000) square feet for two-family use, twelve thousand (12,000) square feet
for multi-family use with at least three thousand five hundred (3,500) square
feet for each multi-family dwelling unit of one or two (2) bedrooms, with an
additional five hundred (500) square feet for each bedroom over two (2)
bedrooms in the multi-family units, and six thousand (6,000) square feet for
other uses, shall be designated, provided and continuously maintained for each
permitted or special use.
   B.   Minimum Lot Width: A minimum lot width of sixty feet (60') shall be
provided for each lot used for a permitted or special use.
   C.   Yards:
      1.   Front Yard: All structures shall be set back at least twenty five
feet (25') from the front lot line.
      2.   Side yard: All structures shall be set in from the side lot line a
distance of not less than five feet (5') on the least side, with the sum of the
two (2) sides not less than fifteen feet (15').
      3.   Rear yard: All structures shall be set in a distance of not less
than twenty five feet (25') from the rear lot line.
   D.   Maximum Height: No principal structure shall exceed two and one-half
(21/2) stories or thirty five feet (35') in height, and no accessory structure
shall exceed one story or fifteen feet (15') in height, except as provided in
section
4-3-3 of this title.
   E.   Floor Area Ratio: Not to exceed 0.7. (Ord. 634, 9-17-1996)
   F.   Minimum Size Of Dwelling:
      1.   All land, parcels or lots for which a final plat of subdivision has
been approved and recorded prior to December 1, 2005, shall be improved in
accordance with the following:
         a.   Each single-family detached dwelling shall contain at least seven
hundred twenty (720) square feet of livable floor area, each two-family
dwelling shall contain at least six hundred (600) square feet of livable floor
area for each dwelling unit, and each multi-family dwelling shall contain at
least five hundred (500) square feet of livable floor area for each dwelling.
      2.   All land, parcels or lots for which a final plat of subdivision has
been approved and recorded after December 1, 2005, shall be improved in
accordance with the following:
         a.   Each one-story single-family detached dwelling shall contain at
least one thousand five hundred (1,500) square feet of livable floor area,
exclusive of basement and garage space.
         b.   Each multi-story single-family detached dwelling shall contain at
least one thousand eight hundred (1,800) square feet of livable floor area,
exclusive of basement and garage space.
         c.   Each one-story single-family detached dwelling and two- story
single-family detached dwelling must include a basement equal in square footage
to at least one-half (1/2) the ground floor square footage.
         d.   Each attached, multi-family or two-family dwelling shall contain
at least one thousand two hundred fifty (1,250) square feet of livable floor
area for each dwelling unit, exclusive of basement and garage space. (Ord. 879,
1-3-2006)
         e.   Each dwelling unit must include an attached garage with a minimum
width of twenty feet (20') and a minimum total size of four hundred forty (440)
square feet. (Ord. 1031, 8-4-2009)
         f.   Each dwelling unit must include a paved driveway designed and
constructed specifically for use by motorized vehicles as a path for the
vehicle to be driven across or as a location at which a vehicle could be parked
or stored. The paving material for a "paved driveway" shall consist of
concrete, asphalt, paving bricks or similar material. The minimum width of the
paved driveway between the property line and the building line shall be
eighteen feet (18'). (Ord. 1047, 2-2-2010)
4-5D-8: SPECIAL PROVISIONS:
   A.   Special provisions as required in the ER district.
   B.   There shall be no application for any map amendment to the R-2 multi-
family residence district accepted after September 17, 1996.
   C.   No land annexed into the village after September 17, 1996, shall be
zoned R-2 multi-family residence district. (Ord. 634, 9-17-1996)
   D.   All land, parcels or lots for which a final plat of subdivision has
been approved and recorded after December 1, 2005, shall be improved in
accordance with the following: (Ord. 878, 1-3-2006)
      1.   Anchored masonry including, but not limited to, brick, stone or cut
stone shall be placed on all four (4) sides of all dwellings. The amount of
required masonry shall be, at minimum, fifty percent (50%) of the building's
exterior surface area, excluding doors and windows. The village prefers a more
varied elevation design, rather than a horizontal brick line at the top of the
first floor. If the brick line is varied including some two-story brick
portions, the balance of the building shall have a minimum of a three foot (3')
brick wainscot. Ranch style dwellings shall be full masonry. If an elevation
includes brick, stone or masonry which is adjacent to and extends above the top
plane of a window, the brick, stone or masonry must be included above the
window. (Ord. 1102, 3-3-2012)
      2.   Brick or stone that is used on a front elevation shall minimally
incorporate a return around the corners of all structures. (Ord. 878, 1-3-2006)
ARTICLE E. R-3 MULTI-FAMILY RESIDENCE DISTRICT
SECTION:
4-5E-1: Description Of District
4-5E-2: Uses Permitted
4-5E-3: Special Uses Permitted
4-5E-4: Temporary Uses Permitted
4-5E-5: Accessory Uses Permitted
4-5E-6: Prohibited Uses
4-5E-7: Site And Structure Requirements
4-5E-8: Special Provisions
4-5E-1: DESCRIPTION OF DISTRICT:
This District provides for certain high-density residential areas within the
community. It is the intent of this District to create a predominantly
residential environment of all types of residential structures, plus certain
additional uses such as schools, parks, churches, and certain public facilities
which serve the residents of the District. General commercial or industrial
uses, except certain enumerated uses, are prohibited. This District normally
abuts major thoroughfares and expressways that provide direct access to the
site. (Ord. 634, 9-17-1996)
4-5E-2: USES PERMITTED:
   A.   Permitted Uses: As of September 17, 1996, no land shall be used or
occupied and no building, structure or premises shall be erected or used as
provided in this Title except in the following conditions:
      1.   An existing use in an R-3 District as of September 17, 1996, may be
continued provided that the use conforms to the requirements for the use as
provided in this Article. No other use than that which existed at the
aforementioned date is permitted under this Article.
      2.   Any R-3 parcel for which a preliminary plat has been approved by the
Village Board in accordance with the requirements set forth in Chapter 3 of the
Subdivisions Regulations Ordinance 1  may be improved and developed in
accordance with the approved preliminary plat and the regulations provided in
this Article.
All vacant land in an R-3 District for which no formally approved preliminary
plat exists as of September 17, 1996, may only be used or occupied as provided
in the R-1 or R-4 Districts.
   B.   Residential Uses:
      Single-family detached dwellings.
      Two-family dwellings.
      Multi-family dwellings.
   C.   Public, Quasi-Public, And Governmental Buildings And Facilities: Such
as, but not limited to:
      Public, quasi-public and governmental buildings and facilities permitted
in the R-2 District.
      Clubs, lodges, social or recreational buildings or properties; not-for-
profit.
      Convalescent or nursing homes.
      Private schools or colleges. (Ord. 634, 9-17-1996)
 
Notes
1 1. See Title 5 of this Code.
4-5E-3: SPECIAL USES PERMITTED:
The following uses shall be permitted only if specifically authorized by the
Village Board as allowed in Section
4-12-5 of this Title:
   A.   Similar and compatible uses to those allowed as "permitted uses" in
this District.
   B.   Country clubs, tennis clubs, swimming pools, and similar recreational
uses.
   C.   Hospitals, clinics, and sanitariums.
   D.   Hotels and motels.
   E.   Planned unit developments. (Ord. 634, 9-17-1996)
4-5E-4: TEMPORARY USES PERMITTED:
Upon application to and issuance by the Building Commissioner of a permit
therefor, the following uses may be operated as temporary uses:
   A.   Temporary permit uses permitted in the R-1 District. (Ord. 634, 9-17-
1996)
4-5E-5: ACCESSORY USES PERMITTED:
Accessory uses, buildings or other structures customarily incidental to and
commonly associated with a principal or special permitted use may be permitted,
provided they are operated and maintained under the same ownership and on the
same lot as the permitted use, do not include structures or structural features
inconsistent with the permitted use, and do not involve the conduct of any
business, trade or industry. Accessory uses may include, but are not limited
to:
   A.   Accessory uses permitted in the R-2 District.
   B.   Multi-family uses may contain one or more of the hereinafter set forth
accessory uses if each such use meets the following conditions:
      1.   Is provided for the convenience of the owner and/or tenant only;
      2.   Does not have exterior signs except for one nonilluminated sign not
exceeding three (3) square feet in area attached to the building;
      3.   Does not have a separate outside entrance; and
      4.   Is not evident from the street:
         Barber shop.
         Beauty shop.
         Delicatessen.
         Eating place.
         Gift shop.
         Laundry and dry cleaning collection station.
         News, cigar and/or candy shop. (Ord. 634, 9-17-1996)
4-5E-6: PROHIBITED USES:
All uses not expressly authorized in Sections
4-5E-2 through
4-5E-5 of this Article, including, but not limited to:
   Mobile homes.
   Industrial uses. (Ord. 634, 9-17-1996)
4-5E-7: SITE AND STRUCTURE REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   Minimum Lot Area: A separate ground area of not less than seven
thousand two hundred (7,200) square feet for single- family use, nine thousand
(9,000) square feet for two-family use, twelve thousand (12,000) square feet
for multi-family use, with the minimum lot area per dwelling unit being not
less than provided for in the following table:
 
Number Of Bedrooms       Minimum Lot Area
Efficiency dwelling unit 800 sq. ft.
One bedroom              1,000 sq. ft.
Two bedroom              1,500 sq. ft.
Three bedroom            3,000 sq. ft.
Each additional bedroom  1,500 sq. ft.
 
and six thousand (6,000) square feet for other uses, shall be designated,
provided, and continuously maintained for each permitted or special use.
   B.   Minimum Lot Width: A minimum lot width of sixty feet (60') shall be
provided for each lot used for a permitted or special use.
   C.   Yards:
      1.   Front Yard: All structures shall be set back at least twenty five
feet (25') from the front lot line.
      2.   Side Yard: All structures shall be set in from the side lot line a
distance of not less than five feet (5') on the least side, with the sum of the
two (2) sides not less than fifteen feet (15') for one or one and one-half (11/
2) story structures; the least side shall be increased by two feet (2') and the
sum of the two (2) sides by three feet (3') for each additional story.
      3.   Rear Yard: All structures shall be set in a distance of not less
than twenty five feet (25') from the rear lot line for one or one and one-half
(11/2) story structures; the rear yard shall be increased by four feet (4') for
each additional story.
   D.   Maximum Height: No principal structure shall exceed eight (8) stories
or eighty five feet (85') in height, and no accessory structures shall exceed
two (2) stories or twenty five feet (25') in height, except as provided in
section
 4-3-3 of this title.
   E.   Floor Area Ratio: Not to exceed 2.5. (Ord. 634, 9-17-1996)
   F.   Minimum Size Of Dwelling:
      1.   All land, parcels or lots for which a final plat of subdivision has
been approved and recorded prior to December 1, 2005, shall be improved in
accordance with the following:
         a.   Each single-family detached dwelling shall contain at least seven
hundred twenty (720) square feet of livable floor area, each two-family
dwelling shall contain at least six hundred (600) square feet of livable floor
area for each dwelling unit, and each multi-family dwelling shall contain at
least five hundred (500) square feet of livable floor area for each dwelling.
      2.   All land, parcels or lots for which a final plat of subdivision has
been approved and recorded after December 1, 2005, shall be improved in
accordance with the following:
         a.   Each one-story single-family detached dwelling shall contain at
least one thousand five hundred (1,500) square feet of livable floor area,
exclusive of basement and garage space.
         b.   Each multi-story single-family detached dwelling shall contain at
least one thousand eight hundred (1,800) square feet of livable floor area,
exclusive of basement and garage space.
         c.   Each one-story single-family detached dwelling and two- story
single-family detached dwelling must include a basement equal in square footage
to at least one-half (1/2) the ground floor square footage.
         d.   Each attached, multi-family or two-family dwelling shall contain
at least one thousand two hundred fifty (1,250) square feet of livable floor
area for each dwelling unit, exclusive of basement and garage space. (Ord. 879,
1-3-2006)
         e.   Each dwelling unit must include an attached garage with a minimum
width of twenty feet (20') and a minimum total size of four hundred forty (440)
square feet. (Ord. 1031, 8-4-2009)
         f.   Each dwelling unit must include a paved driveway designed and
constructed specifically for use by motorized vehicles as a path for the
vehicle to be driven across or as a location at which a vehicle could be parked
or stored. The paving material for a "paved driveway" shall consist of
concrete, asphalt, paving bricks or similar material. The minimum width of the
paved driveway between the property line and the building line shall be
eighteen feet (18'). (Ord. 1047, 2-2-2010)
4-5E-8: SPECIAL PROVISIONS:
   A.   Special provisions as required in the ER district.
   B.   There shall be no application for any map amendment to the R-3 multi-
family residence district accepted after September 17, 1996.
   C.   No land annexed into the village after September 17, 1996, shall be
zoned R-3 multi-family residence district. (Ord. 634, 9-17-1996)
   D.   All land, parcels or lots for which a final plat of subdivision has
been approved and recorded after December 1, 2005, shall be improved in
accordance with the following: (Ord. 878, 1-3-2006)
      1.   Anchored masonry including, but not limited to, brick, stone or cut
stone shall be placed on all four (4) sides of all dwellings. The amount of
required masonry shall be, at minimum, fifty percent (50%) of the building's
exterior surface area, excluding doors and windows. The village prefers a more
varied elevation design, rather than a horizontal brick line at the top of the
first floor. If the brick line is varied including some two-story brick
portions, the balance of the building shall have a minimum of a three foot (3')
brick wainscot. Ranch style dwellings shall be full masonry. If an elevation
includes brick, stone or masonry which is adjacent to and extends above the top
plane of a window, the brick, stone or masonry must be included above the
window. (Ord. 1102, 3-3-2012)
      2.   Brick or stone that is used on a front elevation shall minimally
incorporate a return around the corners of all structures. (Ord. 878, 1-3-2006)
ARTICLE F. R-4 TWO-FAMILY RESIDENCE DISTRICT
SECTION:
4-5F-1: Description Of District
4-5F-2: Uses Permitted
4-5F-3: Special Uses Permitted
4-5F-4: Temporary Uses Permitted
4-5F-5: Accessory Uses Permitted
4-5F-6: Prohibited Uses
4-5F-7: Site And Structure Requirements
4-5F-8: Special Provisions
4-5F-1: DESCRIPTION OF DISTRICT:
The R-4 Two-Family Residence District is established to provide for two-family
residential dwellings at a medium to high suburban density. (Ord. 634, 9-17-
1996)
4-5F-2: USES PERMITTED:
No land shall be used or occupied and no building, structure or premises shall
be erected, altered, enlarged, occupied or used except as otherwise provided in
this Article, for other than one or more of the following specified uses:
   A.   Single-family detached dwellings.
   B.   Two-family dwellings. (Ord. 634, 9-17-1996)
4-5F-3: SPECIAL USES PERMITTED:
The following uses shall be permitted only if specifically authorized by the
Village Board as allowed in Section
4-12-5 of this Title:
Special uses permitted in the R-4 District shall be the same as in the ER
District. (Ord. 634, 9-17-1996)
4-5F-4: TEMPORARY USES PERMITTED:
Upon application to and issuance by the Building Commissioner of a permit
therefor, the following uses may be operated as temporary uses:
   A.   Temporary building or yard for construction materials and/or equipment,
both incidental and necessary to construction in the Zoning District. Each
permit shall specify the location of the building or yard and the area of
permitted operation. Each such permit shall be valid for a period of not more
than six (6) calendar months and shall not be renewed for more than four (4)
successive periods at the same location.
   B.   Temporary office, both incidental and necessary for the sale of rental
or real property. Each permit shall specify the location of the office and the
area of permitted operation. Each such permit shall be valid for a period of
not more than one year and shall not be renewed for more than five (5)
successive periods at the same location.
   C.   Real estate subdivision sign not to exceed one hundred (100) square
feet for each face. The sign shall not be illuminated. Each permit shall
specify the location of the sign. Each such permit shall be valid for a period
of not more than one year and shall not be renewed for more than five (5)
successive periods at the same location.
   D.   Trailer, to be used during the construction of a residence by the
trailer owner and not to exceed one year. (Ord. 634, 9-17-1996)
4-5F-5: ACCESSORY USES PERMITTED:
Accessory uses, buildings or other structures customarily incidental to and
commonly associated with a principal or special permitted use may be permitted,
provided they are operated and maintained under the same ownership and on the
same lot as the permitted use, do not include structure or structural features
inconsistent with the permitted use, and do not involve the conduct of any
business, trade or industry. Accessory uses may include, but are not limited
to:
   A.   Garages, carports or other parking spaces for the exclusive use of
residents or occupants of the premises.
   B.   Gardening (the raising of vegetables and fruits) and keeping of
household pets exclusively for the use or personal enjoyment of residents of
the premises and not for commercial purposes.
   C.   Home occupations.
   D.   Living quarters of persons employed on the premises, and not rented or
otherwise used as a separate dwelling.
   E.   Real estate signs, not exceeding twelve (12) square feet for each face
and set back from every property line at least ten feet (10').
   F.   Roomers and boarders, not to exceed two (2).
   G.   Swimming pools, exclusively for the use of the residents and their
guests and set back from every property line at least ten feet (10'). (Ord.
634, 9-17-1996)
4-5F-6: PROHIBITED USES:
All uses not expressly authorized in sections
 4-5F-2,
4-5F-3,
4-5F-4 and
4-5F-5 of this article, including, but not limited to:
   Commercial uses.
   Hotels and motels.
   Industrial uses.
   Mobile homes.
   Signs and billboards. (Ord. 634, 9-17-1996)
4-5F-7: SITE AND STRUCTURE REQUIREMENTS:
Except as otherwise provided herein, a separate ground area called the zoning
lot shall be designated, provided and continuously maintained for each
structure or land containing a permitted or special use.
   A.   Minimum lot area:
      Single-family detached dwelling: Ten thousand (10,000) square feet
      Two-family dwelling: Twelve thousand (12,000) square feet
      Special uses: Forty thousand (40,000) square feet
   B.   Minimum lot width:
      Single-family detached dwelling: Seventy five feet (75')
      Two-family dwelling: Eighty feet (80')
      Special uses: One hundred forty feet (140')
(Ord. 634, 9-17-1996)
   C.   Yards:
      Front: Not less than thirty feet (30')
      Side: Not less than ten feet (10')
      Rear: Not less than thirty feet (30')
(Ord. 820, 8-3-2004)
   D.   Building height:
      Principal building: Not greater than two and one-half (21/2) stories (35
feet)
      Accessory buildings: Not greater than one story (15 feet)
   E.   Floor area ratio: Not applicable to residential, but all others 0.25.
(Ord. 634, 9-17-1996)
   F.   Minimum size of dwelling:
      1.   All land, parcels or lots for which a final plat of subdivision has
been approved and recorded prior to December 1, 2005, shall be improved in
accordance with the following:
         a.   Each single-family detached dwelling, shall contain at least one
thousand (1,000) square feet of livable floor area, exclusive of basement and
garage space and each two-family dwelling shall contain at least eight hundred
(800) square feet of livable floor area for each dwelling unit, exclusive of
basement and garage space.
      2.   All land, parcels or lots for which a final plat of subdivision has
been approved and recorded after December 1, 2005, shall be improved in
accordance with the following:
         a.   Each one-story single-family detached dwelling shall contain at
least one thousand five hundred (1,500) square feet of livable floor area,
exclusive of basement and garage space.
         b.   Each multi-story single-family detached dwelling shall contain at
least one thousand eight hundred (1,800) square feet of livable floor area,
exclusive of basement and garage space.
         c.   Each one-story single-family detached dwelling and two- story
single-family detached dwelling must include a basement equal in square footage
to at least one-half (1/2) the ground floor square footage.
         d.   Each attached, multi-family or two-family dwelling shall contain
at least one thousand two hundred fifty (1,250) square feet of livable floor
area for each dwelling unit, exclusive of basement and garage space. (Ord. 879,
1-3-2006)
         e.   Each dwelling unit must include an attached garage with a minimum
width of twenty feet (20') and a minimum total size of four hundred forty (440)
square feet. (Ord. 1031, 8-4-2009)
         f.   Each dwelling unit must include a paved driveway designed and
constructed specifically for use by motorized vehicles as a path for the
vehicle to be driven across or as a location at which a vehicle could be parked
or stored. The paving material for a "paved driveway" shall consist of
concrete, asphalt, paving bricks or similar material. The minimum width of the
paved driveway between the property line and the building line shall be
eighteen feet (18'). (Ord. 1047, 2-2-2010)
4-5F-8: SPECIAL PROVISIONS:
   A.   Parking Requirements: In accordance with the applicable parking
regulations set forth in chapter 10 of this title.
   B.   Sign Requirements: In accordance with the applicable sign regulations
set forth in chapter 11 of this title. (Ord. 634, 9-17-1996)
   C.   Trucks: No truck tractor of any size, apportioned power unit,
semitrailer, stinger steered semitrailer, road tractor, pole trailer, converter
dolly, apportioned trailer, apportioned semitrailer, type B or greater bus,
whether privately owned or a school bus, implement of husbandry or any vehicle
requiring an Illinois registration plate suffix of "H" or greater, including
foreign registered vehicles, which would require such registration, if
registered in Illinois, any vehicle required to have mileage plates of "MG"
suffix or greater, farm plates of "VG" or greater, or tow trucks capable of
towing any vehicle which is prohibited under this section, shall at any time be
parked or stored within any residential district. (Ord. 1048, 2-2-2010)
   D.   Mobile Travel Trailers, Camper Trailers And Boats: Only one mobile
travel trailer, camper trailer or boat may be parked or stored on a lot in the
R-4 district, except that additional mobile travel trailers, camper trailers,
and/or boats may be parked or stored on the lot only when located in a garage
or other fully enclosed structure.
   E.   Tents: Tents shall not be erected, used or maintained on any lot,
except such small tents that are customarily used for temporary recreational
purposes. (Ord. 634, 9-17-1996)
   F.   Design Requirements: All land, parcels or lots for which a final plat
of subdivision has been approved and recorded after December 1, 2005, shall be
improved in accordance with the following: (Ord. 878, 1-3-2006)
      1.   Anchored masonry including, but not limited to, brick, stone or cut
stone shall be placed on all four (4) sides of all dwellings. The amount of
required masonry shall be, at minimum, fifty percent (50%) of the building's
exterior surface area, excluding doors and windows. The village prefers a more
varied elevation design, rather than a horizontal brick line at the top of the
first floor. If the brick line is varied including some two-story brick
portions, the balance of the building shall have a minimum of a three foot (3')
brick wainscot. Ranch style dwellings shall be full masonry. If an elevation
includes brick, stone or masonry which is adjacent to and extends above the top
plane of a window, the brick, stone or masonry must be included above the
window. (Ord. 1102, 3-3-2012)
      2.   Brick or stone that is used on a front elevation shall minimally
incorporate a return around the corners of all structures. (Ord. 878, 1-3-2006)
ARTICLE G. R-5 MULTIPLE-FAMILY RESIDENCE DISTRICT
SECTION:
4-5G-1: Description Of District
4-5G-2: Uses Permitted
4-5G-3: Special Uses Permitted
4-5G-4: Temporary Uses Permitted
4-5G-5: Accessory Uses Permitted
4-5G-6: Prohibited Uses
4-5G-7: Site And Structure Requirements
4-5G-8: Special Provisions
4-5G-1: DESCRIPTION OF DISTRICT:
The R-5 Multiple-Family Residence District is established to provide for a
variety of medium- or high-density residential uses, plus certain additional
uses to serve the residents living in the districts. All structures and uses
are to be planned so as to create a cohesive and unified development. All R-
5 developments must be planned unit developments in accordance with Chapter 9
of this Title. (Ord. 634, 9-17-1996)
4-5G-2: USES PERMITTED:
No land shall be used or occupied and no building, structure or premises shall
be erected, altered, enlarged, occupied or used except as otherwise provided in
this Article, for other than one or more of the following specified uses in a
planned unit development:
   A.   Single-family detached dwellings.
   B.   Two-family dwellings.
   C.   Attached single-family dwellings (townhomes, coach homes).
   D.   Multiple-family dwellings, excluding rental apartments. (Ord. 634, 9-
17-1996)
4-5G-3: SPECIAL USES PERMITTED:
The following uses shall be permitted only if specifically authorized by the
Village Board as allowed in Section
4-12-5 of this Title:
   A.   Special uses permitted in the ER District.
   B.   Senior citizen housing subject to the following additional standards:
      1.   Community Need: No special permit for senior citizen housing shall
be granted unless sufficient evidence is provided to demonstrate that there is,
and for the foreseeable future will continue to be, a market demand among
current area residents for all of the dwelling units in the proposed
development.
      2.   Location: Every senior citizen housing development shall be located
in an area of the Village so as to provide convenient access to public
transportation (if available), retail stores, medical services, recreation, and
cultural and religious activities.
      3.   Design Requirements: Every senior citizen housing development shall
be designed and constructed so as to be convertible to a permitted use in the
District. The design should include sufficient developable open space to meet
all ordinance requirements should the development be converted from senior
housing to a permitted use.
      4.   Required Approvals: No special permit for a senior housing
development shall be granted without the prior licensing, certification or
approval of every public agency charged with the regulation of any facet of the
activity of the proposed development.
   C.   Nursing or personal care facilities subject to the following additional
standards:
      1.   Availability Of Facilities: Every nursing or personal care facility
shall be provided with, or have ready access to, facilities and services
necessary and appropriate to the needs of its residents for public
transportation (if available), retail stores, medical services, recreation, and
cultural and religious activities.
      2.   Required Approvals: No special permit for a nursing or personal care
facility shall be granted without the prior licensing, certification or
approval of every public agency charged with the regulation of any facet of the
activity of the proposed facility. (Ord. 634, 9-17-1996)
4-5G-4: TEMPORARY USES PERMITTED:
Upon application to and issuance by the Building Commissioner of a permit
therefor, the following uses may be operated as temporary uses:
   A.   Temporary building or yard for construction materials and/or equipment,
both incidental and necessary to construction in the Zoning District. Each
permit shall specify the location of the building or yard and the area of
permitted operation. Each such permit shall be valid for a period of not more
than six (6) calendar months and shall not be for more than four (4) successive
periods at the same location.
   B.   Temporary office, both incidental and necessary for the sale of rental
or real property. Each permit shall specify the location of the office and the
area of permitted operation. Each such permit shall be valid for a period of
not more than one year and shall not be renewed for more than five (5)
successive periods at the same location.
   C.   Real estate subdivision sign not to exceed one hundred (100) square
feet for each face. The sign shall not be illuminated. Each permit shall
specify the location of the sign. Each such permit shall be valid for a period
of not more than one year and shall not be renewed for more than five (5)
successive periods at the same location.
   D.   Trailer, to be used during the construction of a residence by the
trailer owner and not to exceed one year. (Ord. 634, 9-17-1996)
4-5G-5: ACCESSORY USES PERMITTED:
Accessory uses, buildings or other structures customarily incidental to and
commonly associated with a principal or special permitted use may be permitted,
provided they are operated and maintained under the same ownership and on the
same lot as the permitted use, do not include structure or structural features
inconsistent with the permitted use, and do not involve the conduct of any
business, trade or industry. Accessory uses may include, but are not limited
to:
   A.   Garages, carports, or other parking spaces for the exclusive use of
residents or occupants of the premises.
   B.   Gardening (the raising of vegetables and fruits) and keeping of
household pets exclusively for the use or personal enjoyment of residents of
the premises and not for commercial purposes.
   C.   Home occupations.
   D.   Living quarters of persons employed on the premises, and not rented or
otherwise used as a separate dwelling.
   E.   Real estate signs, not exceeding twelve (12) square feet for each face
and set back from every property line at least ten feet (10').
   F.   Roomers and boarders, not to exceed two (2).
   G.   Swimming pools, exclusively for the use of the residents and their
guests and set back from every property line at least ten feet (10'). (Ord.
634, 9-17-1996)
4-5G-6: PROHIBITED USES:
All uses not expressly authorized in Sections
4-5G-2,
4-5G-3,
4-5G-4, and
 4-5G-5 of this Article, including, but not limited to:
   A.   Mobile homes.
   B.   Hotels and motels.
   C.   Commercial uses.
   D.   Industrial uses.
   E.   Signs and billboards. (Ord. 634, 9-17-1996)
4-5G-7: SITE AND STRUCTURE REQUIREMENTS:
Every tract of land upon which an R-5 use is maintained shall have a minimum
total area, a minimum gross area per dwelling unit, and a minimum lot width.
   A.   Minimum total lot area:
      Single-family detached dwelling: Ten thousand (10,000) square feet
      Two-family dwellings: Twelve thousand (12,000) square feet
      Attached single-family: Thirty thousand (30,000) square feet
      Multiple-family dwellings: Thirty thousand (30,000) square feet
      Senior citizen housing: One hundred thousand (100,000) square feet
      Nursing or personal care facility: One hundred thousand (100,000) square
feet
      All other special uses: Forty thousand (40,000) square feet
   B.   Minimum gross lot area per dwelling unit:
      Single-family detached dwelling: Ten thousand (10,000) square feet
      Two-family dwellings: Six thousand (6,000) square feet
      Attached single-family: Seven thousand two hundred fifty (7,250) square
feet
      Multiple-family dwellings: Three thousand seven hundred fifty (3,750)
square feet
      Senior housing: Three thousand five hundred (3,500) square feet
(excluding detached dwellings)
      Nursing or personal care facility1: Two thousand (2,000) square feet
Note:
   1.   When calculating the gross lot area per dwelling unit of a nursing or
personal care facility, each patient bed shall be counted as a dwelling unit.
In addition, any beds or dwelling units available for occupancy by staff of the
facility shall be counted as a dwelling unit.
   C.   Minimum lot width:
      Single-family detached dwelling: Seventy five feet (75')
      Two-family: Eighty feet (80')
      Attached single-family: One hundred twenty feet (120')
      Multiple-family: One hundred twenty feet (120')
      Senior housing: One hundred eighty feet (180')
      Nursing or personal care facility: One hundred eighty feet (180')
      Special uses: One hundred forty feet (140')
   D.   Yards:
   Front:
      Single-family detached: Not less than thirty feet (30')
      Two-family: Not less than thirty feet (30')
      Single-family attached: Not less than twenty five feet (25')
      Multiple-family: Not less than thirty feet (30')
      Special uses: Not less than fifty feet (50') (Ord. 634, 9-17-1996)
   Side:
      Single-family: Not less than ten feet (10')
      Two-family: Not less than ten feet (10')
      Attached single-family: Not less than fifteen feet (15')
      Multiple-family: Not less than fifteen feet (15')
      Special uses: Not less than fifty feet (50') (Ord. 820, 8-3-2004)
   Rear:
      All permitted uses: Not less than thirty feet (30')
      Special uses: Not less than fifty feet (50')
   E.   Building Height:
      Single-family, two-family, attached single-family: Thirty five feet
(35').
      Multiple-family: Forty feet (40').
      Senior housing: Thirty five feet (35').
      Nursing or personal care facility: Forty five feet (45').
      All other special uses: Thirty five feet (35').
      Accessory buildings: Fifteen feet (15').
   F.   Floor Area Ratio: Not applicable to residential, but all other uses not
to exceed 0.5.
   G.   Spacing Between Buildings: When two (2) or more structures which
contain two-family dwellings, attached single-family dwellings or multiple-
family dwellings, or combinations thereof, are on a lot or on contiguous lots
comprising a unified development under the same ownership or control, the
distance between the exterior structure walls shall be as follows:
      1.   When the front wall of a structure faces any wall of another
structure, the distance between the two (2) structure walls shall be not less
than sixty feet (60').
      2.   When the rear wall of a structure faces the rear wall of the nearest
structure, the distance between the two (2) structure walls shall not be less
than fifty feet (50').
      3.   When the side wall of a structure faces the side wall of the nearest
structure, the distance between the two (2) structure walls shall not be less
than twenty feet (20').
      4.   Where structures are not parallel to each other, the required
spacing shall be measured at the midpoint of the distance along which they face
each other; however, the spacing between the structures at the narrowest point
shall in no event be less than one-half (1/2) the required distance. (Ord. 634,
9-17-1996)
   H.   Minimum Size Of Dwelling:
      1.   All land, parcels or lots for which a final plat of subdivision has
been approved and recorded prior to December 1, 2005, shall be improved in
accordance with the following:
         a.   Each single-family detached dwelling, single-family attached
dwelling, two-family attached dwelling and multi-family dwelling shall contain
at least one thousand (1,000) square feet of livable floor area, exclusive of
basement and garage space.
      2.   All land, parcels or lots for which a final plat of subdivision has
been approved and recorded after December 1, 2005, shall be improved in
accordance with the following:
         a.   Each one-story single-family detached dwelling shall contain at
least one thousand five hundred (1,500) square feet of livable floor area,
exclusive of basement and garage space.
         b.   Each multi-story single-family detached dwelling shall contain at
least one thousand eight hundred (1,800) square feet of livable floor area,
exclusive of basement and garage space.
         c.   Each one-story single-family detached dwelling and two-story
single-family detached dwelling must include a basement equal in square footage
to at least one-half (1/2) the ground floor square footage.
         d.   Each attached, multi-family or two-family dwelling shall contain
at least one thousand two hundred fifty (1,250) square feet of livable floor
area for each dwelling unit, exclusive of basement and garage space. (Ord. 879,
1-3-2006)
         e.   Each dwelling unit must include an attached garage with a minimum
width of twenty feet (20') and a minimum total size of four hundred forty (440)
square feet for attached dwellings and four hundred eighty (480) square feet
for detached dwellings. (Ord. 1031, 8-4-2009)
         f.   Each dwelling unit must include a paved driveway designed and
constructed specifically for use by motorized vehicles as a path for the
vehicle to be driven across or as a location at which a vehicle could be parked
or stored. The paving material for a "paved driveway" shall consist of
concrete, asphalt, paving bricks or similar material. The minimum width of the
paved driveway between the property line and the building line shall be
eighteen feet (18'). (Ord. 1047, 2-2-2010)
4-5G-8: SPECIAL PROVISIONS:
   A.   Planned Unit Developments: All developments in the R-5 district must be
processed and approved as planned unit developments in accordance with chapter
9 of this title.
   B.   Parking Requirements: In accordance with the applicable parking
regulations set forth in chapter 10 of this title.
   C.   Sign Requirements: In accordance with the applicable sign regulations
set forth in chapter 11 of this title. (Ord. 634, 9-17-1996)
   D.   Trucks: No truck tractor of any size, apportioned power unit,
semitrailer, stinger steered semitrailer, road tractor, pole trailer, converter
dolly, apportioned trailer, apportioned semitrailer, type B or greater bus,
whether privately owned or a school bus, implement of husbandry or any vehicle
requiring an Illinois registration plate suffix of "H" or greater, including
foreign registered vehicles, which would require such registration, if
registered in Illinois, any vehicle required to have mileage plates of "MG"
suffix or greater, farm plates of "VG" or greater, or tow trucks capable of
towing any vehicle which is prohibited under this section, shall at any time be
parked or stored within any residential district. (Ord. 1048, 2-2-2010)
   E.   Mobile Travel Trailers, Camper Trailers And Boats: Only one mobile
travel trailer, camper trailer or boat may be parked or stored on a lot in the
R-5 district, except that additional mobile travel trailers, camper trailers,
and/or boats may be parked or stored on the lot only when located in a garage
or other fully enclosed structure.
   F.   Tents: Tents shall not be erected, used or maintained on any lot,
except such small tents that are customarily used for temporary recreational
purposes. (Ord. 634, 9-17-1996)
   G.   Design Requirements: All land, parcels or lots for which a final plat
of subdivision has been approved and recorded after December 1, 2005, shall be
improved in accordance with the following: (Ord. 878, 1-3-2006)
      1.   Anchored masonry including, but not limited to, brick, stone or cut
stone shall be placed on all four (4) sides of all dwellings. The amount of
required masonry shall be, at minimum, fifty percent (50%) of the building's
exterior surface area, excluding doors and windows. The village prefers a more
varied elevation design, rather than a horizontal brick line at the top of the
first floor. If the brick line is varied including some two-story brick
portions, the balance of the building shall have a minimum of a three foot (3')
brick wainscot. Ranch style dwellings shall be full masonry. If an elevation
includes brick, stone or masonry which is adjacent to and extends above the top
plane of a window, the brick, stone or masonry must be included above the
window. (Ord. 1102, 3-3-2012)
      2.   Brick or stone that is used on a front elevation shall minimally
incorporate a return around the corners of all structures. (Ord. 878, 1-3-2006)
ARTICLE H. R-6 RESIDENTIAL APARTMENT DISTRICT
SECTION:
4-5H-1: Description Of District
4-5H-2: Uses Permitted
4-5H-3: Special Uses Permitted
4-5H-4: Temporary Uses Permitted
4-5H-5: Accessory Uses Permitted
4-5H-6: Prohibited Uses
4-5H-7: Site And Structure Requirements
4-5H-8: Special Provisions
4-5H-1: DESCRIPTION OF DISTRICT:
The R-6 District is established for the development of rental apartment
buildings and apartment communities. All apartment developments are to be
planned so as to create a cohesive, functional development that complements the
Village as a whole. All R-6 developments shall be processed and approved as
planned unit developments in accordance with Chapter 9 of this Title. (Ord.
634, 9-17-1996)
4-5H-2: USES PERMITTED:
No land shall be used or occupied and no building, structure or premises shall
be erected, altered, enlarged, occupied or used except as otherwise provided in
this Article, for other than one or more of the following specified uses in a
planned unit development:
Residential apartments. (Ord. 634, 9-17-1996)
4-5H-3: SPECIAL USES PERMITTED:
Special uses permitted in the ER District. (Ord. 634, 9-17-1996)
4-5H-4: TEMPORARY USES PERMITTED:
Upon application to and issuance by the Building Commissioner of a permit
therefor, the following uses may be operated as temporary uses:
   A.   Temporary building or yard for construction materials and/or equipment,
both incidental and necessary to construction in the Zoning District. Each
permit shall specify the location of the building or yard and the area of
permitted operation. Each such permit shall be valid for a period of not more
than six (6) calendar months and shall not be renewed for more than four (4)
successive periods at the same location.
   B.   Temporary office, both incidental and necessary for the sale of rental
or real property. Each permit shall specify the location of the office and the
area of permitted operation. Each such permit shall be valid for a period of
not more than one year and shall not be renewed for more than five (5)
successive periods at the same location.
   C.   Real estate subdivision sign not to exceed one hundred (100) square
feet for each face. The sign shall not be illuminated. Each permit shall
specify the location of the sign. Each such permit shall be valid for a period
of not more than one year and shall not be renewed for more than five (5)
successive periods at the same location.
   D.   Trailer, to be used during the construction of a residence by the
trailer owner and not to exceed one year. (Ord. 634, 9-17-1996)
4-5H-5: ACCESSORY USES PERMITTED:
Accessory uses, buildings or other structures customarily incidental to and
commonly associated with a principal or special permitted use may be permitted;
provided they are operated and maintained under the same ownership and on the
same lot as the permitted use, do not include structure or structural features
inconsistent with the permitted use, and do not involve the conduct of any
business, trade or industry. Accessory uses may include, but are not limited
to:
   A.   Garages, carports, or other parking spaces for the exclusive use of
residents or occupants of the premises.
   B.   Gardening (the raising of vegetables and fruits) and keeping of
household pets exclusively for the use or personal enjoyment of residents of
the premises and not for commercial purposes.
   C.   Home occupations.
   D.   Real estate signs, not exceeding twelve (12) square feet for each face
and set back from every property line at least ten feet (10').
   E.   Roomers and boarders, not to exceed two (2).
   F.   Swimming pools, exclusively for the use of the residents and their
guests and set back from every property line at least ten feet (10'). (Ord.
634, 9-17-1996)
4-5H-6: PROHIBITED USES:
All uses not expressly authorized in Sections
4-5F-2,
4-5F-3, and
4-5F-5 of this Article, including, but not limited to:
   A.   Mobile homes.
   B.   Hotels and motels.
   C.   Commercial uses.
   D.   Industrial uses.
   E.   Signs and billboards. (Ord. 634, 9-17-1996)
4-5H-7: SITE AND STRUCTURE REQUIREMENTS:
All R-6 developments shall be submitted as planned unit developments. Every
tract of land upon which an R-6 use is maintained shall have a minimum total
area, a minimum gross area per dwelling unit, and a minimum lot width.
   A.   Minimum Total Lot Area:
 
Apartment building or complex: 100,000 square feet
Special uses: 100,000 square feet
 
   B.   Minimum Gross Lot Area Per Dwelling Unit:
 
Apartment building or complex: 3,500 square feet
 
   C.   Minimum Lot Width:
 
Apartment building or complex: 180 feet
Special uses: 180 feet
 
   D.   Yards:
Front:
 Apartment building or complex: 50 feet
 Special uses:                  50 feet
Side:
 Apartment building or complex: 50 feet
 Special uses:                  50 feet
Rear:
 Apartment building or complex: 50 feet
 Special uses:                  50 feet
 
   E.   Building Height:
 
Principal building:  40 feet (3 stories)
Accessory buildings: 15 feet
 
   F.   Floor Area Ratio: Not to exceed 0.50
   G.   Spacing Between Buildings: When two (2) or more apartment structures
are on a lot or on contiguous lots comprising a unified development under the
same ownership or control, the distance between the exterior structure walls
shall be as follows:
      1.   When the front wall of a structure faces any wall of another
structure, the distance between the two (2) structure walls shall be not less
than sixty feet (60').
      2.   When the rear wall of a structure faces the rear wall of the nearest
structure, the distance between the two (2) structure walls shall not be less
than fifty feet (50').
      3.   When the side wall of a structure faces the side wall of the nearest
structure, the distance between the two (2) structure walls shall not be less
than twenty feet (20').
      4.   Where structures are not parallel to each other, the required
spacing shall be measured at the midpoint of the distance along which they face
each other; however, the spacing between the structures at the narrowest point
shall in no event be less than one-half (1/2) the required distance. (Ord. 634,
9-17-1996)
4-5H-8: SPECIAL PROVISIONS:
   A.   Planned Unit Developments: All developments in the R-6 district must be
processed and approved as planned unit developments in accordance with chapter
9 of this title.
   B.   Parking Requirements: In accordance with the applicable regulations set
forth in chapter 10 of this title.
   C.   Sign Requirements: In accordance with the applicable regulations set
forth in chapter 11 of this title. (Ord. 634, 9-17-1996)
   D.   Trucks: No truck tractor of any size, apportioned power unit,
semitrailer, stinger steered semitrailer, road tractor, pole trailer, converter
dolly, apportioned trailer, apportioned semitrailer, type B or greater bus,
whether privately owned or a school bus, implement of husbandry or any vehicle
requiring an Illinois registration plate suffix of "H" or greater, including
foreign registered vehicles, which would require such registration, if
registered in Illinois, any vehicle required to have mileage plates of "MG"
suffix or greater, farm plates of "VG" or greater, or tow trucks capable of
towing any vehicle which is prohibited under this section, shall at any time be
parked or stored within any residential district. (Ord. 1048, 2-2-2010)
   E.   Mobile Travel Trailers, Camper Trailers And Boats: Only one mobile
travel trailer, camper trailer or boat may be parked or stored on a lot in the
R-6 district, except that additional mobile travel trailers, camper trailers,
and/or boats may be parked or stored on the lot only when located in a garage
or other fully enclosed structure.
   F.   Tents: Tents shall not be erected, used or maintained on any lot,
except such small tents that are customarily used for temporary recreational
purposes. (Ord. 634, 9-17-1996)
CHAPTER 6
COMMERCIAL DISTRICTS
SECTION:
4-6-1: Purpose
4-6-1: PURPOSE:
The commercial district regulations are intended to govern the location,
intensity, and method of development of the business and commercial uses needed
to serve the citizens of Manhattan and its trade area. The regulations of each
district are designed to provide for groupings of business and commercial uses
that are compatible in scope of services and method of operations. All business
uses are contained in the following commercial district classifications: (Ord.,
4-7-1970)
   C-1 Local shopping district
   C-2 Community shopping district
   C-3 General commercial district
   CBD Central business district
   BP Business park district
   DD Downtown district
(Ord., 4-7-1970; amd. Ord. 700, 7-6-1999; Ord. 1083, 7-19-2011; Ord. 1112, 6-
19-2012)
ARTICLE A. C-1 LOCAL SHOPPING DISTRICT
SECTION:
4-6A-1: Description Of District
4-6A-2: Uses Permitted
4-6A-3: Special Uses Permitted
4-6A-4: Temporary Uses Permitted
4-6A-5: Site And Structure Requirements
4-6A-6: Special Provisions
4-6A-1: DESCRIPTION OF DISTRICT:
The C-1 local shopping district is intended to provide areas to be used by
retail or service establishments to supply convenience goods or personal
services for the daily needs of the residents living in adjacent residential
neighborhoods. The district is designed to encourage shopping centers with
planned off street parking and loading and provide for existing individual or
small groups of local stores. This district is normally located on primary or
secondary thoroughfares, is relatively small in size, and has bulk standards
comparable to the bulk standards for low density residential districts. (Ord.,
4-7-1970)
4-6A-2: USES PERMITTED:
No land shall be used or occupied and no building, structure or premises shall
be erected, altered, enlarged, occupied, or used, except as otherwise provided
in this title, for other than one or more of the specified permitted uses as
outlined in section
4-4-6, "Commercial And Industrial Table Of Permitted And Special Uses", of this
title. (Ord. 1235, 9-20-2016)
4-6A-3: SPECIAL USES PERMITTED:
The special uses as outlined in section
 4-4-6, "Commercial And Industrial Table Of Permitted And Special Uses", of
this title shall be permitted only if specifically authorized by the village
board as allowed in section
 4-12-5 of this title. (Ord. 1235, 9-20-2016)
4-6A-4: TEMPORARY USES PERMITTED:
Upon application to and issuance by the building commissioner of a permit
therefor, the following uses may be operated as temporary uses:
Temporary building or yard for construction materials and/or equipment, both
incidental and necessary to construction in the zoning district. Each permit
shall specify the location of the building or yard and the area of permitted
operation. Each such permit shall be valid for a period of not more than six
(6) calendar months and shall not be renewed for more than four (4) successive
periods at the same location.
Temporary office, both incidental and necessary for the sale or rental of real
property. Each permit shall specify the location of the office and the area of
permitted operation. Each such permit shall be valid for a period of not more
than one year and shall not be renewed for more than five (5) successive
periods at the same location. (Ord. 700, 7-6-1999)
4-6A-5: SITE AND STRUCTURE REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   Minimum Lot Area: No minimum lot area is established in this district.
However, lot dimensions shall be sufficient to meet the remaining density and
dimensional regulations.
   B.   Minimum Lot Width: A minimum lot width of one hundred feet (100') shall
be provided for each lot used for a permitted or special use.
   C.   Building Setback Requirements:
      1.   Front Yard: No principal building shall be allowed within twenty
five feet (25') of any front lot line or street right of way line.
      2.   Side Yard: None required except per subsection C5 of this section.
      3.   Rear Yard: None required except per subsection C5 of this section.
      4.   Exception: Building setback requirements described above for side
and rear yards adjacent to a railroad or a railroad siding shall not be
applicable.
      5.   Adjacency To A Residential District: Where a side yard or rear yard
in this district abuts a residential zoning district, no principal building
shall be allowed within twenty feet (20') of the residential lot line.
   D.   Maximum Site Coverage: Site coverage shall not exceed seventy percent
(70%).
   E.   Building Height Limitations: No building shall exceed three (3) stories
or forty five feet (45') in height. (Ord. 700, 7-6-1999)
4-6A-6: SPECIAL PROVISIONS:
   A.   Parking Requirements: In accordance with the applicable regulations set
forth in chapter 10 of this title.
   B.   Sign Requirements: In accordance with the applicable regulations set
forth in chapter 11 of this title.
   C.   Landscaping: All commercial development shall be in accordance with the
following regulations:
      1.   All yards and open spaces surrounding buildings, parking lots,
access drives and streets shall be landscaped with trees and shrubs, and shall
be maintained by the property owner.
      2.   Trees in front yards shall be planted at a ratio of at least one 21/
2-inch caliper shade tree (as measured 12 inches above grade) for every thirty
feet (30') of street frontage. Strategic grouping of trees is encouraged, as
opposed to even spacing of trees.
      3.   Yard areas shall be landscaped at a ratio of at least one shrub or
tree for every ten feet (10') of the principal building's nearest exterior
wall. Strategic grouping is also encouraged.
      4.   For parking areas greater than thirty (30) spaces, a minimum of
twenty (20) square feet of interior landscaped area per space shall be
provided. In order to qualify as an interior landscaped area, said area shall
be located wholly within or projecting inward from the boundaries of the
parking area.
   D.   General Zoning Provisions: In accordance with the applicable zoning
regulations set forth in chapter 3 of this title.
   E.   IEPA Regulations Adopted By Reference: The standards, specifications
and regulations of the Illinois environmental protection agency are hereby
incorporated into this section and made a part hereof by this reference. Such
standards, specifications, and regulations shall include those as required by
the following:
      Illinois pollution control board rules and regulations; public water
supplies;
      Illinois pollution control board rules and regulations; livestock waste
regulations;
      Illinois pollution control board rules and regulations; solid waste;
      Illinois pollution control board rules and regulations; air pollution
regulations;
      Illinois pollution control board rules and regulations; noise pollution
control regulations;
      Illinois pollution control board rules and regulations; water pollution;
      State of Illinois; the environmental protection act; and Illinois
pollution control board rules and regulations; mine waste regulations. (Ord.
700, 7-6-1999)
   F.   Design Requirements: All buildings constructed in commercial zoning
districts shall be constructed in accordance with the following standards:
      1.   Adjacent To Minor Streets, Secondary Or Collector Thoroughfares:
         a.   All sides of such buildings adjacent to a minor street, secondary
or collector thoroughfare shall be constructed of masonry, brick, stone,
decorative concrete block (excluding plain concrete block), architectural steel
and glass, precast panels, EIFS or natural materials.
            (1)   Building facades, parapet walls and roofs shall not be
colored in a manner that attracts attention to the building.
            (2)   Screening of all heating, ventilating and air conditioning
equipment shall be provided on all sides of the building that are exposed to
public view.
            (3)   Roof screens shall be allowed, provided they are designed to
blend with the architectural style and color of the building.
            (4)   Flues, goosenecks or other equipment mounted on the roof
shall also be screened when heights exceed four feet (4').
            (5)   All landscaping shall be permanently maintained in good
condition with at least the same quality and quantity of landscaping initially
installed.
         b.   Aluminum, steel or vinyl siding shall not be allowed.
      2.   Adjacent To Major Thoroughfares:
         a.   All sides of such buildings adjacent to a major thoroughfare
shall be constructed of masonry, brick, stone, decorative concrete block
(excluding plain concrete block), architectural steel and glass, precast
panels, EIFS or natural materials.
            (1)   Building facades, parapet walls and roofs shall not be
colored in a manner that attracts attention to the building.
            (2)   Screening of all heating, ventilating and air conditioning
equipment shall be provided on all sides of the building that are exposed to
public view.
            (3)   Roof screens shall be allowed, provided they are designed to
blend with the architectural style and color of the building.
            (4)   Flues, goosenecks or other equipment mounted on the roof
shall also be screened when heights exceed four feet (4').
            (5)   All structures and pavement, with the exception of ingress or
egress aisles, shall be set back at least twenty feet (20') from the front lot
line. This subsection F2a(5) shall not apply to the CBD central business
district.
            (6)   All landscaping shall be permanently maintained in good
condition with at least the same quality and quantity of landscaping initially
installed.
         b.   Aluminum, steel or vinyl siding shall not be allowed. (Ord. 870,
8-16-2005)
ARTICLE B. C-2 COMMUNITY SHOPPING DISTRICT
SECTION:
4-6B-1: Description Of District
4-6B-2: Uses Permitted
4-6B-3: Special Uses Permitted
4-6B-4: Temporary Uses Permitted
4-6B-5: Site And Structure Requirements
4-6B-6: Special Provisions
4-6B-1: DESCRIPTION OF DISTRICT:
The C-2 community shopping district encompasses areas located adjacent to
arterial and major collector streets. The district is designed to accommodate
retail and service needs of a wider population than the C-1 local shopping
district. (Ord. 700, 7-6-1999)
4-6B-2: USES PERMITTED:
No land shall be used or occupied and no building, structure or premises shall
be erected, altered, enlarged, occupied, or used, except as otherwise provided
in this title, for other than one or more of the specified permitted uses as
outlined in section
4-4-6, "Commercial And Industrial Table Of Permitted And Special Uses", of this
title. (Ord. 1235, 9-20-2016)
4-6B-3: SPECIAL USES PERMITTED:
The special uses as outlined in section
4-4-6, "Commercial And Industrial Table Of Permitted And Special Uses", of this
title shall be permitted only if specifically authorized by the village board
as allowed in section
4-12-5 of this title. (Ord. 1235, 9-20-2016)
4-6B-4: TEMPORARY USES PERMITTED:
Upon application to and issuance by the building commissioner of a permit
therefor, the following uses may be operated as temporary uses:
C-1 temporary uses permitted. (Ord. 700, 7-6-1999)
4-6B-5: SITE AND STRUCTURE REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   Minimum Lot Area: No minimum lot area is established in this district.
However, lot dimensions shall be sufficient to meet the remaining density and
dimensional regulations.
   B.   Minimum Lot Width: A minimum lot width of one hundred feet (100') shall
be provided for each lot used for a permitted or special use.
   C.   Building Setback Requirements:
      1.   Front Yard: No principal building shall be allowed within forty feet
(40') of any front lot line or street right of way line.
      2.   Side Yard: None required except per subsection C5 of this section.
      3.   Rear Yard: None required except per subsection C5 of this section.
      4.   Exception: Building setback requirements described above for side
and rear yards adjacent to a railroad or a railroad siding shall not be
applicable.
      5.   Adjacency To A Residential District: Where a side yard or rear yard
in this district abuts a residential zoning district, no principal building
shall be allowed within thirty feet (30') of the residential lot line.
   D.   Maximum Site Coverage: Site coverage shall not exceed seventy percent
(70%).
   E.   Building Height Limitations: No building shall exceed three (3) stories
or forty five feet (45') in height. (Ord. 700, 7-6-1999)
4-6B-6: SPECIAL PROVISIONS:
   A.   Parking Requirements: In accordance with the applicable regulations set
forth in chapter 10 of this title.
   B.   Sign Requirements: In accordance with the applicable regulations set
forth in chapter 11 of this title.
   C.   Landscaping: All commercial development shall be in accordance with the
following landscaping regulations:
      1.   All yards and open spaces surrounding buildings, parking lots,
access drives and streets shall be landscaped with trees and shrubs, and shall
be maintained by the property owner.
      2.   Trees in front yards shall be planted at a ratio of at least one 21/
2-inch caliper shade tree (as measured 12 inches above grade) for every thirty
feet (30') of street frontage. Strategic grouping of trees is encouraged, as
opposed to even spacing of trees.
      3.   Yard areas shall be landscaped at a ratio of at least one shrub or
tree for every ten feet (10') of the principal building's nearest exterior
wall. Strategic grouping is also encouraged.
      4.   For parking areas greater than thirty (30) spaces, a minimum of
twenty (20) square feet of interior landscaped area per space shall be
provided. In order to qualify as an interior landscaped area, said area shall
be located wholly within or projecting inward from the boundaries of the
parking area.
   D.   General Zoning Provisions: In accordance with the applicable zoning
regulations set forth in chapter 3 of this title.
   E.   IEPA Regulations Adopted By Reference: The standards, specifications
and regulations of the Illinois environmental protection agency are hereby
incorporated into this section and made a part hereof by this reference. Such
standards, specifications, and regulations shall include those as required by
the following:
      Illinois pollution control board rules and regulations; public water
supplies;
      Illinois pollution control board rules and regulations; livestock waste
regulations;
      Illinois pollution control board rules and regulations; solid waste;
      Illinois pollution control board rules and regulations; air pollution
regulations;
      Illinois pollution control board rules and regulations; noise pollution
control regulations;
      Illinois pollution control board rules and regulations; water pollution;
      State of Illinois; the environmental protection act; and Illinois
pollution control board rules and regulations; mine waste regulations. (Ord.
700, 7-6-1999)
   F.   Design Requirements: All buildings constructed in commercial zoning
districts shall be constructed in accordance with the following standards:
      1.   Adjacent To Minor Streets, Secondary Or Collector Thoroughfares:
         a.   All sides of such buildings adjacent to a minor street, secondary
or collector thoroughfare shall be constructed of masonry, brick, stone,
decorative concrete block (excluding plain concrete block), architectural steel
and glass, precast panels, EIFS or natural materials.
            (1)   Building facades, parapet walls and roofs shall not be
colored in a manner that attracts attention to the building.
            (2)   Screening of all heating, ventilating and air conditioning
equipment shall be provided on all sides of the building that are exposed to
public view.
            (3)   Roof screens shall be allowed, provided they are designed to
blend with the architectural style and color of the building.
            (4)   Flues, goosenecks or other equipment mounted on the roof
shall also be screened when heights exceed four feet (4').
            (5)   All landscaping shall be permanently maintained in good
condition with at least the same quality and quantity of landscaping initially
installed.
         b.   Aluminum, steel or vinyl siding shall not be allowed.
      2.   Adjacent To Major Thoroughfares:
         a.   All sides of such buildings adjacent to a major thoroughfare
shall be constructed of masonry, brick, stone, decorative concrete block
(excluding plain concrete block), architectural steel and glass, precast
panels, EIFS or natural materials.
            (1)   Building facades, parapet walls and roofs shall not be
colored in a manner that attracts attention to the building.
            (2)   Screening of all heating, ventilating and air conditioning
equipment shall be provided on all sides of the building that are exposed to
public view.
            (3)   Roof screens shall be allowed, provided they are designed to
blend with the architectural style and color of the building.
            (4)   Flues, goosenecks or other equipment mounted on the roof
shall also be screened when heights exceed four feet (4').
            (5)   All structures and pavement, with the exception of ingress or
egress aisles, shall be set back at least twenty feet (20') from the front lot
line. This subsection F2a(5) shall not apply to the CBD central business
district.
            (6)   All landscaping shall be permanently maintained in good
condition with at least the same quality and quantity of landscaping initially
installed.
         b.   Aluminum, steel or vinyl siding shall not be allowed. (Ord. 870,
8-16-2005)
ARTICLE C. C-3 GENERAL COMMERCIAL DISTRICT
SECTION:
4-6C-1: Description Of District
4-6C-2: Uses Permitted
4-6C-3: Special Uses Permitted
4-6C-4: Temporary Uses Permitted
4-6C-5: Site And Structure Requirements
4-6C-6: Special Provisions
4-6C-1: DESCRIPTION OF DISTRICT:
The C-3 general commercial district is intended to accommodate retail and
wholesale commercial activities which are adjacent to arterial streets and
serves the population of the village and its surrounding areas. (Ord. 700, 7-6-
1999)
4-6C-2: USES PERMITTED:
No land shall be used or occupied and no building, structure or premises shall
be erected, altered, enlarged, occupied, or used, except as otherwise provided
in this title, for other than one or more of the specified permitted uses as
outlined in section
4-4-6, "Commercial And Industrial Table Of Permitted And Special Uses", of this
title. (Ord. 1235, 9-20-2016)
4-6C-3: SPECIAL USES PERMITTED:
The special uses as outlined in section
4-4-6, "Commercial And Industrial Table Of Permitted And Special Uses", of this
title shall be permitted only if specifically authorized by the village board
as allowed in section
4-12-5 of this title. (Ord. 1235, 9-20-2016)
4-6C-4: TEMPORARY USES PERMITTED:
Upon application to and issuance by the building commissioner of a permit
therefor, the following uses may be operated as temporary uses:
C-2 temporary uses permitted. (Ord. 700, 7-6-1999)
4-6C-5: SITE AND STRUCTURE REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   Minimum Lot Area: No minimum lot area is established in this district.
However, lot dimensions shall be sufficient to meet the remaining density and
dimensional regulations.
   B.   Minimum Lot Width: No minimum lot width is required.
   C.   Building Setback Requirements:
      1.   Front Yard: No principal building shall be allowed within forty feet
(40') of any front lot line or street right of way line.
      2.   Side Yard: None required except per subsection C5 of this section.
      3.   Rear Yard: None required except per subsection C5 of this section.
      4.   Exception: Building setback requirements described above for side
and rear yards adjacent to a railroad or a railroad siding shall not be
applicable.
      5.   Adjacency To A Residential District: Where a side yard or rear yard
in this district abuts a residential zoning district, no principal building
shall be allowed within thirty feet (30') of the residential lot line.
   D.   Maximum Site Coverage: Site coverage shall not exceed seventy percent
(70%).
   E.   Building Height Limitations: No building shall exceed three (3) stories
or forty five feet (45') in height. (Ord. 700, 7-6-1999)
4-6C-6: SPECIAL PROVISIONS:
   A.   Parking Requirements: In accordance with the applicable parking
regulations set forth in chapter 10 of this title.
   B.   Sign Requirements: In accordance with the applicable sign regulations
set forth in chapter 11 of this title.
   C.   Landscaping: All commercial development shall be in accordance with the
following landscaping regulations:
      1.   All yards and open spaces surrounding buildings, parking lots,
access drives and streets shall be landscaped with trees and shrubs, and shall
be maintained by the property owner.
      2.   Trees in front yards shall be planted at a ratio of at least one 21/
2-inch caliper shade tree (as measured 12 inches above grade) for every thirty
feet (30') of street frontage. Strategic grouping of trees is encouraged, as
opposed to even spacing of trees.
      3.   Yard areas shall be landscaped at a ratio of at least one shrub or
tree for every ten feet (10') of the principal building's nearest exterior
wall. Strategic grouping is also encouraged.
      4.   For parking areas greater than thirty (30) spaces, a minimum of
twenty (20) square feet of interior landscaped area per space shall be
provided. In order to qualify as an interior landscaped area, said area shall
be located wholly within or projecting inward from the boundaries of the
parking area.
   D.   General Zoning Provisions: In accordance with the applicable zoning
regulations set forth in chapter 3 of this title.
   E.   IEPA Regulations Adopted By Reference: The standards, specifications
and regulations of the Illinois environmental protection agency are hereby
incorporated into this section and made a part hereof by this reference. Such
standards, specifications, and regulations shall include those as required by
the following:
      Illinois pollution control board rules and regulations; public water
supplies;
      Illinois pollution control board rules and regulations; livestock waste
regulations;
      Illinois pollution control board rules and regulations; solid waste;
      Illinois pollution control board rules and regulations; air pollution
regulations;
      Illinois pollution control board rules and regulations; noise pollution
control regulations;
      Illinois pollution control board rules and regulations; water pollution;
      State of Illinois; the environmental protection act; and Illinois
pollution control board rules and regulations; mine waste regulations. (Ord.
700, 7-6-1999)
   F.   Design Requirements: All buildings constructed in commercial zoning
districts shall be constructed in accordance with the following standards:
      1.   Adjacent To Minor Streets, Secondary Or Collector Thoroughfares:
         a.   All sides of such buildings adjacent to a minor street, secondary
or collector thoroughfare shall be constructed of masonry, brick, stone,
decorative concrete block (excluding plain concrete block), architectural steel
and glass, precast panels, EIFS or natural materials.
            (1)   Building facades, parapet walls and roofs shall not be
colored in a manner that attracts attention to the building.
            (2)   Screening of all heating, ventilating and air conditioning
equipment shall be provided on all sides of the building that are exposed to
public view.
            (3)   Roof screens shall be allowed, provided they are designed to
blend with the architectural style and color of the building.
            (4)   Flues, goosenecks or other equipment mounted on the roof
shall also be screened when heights exceed four feet (4').
            (5)   All landscaping shall be permanently maintained in good
condition with at least the same quality and quantity of landscaping initially
installed.
         b.   Aluminum, steel or vinyl siding shall not be allowed.
      2.   Adjacent To Major Thoroughfares:
         a.   All sides of such buildings adjacent to a major thoroughfare
shall be constructed of masonry, brick, stone, decorative concrete block
(excluding plain concrete block), architectural steel and glass, precast
panels, EIFS or natural materials.
            (1)   Building facades, parapet walls and roofs shall not be
colored in a manner that attracts attention to the building.
            (2)   Screening of all heating, ventilating and air conditioning
equipment shall be provided on all sides of the building that are exposed to
public view.
            (3)   Roof screens shall be allowed, provided they are designed to
blend with the architectural style and color of the building.
            (4)   Flues, goosenecks or other equipment mounted on the roof
shall also be screened when heights exceed four feet (4').
            (5)   All structures and pavement, with the exception of ingress or
egress aisles, shall be set back at least twenty feet (20') from the front lot
line. This subsection F2a(5) shall not apply to the CBD central business
district.
            (6)   All landscaping shall be permanently maintained in good
condition with at least the same quality and quantity of landscaping initially
installed.
         b.   Aluminum, steel or vinyl siding shall not be allowed. (Ord. 870,
8-16-2005)
ARTICLE D. CBD CENTRAL BUSINESS DISTRICT
SECTION:
4-6D-1: Description Of District
4-6D-2: Uses Permitted
4-6D-3: Special Uses Permitted
4-6D-4: Temporary Uses Permitted
4-6D-5: Site And Structure Requirements
4-6D-6: Special Provisions
4-6D-1: DESCRIPTION OF DISTRICT:
The CBD central business district is intended to accommodate those retail,
office, and to a degree, residential, uses that are characteristic of downtown
Manhattan. (Ord. 700, 7-6-1999)
4-6D-2: USES PERMITTED:
No land shall be used or occupied and no building, structure or premises shall
be erected, altered, enlarged, occupied, or used, except as otherwise provided
in this title, for other than one or more of the specified permitted uses as
outlined in section
4-4-6, "Commercial And Industrial Table Of Permitted And Special Uses", of this
title. (Ord. 1235, 9-20-2016)
4-6D-3: SPECIAL USES PERMITTED:
The special uses as outlined in section
 4-4-6, "Commercial And Industrial Table Of Permitted And Special Uses", of
this title shall be permitted only if specifically authorized by the village
board as allowed in section
4-12-5 of this title. (Ord. 1235, 9-20-2016)
4-6D-4: TEMPORARY USES PERMITTED:
Upon application to and issuance by the building commissioner of a permit
therefor, the following uses may be operated as temporary uses:
C-2 temporary uses permitted. (Ord. 700, 7-6-1999)
4-6D-5: SITE AND STRUCTURE REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   Minimum Lot Area: No minimum lot area is established in this district.
However, lot dimensions shall be sufficient to meet the remaining density and
dimensional regulations.
   B.   Minimum Lot Width: No minimum lot width is required.
   C.   Building Setback Requirements:
      1.   Front Yard: None required.
      2.   Side Yard: None required except per subsection C5 of this section.
      3.   Rear Yard: None required except per subsection C5 of this section.
      4.   Exception: Building setback requirements described above for side
and rear yards adjacent to a railroad or a railroad siding shall not be
applicable.
      5.   Adjacency To A Residential District: Where a side yard or rear yard
in this district abuts a residential zoning district, no principal building
shall be allowed within twenty feet (20') of the residential lot line.
   D.   Maximum Site Coverage: There is no limitation on site coverage in the
CBD central business district.
   E.   Building Height Limitations: No building shall exceed three (3) stories
or forty five feet (45') in height. (Ord. 700, 7-6-1999)
4-6D-6: SPECIAL PROVISIONS:
   A.   Sign Requirements: In accordance with the applicable regulations set
forth in chapter 11 of this title.
   B.   Parking Requirements: All permitted and special uses are exempt from
the requirements of chapter 10 of this title.
   C.   Landscaping Requirements: No landscaping is required in this district
except that when front, side or rear yards are provided or required, then
landscaping in those yards shall be provided in accordance with the following
regulations:
      1.   All yards and open spaces surrounding buildings, parking lots,
access drives and streets shall be landscaped with trees and shrubs, and shall
be maintained by the property owner.
      2.   Trees in front yards shall be planted at a ratio of at least one 21/
2-inch caliper shade tree (as measured 12 inches above grade) for every thirty
feet (30') of street frontage. Strategic grouping of trees is encouraged, as
opposed to even spacing of trees.
      3.   Yard areas shall be landscaped at a ratio of at least one shrub or
tree for every ten feet (10') of the principal building's nearest exterior
wall. Strategic grouping is also encouraged.
      4.   For parking areas greater than thirty (30) spaces, a minimum of
twenty (20) square feet of interior landscaped area per space shall be
provided. In order to qualify as an interior landscaped area, said area shall
be located wholly within or projecting inward from the boundaries of the
parking area.
   D.   General Zoning Provisions: In accordance with the applicable
regulations set forth in chapter 3 of this title.
   E.   IEPA Regulations Adopted By Reference: The standards, specifications
and regulations of the Illinois environmental protection agency are hereby
incorporated into this section and made a part hereof by this reference. Such
standards, specifications, and regulations shall include those as required by
the following:
      Illinois pollution control board rules and regulations; public water
supplies;
      Illinois pollution control board rules and regulations; livestock waste
regulations;
      Illinois pollution control board rules and regulations; solid waste;
      Illinois pollution control board rules and regulations; air pollution
regulations;
      Illinois pollution control board rules and regulations; noise pollution
control regulations;
      Illinois pollution control board rules and regulations; water pollution;
      State of Illinois; the environmental protection act; and Illinois
pollution control board rules and regulations; mine waste regulations. (Ord.
700, 7-6-1999)
   F.   Design Requirements: All buildings constructed in commercial zoning
districts shall be constructed in accordance with the following standards:
      1.   Adjacent To Minor Streets, Secondary Or Collector Thoroughfares:
         a.   All sides of such buildings adjacent to a minor street, secondary
or collector thoroughfare shall be constructed of masonry, brick, stone,
decorative concrete block (excluding plain concrete block), architectural steel
and glass, precast panels, EIFS or natural materials.
            (1)   Building facades, parapet walls and roofs shall not be
colored in a manner that attracts attention to the building.
            (2)   Screening of all heating, ventilating and air conditioning
equipment shall be provided on all sides of the building that are exposed to
public view.
            (3)   Roof screens shall be allowed, provided they are designed to
blend with the architectural style and color of the building.
            (4)   Flues, goosenecks or other equipment mounted on the roof
shall also be screened when heights exceed four feet (4').
            (5)   All landscaping shall be permanently maintained in good
condition with at least the same quality and quantity of landscaping initially
installed.
         b.   Aluminum, steel or vinyl siding shall not be allowed.
      2.   Adjacent To Major Thoroughfares:
         a.   All sides of such buildings adjacent to a major thoroughfare
shall be constructed of masonry, brick, stone, decorative concrete block
(excluding plain concrete block), architectural steel and glass, precast
panels, EIFS or natural materials.
            (1)   Building facades, parapet walls and roofs shall not be
colored in a manner that attracts attention to the building.
            (2)   Screening of all heating, ventilating and air conditioning
equipment shall be provided on all sides of the building that are exposed to
public view.
            (3)   Roof screens shall be allowed, provided they are designed to
blend with the architectural style and color of the building.
            (4)   Flues, goosenecks or other equipment mounted on the roof
shall also be screened when heights exceed four feet (4').
            (5)   All structures and pavement, with the exception of ingress or
egress aisles, shall be set back at least twenty feet (20') from the front lot
line. This subsection F2a(5) shall not apply to the CBD central business
district.
            (6)   All landscaping shall be permanently maintained in good
condition with at least the same quality and quantity of landscaping initially
installed.
         b.   Aluminum, steel or vinyl siding shall not be allowed. (Ord. 870,
8-16-2005)
ARTICLE E. BP BUSINESS PARK DISTRICT
SECTION:
4-6E-1: Description Of District
4-6E-2: Uses
4-6E-3: Lot Size Regulations
4-6E-4: Yard And Setback Regulations
4-6E-5: Maximum Lot Coverage
4-6E-6: Structure Height
4-6E-7: Special Provisions
4-6E-1: DESCRIPTION OF DISTRICT:
   A.   The business park district is established as a means to provide unified
development of a variety of commercial, light industrial, warehousing,
wholesale and office uses, in a campuslike setting. The mixes of uses that are
identified as permitted uses in this development are aimed at promoting and
maintaining desirable economic activities.
   B.   The business park district sets forth specific standards for integrated
development that considers all elements of good land planning, so as to provide
appropriate relationships between structures and land uses, while at the same
time:
      1.   Provides for adequate space, light, air, use and bulk limitations.
      2.   Promotes the health, safety and welfare of the village of Manhattan
and its residents.
   C.   All business park developments must be planned unit developments in
accordance with chapter 9 of this title. (Ord. 1083, 7-19-2011)
4-6E-2: USES:
   A.   Permitted Uses: No land shall be used or occupied and no building,
structure or premises shall be erected, altered, enlarged, occupied, or used,
except as otherwise provided in this title, for other than one or more of the
specified permitted uses as outlined in section
4-4-6, "Commercial And Industrial Table Of Permitted And Special Uses", of this
title.
   B.   Special Uses: The special uses as outlined in section
 4-4-6, "Commercial And Industrial Table Of Permitted And Special Uses", of
this title shall be permitted only if specifically authorized by the village
board as allowed in section
 4-12-5 of this title. (Ord. 1235, 9-20-2016)
   C.   Permitted Accessory Uses: The following accessory uses shall be
permitted, provided, however, they comply with standards for screening in
section
4-6E-7 of this article:
      Exterior vehicle loading.
      With the exception of exterior storage of vehicles by a vehicle
dealership, there shall be no outdoor storage of goods, materials, vehicles or
equipment unless adequately screened from view from the public right of way.
   D.   Prohibited Uses: All uses not expressly authorized in subsections A and
B of this section or as determined by the village's zoning officer to be
similar and compatible to those permitted in subsections A and B of this
section, including, but not limited to:
      Bulk sales of fuel and ice.
      Cargo container facilities.
      "Motor freight terminals", defined as "a building or area in which truck,
including tractor or trailer units are parked, stored, or serviced, including
the transfer, loading or unloading of goods. A terminal may include facilities
for the temporary storage of loads prior to transport".
      Outdoor machinery storage and rental.
      Radio and microwave transmitting and receiving stations, except as an
accessory use.
      Semitrailer and other nonrecreational type trailer sales.
      The development, use and operation of: intermodal rail terminal
facilities; connecting and switch tracks to provide rail connections between
railroad main lines and intermodal rail terminal facilities; short term storage
or staging of goods and commodities in transit.
      Utility yards. (Ord. 1083, 7-19-2011)
4-6E-3: LOT SIZE REGULATIONS:
   A.   Minimum lot size: Not less than one acre.
   B.   Minimum lot width: Not less than one hundred fifty feet (150') shall be
maintained at the building setback line. (Ord. 1083, 7-19-2011)
4-6E-4: YARD AND SETBACK REGULATIONS:
   A.   Minimum front and corner side yards: Not less than forty feet (40')
from a front or corner side lot line of a public street.
   B.   Minimum interior side yards: Not less than fifteen feet (15') from an
interior side lot line. Where a side lot line coincides with a side or rear lot
line of a residential or institutional use or district, the interior side
requirement shall be increased to twenty five feet (25').
   C.   Minimum rear yards: Not less than twenty five feet (25') from a rear
lot line. (Ord. 1083, 7-19-2011)
4-6E-5: MAXIMUM LOT COVERAGE:
Provided the minimum pavement setback requirements of section
4-6E-7 of this article are met, the remainder of a lot may be occupied with
buildings, accessory structures, pavement or impervious surfaces. (Ord. 1083,
7-19-2011)
4-6E-6: STRUCTURE HEIGHT:
   A.   Not more than thirty five feet (35') when within one hundred fifty feet
(150') from property planned, zoned or used for residential purposes.
   B.   Not more than fifty feet (50') when more than one hundred fifty feet
(150') from property planned, zoned or used for residential purposes. (Ord.
1083, 7-19-2011)
4-6E-7: SPECIAL PROVISIONS:
   A.   Minimum Pavement Setbacks: Pavement constructed for parking, drive
aisles, off street loading and other accessory uses, including outdoor storage,
shall comply with the following:
      1.   Front/Corner Side: Not less than thirty feet (30').
      2.   Interior Side: Not less than fifteen feet (15'), unless either of
the following apply:
         Where drive aisles are shared (0 setback) on one side of a property,
pavement that extends along the opposite interior side lot line shall be set
back at least twenty five feet (25').
         If pavement used for parking, loading, drive aisles, outdoor storage
or other accessory uses is proposed to be located next to an existing, planned
or zoned residential or institutional use, the required setback shall be
increased to twenty five feet (25').
   B.   Landscape Screening:
      1.   A minimum five foot (5') tall, landscape screen shall be required
when properties are adjacent to, or across the street from properties planned,
zoned or used for residential or institutional purposes.
      2.   The screen shall include evergreen trees, but may also include
fences, walls, berms and other deciduous and ornamental plant material, or any
combination thereof.
      3.   Trees used for landscape screening shall comply with the required
minimum sizes:
 
Deciduous shade      Not less than 5 inch caliper, as measured 12 inches above
                     grade
                     
Deciduous ornamental Not less than 6 feet tall, if multibranched
                    Not less than 2 inch caliper, if single stem
                     
Evergreen            Not less than 6 feet tall
 
      4.   All landscaping shall be permanently maintained in good condition
with at least the same quality and quantity of landscaping initially installed.
   C.   Off Street Loading:
      1.   Unenclosed loading shall be allowed in interior side and rear yards
when possible. Where provided, it shall be screened from public rights of way
by the building, construction of wing walls, or landscaping.
      2.   Loading shall be allowed in the front yard only if the overhead
doors are painted the same color as the adjacent walls and the intensity of
landscaping in the front yard shall be increased.
   D.   Sidewalks: Five foot (5') wide, concrete walks shall be provided in the
public right of way, one foot (1') off the property line, along all streets. A
ten foot (10') asphalt trail may be installed on one side of the street in
place of a concrete sidewalk on both sides of the street if approved as part of
the planned unit development.
   E.   Building Design/Materials:
      1.   The design of all buildings shall be compatible in form, textures,
and colors, consistent with a campus setting.
      2.   Buildings shall be constructed of masonry, brick, stone or
decorative concrete block (excluding plain concrete block), architectural steel
and glass, or precast panels. Aluminum or vinyl siding shall not be allowed.
      3.   Entrances to buildings shall be designed as a focal point of the
building.
      4.   Walls that exceed a length of two hundred feet (200') shall be
articulated through changes in the plane of the facade, installation of
windows, installation of landscaping, or any combination thereof.
   F.   Roof Mounted Mechanical Equipment:
      1.   Screening of all heating, ventilating and air conditioning equipment
shall be provided on all sides of the building that are exposed to public view.
      2.   Roof screens shall be allowed provided they are designed to blend
with the architecture and color of the building. Where this cannot be
accomplished, screening by the parapet wall or roof structure shall be
required.
      3.   Flues, goosenecks or other equipment that is mounted on the roof
shall also be screened when heights exceed four feet (4').
   G.   Landscape Requirements:
      1.   The following identifies the minimum number of trees and shrubs that
will be required. Additional landscaping may be required where appropriate, to
soften large expanses of building facades or screen unenclosed loading from
public rights of way.
         a.   Front/Corner Side Yards: One 5-inch caliper shade tree and three
(3) shrubs for every thirty (30) linear feet of front yard. Where evergreen or
ornamental trees are used in addition to, or in lieu of shade trees, they shall
be at least six feet (6') tall. Clustering of such landscaping is recommended.
         b.   Interior Side/Rear Yards: Except where the interior side yard or
rear yard of a lot is a shared common drive or parkway between lots, one 5-inch
caliper shade tree and three (3) shrubs for every forty (40) linear feet of
interior side yard or rear yard. Where evergreen or ornamental trees are used
in addition to, or in lieu of shade trees, they shall be at least six feet (6')
tall. Clustering of such landscaping is recommended.
         c.   Parking Lot: One curbed, landscaped island, planted with one 5-
inch caliper shade tree for each fifty (50) spaces. Trees shall be high
branched to maintain a clear line of sight not less than five feet (5') above
grade. Clustering of such landscaping is recommended.
      2.   All landscaping shall be permanently maintained in good condition
with at least the same quality and quantity of landscaping initially installed.
   H.   Waste Materials: No materials or wastes shall be deposited upon a lot
in such a form that they might be transferred off the property by natural
causes or forces, such as water, wind or snow.
   I.   Trash Enclosure: Bins used to store trash outside the building shall be
enclosed by a fence or masonry wall at least equal to the height of the
enclosure. A concrete pad and approach apron shall also be required, to bear
the weight of receptacles.
   J.   Lighting: Parking and security lighting shall comply with the
following:
      1.   Foot-candles shall average from 1.0 to 3.0, and be evenly
distributed in the parking lot and drive aisles.
      2.   Luminaries shall be designed to avoid glare and confine light to the
property. Excess spillage shall not exceed 0.5 foot-candle at any property
line.
   K.   Performance Standards: Noise, glare, vibration, odor, etc., shall be
regulated according to standards established by the Illinois pollution control
board of the environmental protection agency, as may be amended from time to
time.
   L.   Road Requirements: All public roads shall be constructed in accordance
with the requirements of the subdivision ordinance for commercial and
industrial roadways. Private roadways, drive aisles and parking facilities
intended for semitruck traffic shall be designed to the same pavement cross
section standards as commercial and industrial roadways.
   M.   Signage: The village acknowledges that high quality, adequate signage
is essential to the success of a commercial development and business park
development and the ability to attract high quality retailers, tenants, users
and businesses. The village further acknowledges that given the size and scope
of the commercial development and business park development, the strict
application of the sign restrictions contained in the village zoning ordinance
may not be in the best interests of the village and its residents. A
comprehensive sign plan shall be required in accordance with the requirements
of and in accordance with chapter 11 of this title.
   N.   General Zoning Provisions: In accordance with the applicable
regulations set forth in chapter 3 of this title.
   O.   Parking Requirements: In accordance with the applicable regulations set
forth in chapter 10 of this title.
   P.   IEPA Regulations Adopted By Reference: The standards, specifications
and regulations of the Illinois environmental protection agency are hereby
incorporated into this section and made a part thereof by this reference. Such
standards, specifications, and regulations shall include those as required by
the following:
      1.   Illinois pollution control board rules and regulations; public water
supplies;
      2.   Illinois pollution control board rules and regulations; livestock
waste regulations;
      3.   Illinois pollution control board rules and regulations; solid waste;
      4.   Illinois pollution control board rules and regulations; air
pollution regulations;
      5.   Illinois pollution control board rules and regulations; noise
pollution control regulations;
      6.   Illinois pollution control board rules and regulations; water
pollution;
      7.   State of Illinois; the environmental protection act; and Illinois
pollution control board rules and regulations; mine waste regulations. (Ord.
1083, 7-19-2011)
ARTICLE F. DD DOWNTOWN DISTRICT
SECTION:
4-6F-1: Description Of District
4-6F-2: Uses Permitted
4-6F-3: Special Uses Permitted
4-6F-4: Temporary Uses Permitted
4-6F-5: Prohibited Uses
4-6F-6: Site And Structure Requirements
4-6F-7: Special Provisions
4-6F-8: Review Process
4-6F-1: DESCRIPTION OF DISTRICT:
The downtown district (DD) is bounded by the area shown in map DD.1 of this
section. The district includes the existing downtown area, and will include the
proposed village center site near the station upon annexation.
The intent of the downtown district is to implement the vision and principles
identified by the community in the 2010 Manhattan village center master plan
(appendix A attached to the ordinance codified herein). All development in the
downtown district must follow the regulations set forth in this article, and
also comply with the regulations and guidelines set forth in appendix A
attached to the ordinance codified herein.
MAP DD.1
DOWNTOWN DISTRICT BOUNDARY MAP
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/e82f668ac95262400ec0a90bb461a735129eaca9/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2257.png] 
 
(Ord. 1112, 6-19-2012)
4-6F-2: USES PERMITTED:
No land shall be used or occupied and no building, structure or premises shall
be erected, altered, enlarged, occupied, or used, except as otherwise provided
for in this title, for other than one or more of the following specified uses:
   Any use permitted in the C-1 and C-2 districts unless otherwise specified in
section
4-6F-3 or
 4-6F-5 of this article.
   Accessory uses as allowed in section
4-3-4 of this title.
Following uses are also permitted in the DD district at the general locations
shown in map DD.2 of this section:
   Duplexes, apartments and condominiums.
   Mixed use buildings, with residential uses over street level commercial.
   Single-family attached, row houses and townhomes - rear loaded.
   Single-family detached - front or rear loaded.
MAP DD.2
GENERAL LAND USE REGULATING PLAN
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/e82f668ac95262400ec0a90bb461a735129eaca9/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2259.png]
 
(Ord. 1112, 6-19-2012)
4-6F-3: SPECIAL USES PERMITTED:
The following uses shall be permitted only if specifically authorized by the
village board as allowed in section
 4-12-5 of this title:
   All permitted and special uses which include drive-through facilities.
   Animal hospital, or clinic with kennel.
   Any new building or structure exceeding three (3) stories in height, or
redevelopment larger than one acre; PUD required.
   Automobile, motorcycle, or other motor vehicle sales with repair and service
facilities allowed only as accessory to the principal use.
   Banks and financial institutions with drive-through facilities.
   Bus and train stations.
   Gas station.
   Group home.
   Indoor retail sales of goods equal to or greater than fifty thousand
(50,000) square feet; PUD required.
   Nursing home, assisted living or independent living facility.
   Package liquor store, tavern, bar.
   Planned unit developments (in accordance with the applicable regulations of
chapter 9 of this title).
   Public utility and governmental service uses on lots having areas, widths,
yards and other conditions as approved by the village board, including, but not
limited to:
   Electrical substations and booster stations.
   Pumping station or well.
   Other government and utility uses as authorized by the village board.
   Recreation and community center equal to or greater than twenty five
thousand (25,000) square feet.
   Theater.
   Transmission devices.
   Other uses which are of the same general character as the above permitted
uses or special uses, as determined by the zoning administrator. (Ord. 1112, 6-
19-2012)
4-6F-4: TEMPORARY USES PERMITTED:
Upon application to and issuance by the building commissioner of a permit
therefor, the following uses may be operated as temporary uses:
   C-1 temporary uses permitted. (Ord. 1112, 6-19-2012)
4-6F-5: PROHIBITED USES:
This list is not all inclusive and other similar and compatible uses may be
deemed prohibited as determined by the zoning administrator.
   Automobile body shop.
   Building materials sales, with bulk storage.
   Building trades and contractor's office, including storage of materials or
vehicles.
   Car wash.
   Cash for gold business.
   Currency exchange.
   Dry cleaning facility, including accessory equipment serving more than the
principal retail outlet for which it is a part.
   Freestanding storage facility, including self-service.
   Industrial, warehouse and wholesale establishments.
   Mobile homes.
   Outdoor storage greater than one hundred (100) square feet in area.
   Pawnshops.
   Tattoo establishment.
   Towing service with storage of vehicles. (Ord. 1112, 6-19-2012)
4-6F-6: SITE AND STRUCTURE REQUIREMENTS:
 
             Development Types
Requirements D-MU Mixed D-MF Multi- D-RR1/D-RR2 D-SFR/D-SFF   D-C Commercial
             Use        Family      Row House   Single-Family
                           Development Types
Requirements               D-MU Mixed  D-MF Multi- D-RR1/D-RR2 D-SFR/D-SFF D-
                           Use         Family      Row House   Single-     C
                                                               Family      Commercial
Setback:                                                                
   Front                0' to 5'    0' – 15'  10'         20'         0' to 5'
                           maximum     maximum                             maximum
   Side                 0'          0'          0'          10'         0'
   Rear (lot abuts alley10'         10'         10'         30'         10'
   Rear (lot commercial 10'         10'         10'         30'         10'
use)
   Rear (lot abuts      30'         30'         30'         30'         30'
residential)
   Height (maximum)     4 stories   4 stories   3 stories   3 stories   4 stories
Use:                                                                    
   Street level use     Retail/     Residential Residential Residential Retail/
                           office                                          office
   Upper level use      Office/     Residential Residential Residential Office
                           residential
Minimum lot size           n/a         n/a         n/a         40' x 120'  n/a
Off street parking         See note 1  See note 1  See note 1  See note 1  See note 1
Off street loading         1           n/a         n/a         n/a         1
Design standards           See note 2  See note 2  See note 2  See note 2  See note 2
Lot coverage               90%         90%         60%         40%         90%
 
Note:
   1.    See subsection
4-6F-7A of this article.
   2.    See appendix A attached to the ordinance codified herein.
(Ord. 1112, 6-19-2012)
4-6F-7: SPECIAL PROVISIONS:
   A.   Parking: Parking requirements shall be in accordance with the
applicable regulations set forth in chapter 10 of this title.
To promote shared parking and reduce large paved areas, commercial developments
may be allowed to reduce the on site parking requirements in the DD district by
up to seventy five percent (75%) as determined by the village board.
   B.   Sign Requirements: Signage in the DD district shall be in accordance
with the applicable regulations set forth in chapter 11 of this title.
   C.   Landscape Requirements: All commercial development shall be in
accordance with the following landscaping regulations:
      1.   All yards and open spaces surrounding buildings, parking lots,
access drives and streets shall be landscaped with trees and shrubs, and shall
be maintained by the property owner.
      2.   Trees in front yards shall be planted at a ratio of at least one 21/
2-inch caliper shade tree (as measured 12 inches above grade) for every thirty
feet (30') of street frontage. Strategic grouping of trees is encouraged, as
opposed to even spacing of trees.
      3.   Yard areas shall be landscaped at a ratio of at least one shrub or
tree for every ten feet (10') of the principal building's nearest exterior
wall. Strategic grouping is also encouraged.
      4.   For parking areas greater than thirty (30) spaces, a minimum of one
20-square feet of interior landscaped area per thirty (30) spaces shall be
provided. In order to qualify as an interior landscaped area, said area shall
be located wholly within or projecting inward from the boundaries of the
parking area.
   D.   General Zoning Provisions: In accordance with the applicable zoning
regulations set forth in chapter 3 of this title.
   E.   IEPA Regulations Adopted By Reference: The standards, specifications,
and regulations shall include those as required by the following:
      Illinois pollution control board for public water supplies, livestock
waste, solid waste, air pollution, noise pollution and water pollution.
      State of Illinois; the environmental protection act; and Illinois
pollution control board rules and regulations; mine waste regulations.
   F.   Building Design Requirements: All buildings in the DD district shall be
constructed in accordance with the design guidelines set forth in appendix A
attached to the ordinance codified herein.
   G.   Rooftop Equipment: All heating, ventilating and air conditioning
equipment that are exposed to public view shall be screened on all sides.
Roof screens shall be allowed, provided they are designed to blend with the
architectural style and color of the building.
Flues, goosenecks or other equipment mounted on the roof shall also be screened
when heights exceed four feet (4'). (Ord. 1112, 6-19-2012)
4-6F-8: REVIEW PROCESS:
All proposals that will be in compliance with the requirements set forth in the
downtown district zoning code and appendix A attached to the ordinance codified
herein will be considered as- of-right, and follow the typical plan review and
approval process.
For residential proposals on already approved and platted lots, review and
approval will be by village staff. (Ord. 1112, 6-19-2012)
CHAPTER 7
INDUSTRIAL DISTRICTS
SECTION:
4-7-1: Purpose
4-7-1: PURPOSE:
The industrial district regulations are intended to govern the location,
intensity, and method of development of the industrial areas of the Village.
The regulations are designed to provide for the grouping together of industries
that are compatible to one another and that are not objectionable to the
community as a whole. The regulations preserve lands for industrial and allied
uses and prohibit the intrusion of residential and other noncompatible uses
into the industrial area. The performance of the industrial uses is regulated
by establishing standards for the external effects of noise, smoke, vibration
and other potential nuisances. All industrial uses are contained in the
following three (3) industrial districts:
   I-1 Office, Research And Light Industrial District
   I-2 Light Industrial District
   I-3 Heavy Industrial District
(Ord., 4-7-1970; amd. Ord. 700, 7-6-1999)
ARTICLE A. I-1 OFFICE, RESEARCH AND LIGHT INDUSTRIAL DISTRICT
SECTION:
4-7A-1: Description Of District
4-7A-2: Uses Permitted
4-7A-3: Special Uses Permitted
4-7A-4: Temporary Uses Permitted
4-7A-5: Site And Structure Requirements
4-7A-6: Special Provisions
4-7A-1: DESCRIPTION OF DISTRICT:
The I-1 office, research and light industrial district is intended to provide
an environment suitable for and limited to research and development activities,
office, warehousing and light manufacturing enterprises. The more stringent
conditions and restrictions applied in this district are intended to preserve
the quality of life in adjacent districts by encouraging a high degree of
design quality, open space and environmental quality. (Ord. 700, 7-6-1999)
4-7A-2: USES PERMITTED:
No land shall be used or occupied and no building, structure or premises shall
be erected, altered, enlarged, occupied, or used, except as otherwise provided
in this title, for other than one or more of the specified permitted uses as
outlined in section
4-4-6, "Commercial And Industrial Table Of Permitted And Special Uses", of this
title. (Ord. 1235, 9-20-2016)
4-7A-3: SPECIAL USES PERMITTED:
The special uses as outlined in section
4-4-6, "Commercial And Industrial Table Of Permitted And Special Uses", of this
title shall be permitted only if specifically authorized by the village board
as allowed in section
4-12-5 of this title. (Ord. 1235, 9-20-2016)
4-7A-4: TEMPORARY USES PERMITTED:
Upon application to and issuance by the building commissioner of a permit
therefor, the following uses may be operated as temporary uses:
Temporary building or yard for construction materials and/or equipment, both
incidental and necessary to construction in the zoning district. Each permit
shall specify the location of the building or yard and the area of permitted
operation. Each such permit shall be valid for a period of not more than six
(6) calendar months and shall not be renewed for more than four (4) successive
periods at the same location.
Temporary office, both incidental and necessary for the sale or rental of real
property. Each permit shall specify the location of the office and the area of
permitted operation. Each such permit shall be valid for a period of not more
than one year and shall not be renewed for more than five (5) successive
periods at the same location. (Ord. 700, 7-6-1999)
4-7A-5: SITE AND STRUCTURE REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   Minimum Lot Area: No minimum lot area is established in this district.
However, lot dimensions shall be sufficient to meet the remaining density and
dimensional regulations.
   B.   Minimum Lot Width: A minimum lot width of one hundred fifty feet (150')
shall be provided for each lot used for a permitted or special use.
   C.   Building Setback Requirements:
      1.   Front Yard: No principal building shall be allowed within fifty feet
(50') of any front lot line or street right of way line.
      2.   Side Yard: No principal building shall be allowed within twenty feet
(20') of any side lot line.
      3.   Rear Yard: No principal building shall be allowed within twenty feet
(20') of any rear lot line.
      4.   Exception: Building setback requirements described above for side
and rear yards adjacent to a railroad or a railroad siding shall not be
applicable.
      5.   Adjacency To A Residential District: Where a side yard or rear yard
in this district abuts a residential zoning district, no principal building
shall be allowed within fifty feet (50') of the residential lot line.
   D.   Maximum Site Coverage: Site coverage shall not exceed forty percent
(40%).
   E.   Building Height Limitations: No building shall exceed four (4) stories
or forty five feet (45') in height. This height may be increased to a maximum
of one hundred feet (100') by a special use permit, as long as all yard
setbacks are increased by a ratio of one foot (1') for each two feet (2'), or
portion thereof, of increased building height over forty five feet (45'),
provided that no front yard setback exceeds one hundred fifty feet (150') and
no side or rear yard exceeds seventy five feet (75'). (Ord. 700, 7-6-1999)
4-7A-6: SPECIAL PROVISIONS:
   A.   Parking Requirements: In accordance with the applicable regulations set
forth in chapter 10 of this title.
   B.   Sign Requirements: In accordance with the applicable regulations set
forth in chapter 11 of this title.
   C.   Landscaping: All development in the I-1 district shall be landscaped as
follows:
      1.   All yards and open spaces surrounding buildings, parking lots,
access drives and streets shall be landscaped with trees and shrubs, and shall
be maintained by the property owner.
      2.   Trees in front yards shall be planted at a ratio of at least one 21/
2-inch caliper shade tree (as measured at 12 inches above grade) for every
thirty feet (30') of street frontage. Strategic grouping of trees is
encouraged, as opposed to even spacing of trees.
      3.   Yard areas shall be landscaped at a ratio of at least one shrub or
tree for every ten feet (10') of the principal building's nearest exterior
wall. Strategic grouping is also encouraged.
      4.   For parking areas greater than thirty (30) spaces, a minimum of
twenty (20) square feet of interior landscaped area per space shall be
provided. In order to qualify as an interior landscaped area, said area shall
be located wholly within or projecting inward from the boundaries of the
parking area.
   D.   General Zoning Provisions: In accordance with the applicable
regulations set forth in chapter 3 of this title.
   E.   IEPA Regulations Adopted By Reference: The standards, specifications
and regulations of the Illinois environmental protection agency are hereby
incorporated into this section and made a part hereof by this reference. Such
standards, specifications, and regulations shall include those as required by
the following:
      Illinois pollution control board rules and regulations; public water
supplies;
      Illinois pollution control board rules and regulations; livestock waste
regulations;
      Illinois pollution control board rules and regulations; solid waste;
      Illinois pollution control board rules and regulations; air pollution
regulations;
      Illinois pollution control board rules and regulations; noise pollution
control regulations;
      Illinois pollution control board rules and regulations; water pollution;
      State of Illinois; the environmental protection act; and Illinois
pollution control board rules and regulations; mine waste regulations. (Ord.
700, 7-6-1999)
ARTICLE B. I-2 LIGHT INDUSTRIAL DISTRICT
SECTION:
4-7B-1: Description Of District
4-7B-2: Uses Permitted
4-7B-3: Special Uses Permitted
4-7B-4: Temporary Uses Permitted
4-7B-5: Site And Structure Requirements
4-7B-6: Special Provisions
4-7B-1: DESCRIPTION OF DISTRICT:
The I-2 light industrial district is intended to allow industrial uses that are
conducted in such a manner so as to not be detrimental to the rest of the
community by reason of noise, vibration, smoke, dust, toxic or noxious
materials, odor, fire, explosive hazards, glare or heat. (Ord. 700, 7-6-1999)
4-7B-2: USES PERMITTED:
No land shall be used or occupied and no building, structure or premises shall
be erected, altered, enlarged, occupied, or used, except as otherwise provided
in this title, for other than one or more of the specified permitted uses as
outlined in section
4-4-6, "Commercial And Industrial Table Of Permitted And Special Uses", of this
title. (Ord. 1235, 9-20-2016)
4-7B-3: SPECIAL USES PERMITTED:
The special uses as outlined in section
4-4-6, "Commercial And Industrial Table Of Permitted And Special Uses", of this
title shall be permitted only if specifically authorized by the village board
as allowed in section
4-12-5 of this title. (Ord. 1235, 9-20-2016)
4-7B-4: TEMPORARY USES PERMITTED:
Upon application to and issuance by the building commissioner of a permit
therefor, the following uses may be operated as temporary uses:
Temporary uses permitted in the I-1 district. (Ord. 700, 7-6-1999)
4-7B-5: SITE AND STRUCTURE REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   Minimum Lot Area: No minimum lot area is established in this district.
However, lot dimensions shall be sufficient to meet the remaining density and
dimensional regulations.
   B.   Minimum Lot Width: A minimum lot width of one hundred feet (100') shall
be provided for each lot used for a permitted or special use.
   C.   Building Setback Requirements:
      1.   Front Yard: No principal building shall be allowed within fifty feet
(50') of any front lot line or street right of way line.
      2.   Side Yard: No principal building shall be allowed within twenty feet
(20') of any side lot line.
      3.   Rear Yard: No principal building shall be allowed within twenty feet
(20') of any rear lot line.
      4.   Exception: Building setback requirements described above for side
and rear yards adjacent to a railroad or a railroad siding shall not be
applicable.
      5.   Adjacency To A Residential District: Where a side yard or rear yard
in this district abuts a residential zoning district, no principal building
shall be allowed within fifty feet (50') of the residential lot line.
   D.   Maximum Site Coverage: Site coverage shall not exceed sixty percent
(60%).
   E.   Building Height Limitations: No building shall exceed four (4) stories
or forty five feet (45') in height. This height may be increased to a maximum
of one hundred feet (100') by a special use permit, as long as all yard
setbacks are increased by a ratio of one foot (1') for each two feet (2'), or
portion thereof, of increased building height over forty five feet (45'),
provided that no front yard setback exceeds one hundred fifty feet (150') and
no side or rear yard exceeds seventy five feet (75'). (Ord. 700, 7-6-1999)
4-7B-6: SPECIAL PROVISIONS:
   A.   Parking Requirements: In accordance with the applicable regulations set
forth in chapter 10 of this title.
   B.   Sign Requirements: In accordance with the applicable regulations set
forth in chapter 11 of this title.
   C.   Landscaping: All development in the I-2 district shall be landscaped as
follows:
      1.   All yards and open spaces surrounding buildings, parking lots,
access drives and streets shall be landscaped with trees and shrubs, and shall
be maintained by the property owner.
      2.   Trees in front yards shall be planted at a ratio of at least one 21/
2-inch caliper shade tree (as measured at 12 inches above grade) for every
thirty feet (30') of street frontage. Strategic grouping of trees is
encouraged, as opposed to even spacing of trees.
      3.   Yard areas shall be landscaped at a ratio of at least one shrub or
tree for every ten feet (10') of the principal building's nearest exterior
wall. Strategic grouping is also encouraged.
      4.   For parking areas greater than thirty (30) spaces, a minimum of
twenty (20) square feet of interior landscaped area per space shall be
provided. In order to qualify as an interior landscaped area, said area shall
be located wholly within or projecting inward from the boundaries of the
parking area.
   D.   General Zoning Provisions: In accordance with the applicable
regulations set forth in chapter 3 of this title.
   E.   IEPA Regulations Adopted By Reference: The standards, specifications
and regulations of the Illinois environmental protection agency are hereby
incorporated into this section and made a part hereof by this reference. Such
standards, specifications, and regulations shall include those as required by
the following:
      Illinois pollution control board rules and regulations; public water
supplies;
      Illinois pollution control board rules and regulations; livestock waste
regulations;
      Illinois pollution control board rules and regulations; solid waste;
      Illinois pollution control board rules and regulations; air pollution
regulations;
      Illinois pollution control board rules and regulations; noise pollution
control regulations;
      Illinois pollution control board rules and regulations; water pollution;
      State of Illinois; the environmental protection act; and Illinois
pollution control board rules and regulations; mine waste regulations. (Ord.
700, 7-6-1999)
ARTICLE C. I-3 HEAVY INDUSTRIAL DISTRICT
SECTION:
4-7C-1: Description Of District
4-7C-2: Uses Permitted
4-7C-3: Special Uses Permitted
4-7C-4: Temporary Uses Permitted
4-7C-5: Site And Structure Requirements
4-7C-6: Special Provisions
4-7C-1: DESCRIPTION OF DISTRICT:
The I-3 heavy industrial district is intended to be located in areas so that
its permitted and special uses are conducted in such a manner so as not to be
detrimental to the rest of the community by reason of their noise, vibration,
smoke, dust, toxic or noxious materials, odor, fire, explosive hazards, glare
or heat that may be incidental to their operations. Further development of
residences is prohibited in this district to keep residential uses from
absorbing any adverse effects of the industries and to conserve the supply of
industrial land for industrial use. (Ord. 700, 7-6-1999)
4-7C-2: USES PERMITTED:
No land shall be used or occupied and no building, structure or premises shall
be erected, altered, enlarged, occupied, or used, except as otherwise provided
in this title, for other than one or more of the specified permitted uses as
outlined in section
4-4-6, "Commercial And Industrial Table Of Permitted And Special Uses", of this
title. (Ord. 1235, 9-20-2016)
4-7C-3: SPECIAL USES PERMITTED:
The special uses as outlined in section
4-4-6, "Commercial And Industrial Table Of Permitted And Special Uses", of this
title shall be permitted only if specifically authorized by the village board
as allowed in section
4-12-5 of this title. (Ord. 1235, 9-20-2016)
4-7C-4: TEMPORARY USES PERMITTED:
Upon application to and issuance by the building commissioner of a permit
therefor, the following uses may be operated as temporary uses:
Temporary uses in the I-1 and I-2 districts. (Ord. 700, 7-6-1999)
4-7C-5: SITE AND STRUCTURE REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   Minimum Lot Area: A minimum lot area of fifteen (15) acres shall be
provided for each lot used for a permitted or special use. This minimum lot
area may be reduced by special use permit.
   B.   Minimum Lot Width: A minimum lot width of one hundred feet (100') shall
be provided for each lot used for a permitted or special use.
   C.   Building Setback Requirements:
      1.   Front Yard: No principal building shall be allowed within fifty feet
(50') of any front lot line or street right of way line.
      2.   Side Yard: No principal building shall be allowed within twenty feet
(20') of any side lot line.
      3.   Rear Yard: No principal building shall be allowed within twenty feet
(20') of any rear lot line.
      4.   Exception: Building setback requirements described above for side
and rear yards adjacent to a railroad or a railroad siding shall not be
applicable.
      5.   Adjacency To A Residential District: Where a side yard or rear yard
in this district abuts a residential zoning district, no principal building
shall be allowed within one hundred feet (100') of the residential lot line.
   D.   Maximum Site Coverage: Not more than seventy percent (70%) of the lot
area may be occupied by buildings and structures, including accessory
buildings.
   E.   Building Height Limitations: No building shall exceed four (4) stories
or forty five feet (45') in height. This height may be increased to a maximum
of one hundred feet (100') as long as all yard setbacks are increased by a
ratio of one foot (1') for every two feet (2'), or portion thereof, of
increased building height over forty five feet (45'), provided that no front
yard setback exceeds one hundred fifty feet (150') and no side or rear yard
exceeds seventy five feet (75').
Chimneys, cooling towers, elevator headhouses, monuments, stage towers or
scenery lofts, tanks, water towers, ornamental towers and spires, church
steeples, power lines, power poles or necessary equipment and mechanical
appurtenances usually required to be placed above the roof level are not
subject to the height limitations herein prescribed. (Ord. 700, 7-6-1999)
4-7C-6: SPECIAL PROVISIONS:
   A.   Parking Requirements: In accordance with the applicable regulations set
forth in chapter 10 of this title.
   B.   Sign Requirements: In accordance with the applicable regulations set
forth in chapter 11 of this title.
   C.   Landscaping: All development in the I-3 district shall be landscaped as
follows:
      1.   All yards and open spaces surrounding buildings, parking lots,
access drives and streets shall be landscaped with trees and shrubs, and shall
be maintained by the property owner.
      2.   Trees in front yards shall be planted at a ratio of at least one 21/
2-inch caliper shade tree (as measured at 12 inches above grade) for every
thirty feet (30') of street frontage. Strategic grouping of trees is
encouraged, as opposed to even spacing of trees.
      3.   Yard areas shall be landscaped at a ratio of at least one shrub or
tree for every ten feet (10') of the principal building's nearest exterior
wall. Strategic grouping is also encouraged.
      4.   For parking areas greater than thirty (30) spaces, a minimum of
twenty (20) square feet of interior landscaped area per space shall be
provided. In order to qualify as an interior landscaped area, said area shall
be located wholly within or projecting inward from the boundaries of the
parking area.
   D.   General Zoning Provisions: In accordance with the applicable
regulations set forth in chapter 3 of this title.
   E.   IEPA Regulations Adopted By Reference: The standards, specifications
and regulations of the Illinois environmental protection agency are hereby
incorporated into this section and made a part hereof by this reference. Such
standards, specifications, and regulations shall include those as required by
the following:
      Illinois pollution control board rules and regulations; public water
supplies;
      Illinois pollution control board rules and regulations; livestock waste
regulations;
      Illinois pollution control board rules and regulations; solid waste;
      Illinois pollution control board rules and regulations; air pollution
regulations;
      Illinois pollution control board rules and regulations; noise pollution
control regulations;
      Illinois pollution control board rules and regulations; water pollution;
      State of Illinois; the environmental protection act; and Illinois
pollution control board rules and regulations; mine waste regulations. (Ord.
700, 7-6-1999)
CHAPTER 8
NONCONFORMING BUILDINGS, STRUCTURES AND USES
SECTION:
4-8-1: Statement Of Purpose
4-8-2: Regulations
4-8-3: Continuance Of Nonconforming Use
4-8-4: Continuance Of Nonconforming Use Of Land
4-8-1: STATEMENT OF PURPOSE:
The purpose of this chapter is to provide for the regulation of nonconforming
uses, buildings, structures, and to specify those circumstances and conditions
under which those nonconforming buildings, structures, and uses may be
continued, in accordance with the authority granted by 65 Illinois Compiled
Statutes 5/11-13-1. (Ord., 4-7-1970)
4-8-2: REGULATIONS:
Any nonconforming building, structure, or use which existed lawfully at the
time of the adoption of this title and which remains nonconforming, and any
such building, structure, or use which shall become nonconforming upon the
adoption of this title or of any subsequent amendment thereto, may be continued
only in accordance with the regulations which follow:
   A.   Repairs And Alterations: Ordinary repairs and alterations may be made
to a nonconforming building or structure, provided that no structural
alterations shall be made in or to such building or structure, all or
substantially all of which is designed or intended for a use not permitted in
the district in which it is located, except those required by law, or except to
make the building or structure, and use thereof, conform to the regulations of
the district in which it is located.
   B.   Additions And Enlargements:
      1.   A nonconforming building or structure, all or substantially all of
which is designed or intended for a use not permitted in the district in which
it is located, shall not be added to or enlarged in any manner unless such
nonconforming building or structure, and use thereof, including all additions
and enlargements thereto is made to conform to all the regulations of the
district in which it is located.
      2.   A nonconforming building or structure, which is nonconforming only
as to bulk, shall not be added to or enlarged in any manner unless such
additions and enlargements thereto are made to conform to all regulations of
the district in which it is located.
   C.   Moving: No building or structure, which does not conform to all of the
regulations of the district in which it is located, shall be moved in whole or
in part to any other location unless every portion of such building or
structure is moved, and the use thereof is made to conform to all regulations
of the district into which it is moved. (Ord., 4-7-1970)
   D.   Restoration Of Damaged Nonconforming Building: A building or structure,
all or substantially all of which is designed or intended for a use which is
not permitted in the district in which it is located, and which is destroyed or
damaged by fire or other casualty or act of God to the extent that the cost of
restoration to the condition in which it was before the occurrence will exceed
fifty percent (50%) of the cost of restoration of the entire building or
structure new, shall not be restored unless said building or structure, and the
use thereof, shall conform to all regulations of the district in which it is
located. In the event that such damage or destruction is less than fifty
percent (50%) of the cost of restoration of the entire building or structure
new, no repairs or reconstruction shall be made unless such restoration is
started within one year from the date of the partial destruction and is
diligently prosecuted to completion. If the nonconforming building is a single-
family detached structure located within a commercial district the building may
be reconstructed on the same footprint without regard to the cost of
restoration. (Ord. 961, 6-5-2007)
   E.   Discontinuance Of Use Of Nonconforming Building Or Structure: A
building, structure, or portion thereof, all or substantially all of which is
designed or intended for a use which is not permitted in the district in which
it is located, and which is vacant, unoccupied, and not used on the effective
date hereof or thereafter becomes vacant and remains unoccupied, or is not used
for a continuous period of one year, shall not thereafter be occupied or used
except by a use which conforms to the use regulations of the district in which
it is located.
   F.   Expansion Of Use In Nonconforming Building Or Structure: The
nonconforming use of a part of a building or structure may be expanded within
the building or structure in which said use is presently located, but no
changes or structural alterations shall be made unless such changes or
structural alterations, and the use thereof, conform to all the regulations of
the district in which the building or structure is located.
   G.   Change Of Use In Nonconforming Building Or Structure: The nonconforming
use of a building or structure may be changed to any other nonconforming use
allowed within the same or more restrictive zoning district that allows the
existing nonconforming use; but no change shall extend or otherwise modify any
provision made in this title for elimination of such nonconforming building or
structure, and the use thereof. (Ord., 4-7-1970)
4-8-3: CONTINUANCE OF NONCONFORMING USE:
The lawfully existing nonconforming use of part or all of a building or
structure, all or substantially all of which building or structure is designed
or intended for a use permitted in the district in which it is located, may be
continued subject to the following provisions:
   A.   Expansion Of Nonconforming Use: The nonconforming use of part of a
building or structure, all or substantially all of which building or structure
is designed or intended for a use permitted in the district in which it is
located, shall not be expanded or extended into any other portion of such
building or structure, nor changed to any other nonconforming use.
   B.   Discontinuance: If a nonconforming use of a building or structure, all
or substantially all of which building or structure is designed or intended for
a use permitted in the district in which it is located, is discontinued for a
period of six (6) months, it shall not be renewed, and any subsequent use of
the building or structure shall conform to the use regulations of the district
in which the premises is located.
   C.   Change Of A Nonconforming Use: Nonconforming use shall be changed to
another nonconforming use when such nonconforming use is located in a building
or structure, all or substantially all of which building or structure is
designed or intended for a permitted use. (Ord., 4-7-1970)
4-8-4: CONTINUANCE OF NONCONFORMING USE OF LAND:
The nonconforming use of land not involving a building or structure, or in
connection with which any building or structure thereon is incidental or
accessory to the principal use of the land, may be continued subject to the
following provisions:
   A.   Expansion: A nonconforming use of land shall not be expanded or
extended beyond the area it occupies.
   B.   Discontinuance: If a nonconforming use of land is discontinued for a
period of three (3) consecutive months, it shall not thereafter be renewed, and
any subsequent use of land shall conform to the regulations of the district in
which the land is located.
   C.   Change Of Use: A nonconforming use of land may be changed to any other
nonconforming use allowed within the same or more restrictive zoning district
that allows the existing nonconforming use. (Ord., 4-7-1970)
CHAPTER 9
PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT REGULATIONS
SECTION:
4-9-1: Purpose
4-9-2: Procedure
4-9-2-1: Pre-Application Procedure, Conference
4-9-2-2: Approval of Preliminary Plat
4-9-2-3: Approval of Final Plat
4-9-2-4: Recording the Final Plat
4-9-2-5: Changes in the Planned Unit Development
4-9-2-6: Schedule
4-9-3: Location
4-9-4: Specific Content
4-9-4-1: Pre-Application Stage
4-9-4-2: Preliminary Plat Stage
4-9-4-3: Final Plat Stage
4-9-5: Standards
4-9-6: Findings
4-9-7: Conditions and Guarantees
4-9-1: PURPOSE:
   A.   The purpose of the planned unit development is to permit:
      1.   A maximum choice in the types of environment available to the public
by allowing a development that would not be possible under the strict
application of the other Chapters of this Title.
      2.   Permanent preservation of common open space and recreation areas and
facilities.
      3.   A pattern of development to preserve natural vegetation, topographic
and geologic features.
      4.   A creative approach to the use of land and related physical
facilities that results in better development and design and the construction
of aesthetic amenities.
      5.   An efficient use of the land resulting in more economic networks of
utilities, streets, and other facilities.
      6.   A land use which promotes the public health, safety, comfort,
morals, and welfare.
   B.   The planned unit development is intended to provide for developments
incorporating a single type or a variety of related uses which are planned and
developed as a unit. The planned unit development may provide amenities not
otherwise required by law and should establish facilities and open space
greater than the minimums required by law. Such development may consist of
conventionally subdivided lots or provide for development by a planned unit
development plat which establishes the location and extent of the features of
the planned unit development in keeping with the purpose of the plan. (Ord., 4-
7-70)
4-9-2: PROCEDURE:
A planned unit development shall be granted as a special use in accord with the
following procedures and may depart from the normal procedure, standards, and
other requirements of the other Chapters of this Title. Applications shall be
made on forms provided by the Village and shall be accompanied by the required
plats and documents. (Ord., 4-7-70)
4-9-2-1: PRE-APPLICATION PROCEDURE, CONFERENCE:
Prior to the filing of an application for approval of a planned unit
development, the developer may request of the Plan Commission an informal
meeting to discuss the development of their land in conjunction with the
Village Plan. Said meeting shall be a part of a regularly scheduled meeting,
shall be open to the public, and included on their agenda in advance of the
meeting.
The pre-application conference is not mandatory and does not require formal
application, fee, or filing of a planned unit development plat. (Ord., 4-7-70)
4-9-2-2: APPROVAL OF PRELIMINARY PLAT:
A preliminary plat of the planned unit development shall be submitted to the
President and Board of Trustees, who shall refer same to the Plan Commission
for public hearing, report, and recommendation as to whether or not the
President and Board of Trustees should issue the special use permit applied
for. The required procedure for approval of the preliminary plat shall be:
   A.   Submission of the following:
      1.   Written application for approval of a planned unit development shall
be made on forms and in the manner prescribed by rules of the Village.
      2.   The application shall be accompanied by a fee which shall be
established by the President and Board of Trustees.
      3.   The preliminary plat and supporting data shall be in accord with the
stipulations of Section
4-9-4 of this Chapter.
   B.   The Plan Commission shall hold a public hearing on the application for
a planned unit development, giving notice of the time and place not more than
thirty (30) nor less than fifteen (15) days before the hearing by publishing a
notice thereof at least once in a newspaper published or having general
circulation within the Village.
   C.   Copies of the preliminary planned unit development plat and supporting
data shall be submitted to the Zoning Board of Appeals for their review and
recommendations. The report of the Zoning Board of Appeals shall be made to the
Plan Commission within thirty (30) days and preceding the Plan Commission's
recommendation to the Village Board.
   D.   Copies of the preliminary planned unit development plat and supporting
data shall be submitted to the Village Engineer for certification as to
conformity with these regulations, recommendations, and suggestions regarding
the overall design, if any.
   E.   Following the public hearing and review of the preliminary planned unit
development plat and supporting data for conformity to these regulations, the
Plan Commission shall, within sixty (60) days, recommend approval,
modification, or disapproval, and the reasons therefor, to the President and
Village Board.
As a condition to the approval of the preliminary plat, the Plan Commission
shall set forth in a separate communication to the President and Board of
Trustees, findings of fact, in accord with Section
4-9-6 of this Chapter, on which they base their approval and describing how the
proposal meets the standards of Section
 4-9-5 of this Chapter.
   F.   The President and Board of Trustees after receipt of the preliminary
unit development plat from the Plan Commission, shall approve, modify, or
disapprove the preliminary plat. In the case of approval, or approval with
modification, the Village Board shall pass an ordinance granting the special
use and indicate their approval upon the plat, and arrange zoning map
modifications as necessary. The Village Board may require such special
conditions as they may deem necessary to insure conformance with the intent of
all Comprehensive Plan elements and the stated purposes of the planned
development.
   G.   Approval of a preliminary planned unit development plat shall not
constitute approval of the final plat. Rather it shall be deemed an expression
of approval to the layout submitted on the preliminary plat as a guide to the
preparation of the final plat which will be submitted for approval of the
Village and subsequent recording upon the fulfillment of the requirements of
these regulations and conditions of the preliminary approval, if any. The final
plat shall be approved as the final land use and zoning plat if it conforms
with the preliminary land use and zoning plat.
The preliminary and final plat may be filed and approved simultaneously or the
final plat may be filed and approved without a preliminary plat if all of the
land is to be developed at one time, and if all requirements hereof are met.
No building permit shall be issued for any structure until the approval of the
final plat. (Ord., 4-7-70)
4-9-2-3: APPROVAL OF FINAL PLAT:
The final planned unit development plat shall conform substantially to the
preliminary plat as approved, and, if desired by the developer, it may be
submitted in stages with each stage reflecting the approved preliminary plat
which is proposed to be recorded and developed; provided, however, that such
portion conforms to all requirements of these regulations. The required
procedure for approval of a final plat shall be:
   A.   A final planned unit development plat and other supporting data
required for approval shall be submitted to the Plan Commission in accord with
the provisions of Section
4-9-4 of this Chapter.
The final plats must be submitted for approval in accordance with agreed to
scheduling, but not later than five (5) years from the approval of the
preliminary plat; in the event that same is not done, the Plan Commission shall
initiate such zoning changes as it deems necessary to preserve the public
interest.
Final plats and supporting data shall show in detail the design, location, and
use of all buildings and overall land development as well as such additional
information as the Plan Commission may require.
   B.   The final plat and supporting data shall be submitted to the Village
Engineer for certification that the final plat is in conformity with these
regulations and in agreement with the approved preliminary plat.
   C.   After review of the final plat, the Plan Commission shall, within
thirty (30) days, recommend approval or disapproval, and the reasons therefor,
to the President and Board of Trustees.
   D.   The President and Board of Trustees after receipt of the final plat
from the Plan Commission, shall approve, or disapprove the final plat and shall
pass an ordinance authorizing the planned unit development as a special use and
allowing the issuance of a zoning certificate and all other necessary permits.
Permits are to be issued only after the final planned unit development plat and
supporting data have been recorded with the Recorder of Deeds, and shall be
issued in full conformance with Chapter 12 of this Title. (Ord., 4-7-70)
4-9-2-4: RECORDING THE FINAL PLAT:
   A.   The ordinance authorizing construction of the planned unit development
shall be effective only upon recording of the final planned unit development
plat and supporting date with the County Recorder of Deeds. No permit, allowing
construction of a building or other development, shall be granted until the
required recording of the final plat, and proof of filing provided to the
Village.
   B.   The purpose of the final plat is to designate with particularity the
land subdivided into conventional lots as well as the division of other lands,
not so subdivided, into common open areas and building sites. The preliminary
plat shall generally locate buildings whereas the final plat shall show the
exact location of each building. All streets and easements shall be shown on
the final plat.
   C.   The recording of the final plat shall inform all who deal with the
planned unit development of the restrictions placed upon the land and act as a
zoning control device. (Ord., 4-7-70)
4-9-2-5: CHANGES IN THE PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT:
   A.   The planned unit development project shall be developed only according
to the approved and recorded final plat and all supporting data. The recorded
final plat and supporting data together with all recorded amendments shall be
binding on the applicant, their successors, grantees, and assigns and shall
limit and control the use of premises and location of structures in the planned
unit development project as set forth therein.
      1.   Major Changes: Changes which alter the concept or intent of the
planned unit development including increases in density, increases in the
height of buildings, reductions or proposed open space, changes in the
development schedule, changes in road standards, or changes in the final
governing agreements, provisions, or covenants, or other changes, may be
approved only by submission of a new preliminary plat and supporting data and
following the "preliminary approval" steps and subsequent amendment of the
final planned unit development plat.
All changes to the final plat shall be recorded with the County Recorder of
Deeds as amendments to the final plat or reflected in the recording of a new
"corrected" final plat.
      2.   Minor Changes: The Village Plan Commission may approve minor
changes, errors, or omissions, in the planned unit development which do not
change the concept or intent of the development, without going through the
"preliminary approval" steps. Minor changes shall be any change not defined as
a major change. (Ord., 4-7-70)
4-9-2-6: SCHEDULE:
The President and Board of Trustees shall consider the planned unit development
subject to revocation if construction falls more than two (2) years behind the
schedule filed with the final plat. Extensions in the building schedule may be
granted by the Plan Commission. (Ord., 4-7-70)
4-9-3: LOCATION:
The planned unit development is authorized as a special use in each of the
zoning districts of this Title. (Ord., 4-7-70)
4-9-4: SPECIFIC CONTENT:
The planned unit development plats and supporting data shall include the
following information; unless waived by the Plan Commission. (Ord., 4-7-70)
4-9-4-1: PRE-APPLICATION STAGE:
   A.   General Site Information: Data regarding site conditions, land
characteristics, available community facilities and utilities, existing
covenants, and other related information.
   B.   Sketch Plan: A drawing in simple sketch form showing the proposed
location and extent of the land use, streets, lots, and other features.
   C.   Legal Description: A property survey and legal description of the site
proposed for development. (Ord., 4-7-70)
4-9-4-2: PRELIMINARY PLAT STAGE:
   A.   Detailed Plan: A drawing of the planned unit development shall be
prepared at a scale of not less than one inch equals one hundred feet (1" =
100') and shall show such designations as proposed streets (public and
private), all buildings and their use, common open space, recreation
facilities, parking areas, service areas, and other facilities to indicate the
character of the proposed development. The submission may be composed of one or
more sheets and drawings and shall include:
      1.   Boundary Lines: Bearings and distances.
      2.   Easements: General location, width, and purpose.
      3.   Streets On and Adjacent to the Tract: Street name, right- of-way
width, existing or proposed center line elevations, pavement type, walks,
curbs, gutters, culverts, etc.
      4.   Utilities On and Adjacent to the Tract: Location, size, and invert
elevation of sanitary, storm, and combined sewers; location and size of water
mains; location of gas lines, fire hydrants, electric and telephone lines, and
street lights; direction and distance to and size of nearest usable water mains
and sewers adjacent to the tract showing invert elevation of sewers.
      5.   Ground Elevations on the Tract: For land that slopes less than one-
half of one percent (.05%), show one foot (1') contours; show spot elevations
at all breaks in grades, along all drainage channels or swales, and at selected
points not more than one hundred feet (100') apart in all directions; for land
that slopes more than one-half of one percent (.05%) show two foot (2')
contours.
      6.   Subsurface Conditions on the Tract, if Required by the Plan
Commission: Location and results of tests made to generally ascertain
subsurface soil, rock, and ground water conditions; depth to ground water
unless test pits are dry at a depth of five feet (5'); location and results of
soil percolation tests if individual sewage disposal systems are proposed.
      7.   Other Conditions on the Tract: Watercourses, flood plains, marshes,
rock outcrop, wooded areas, isolated preservable trees one foot (1') or more in
diameter, houses, barns, accessory buildings, and other significant features.
      8.   Other Conditions on Adjacent Land: Approximate direction and
gradient on ground slope, including any embankments or retaining walls;
character and location of major buildings, railroads, power lines, towers, and
other nearby nonresidential land uses or adverse influences; owners of adjacent
unplatted land; for adjacent platted land refer to subdivision plat by name,
and show approximate percent built- up, typical lot size, and dwelling type.
      9.   Zoning on and adjacent to the tract.
      10.   Proposed Public Improvements: Highways or other major improvements
planned by public authorities for future construction on or near the tract.
      11.   Open Space: All parcels of land intended to be dedicated for public
use or reserved for the use of all property owners with the purpose indicated.
      12.   General location, purpose, and height, in feet or stories, of each
building other than single-family residences on individually platted lots.
      13.   Map Data: Name of development north point, and scale, date of
preparation, and acreage of site.
      14.   Miscellaneous: Such additional information as may be required by
the Plan Commission.
   B.   Character: Explanation of the character of the planned development and
the manner in which it has been planned to take advantage of the flexibility of
these regulations.
   C.   Ownership: Statement of present and proposed ownership of all land
within the project, including present tract designation according to official
records in offices of the County Recorder.
   D.   Names: The names and addresses of the persons to whom the notice of the
hearing to be held by the planning agency should be sent (the subdivider, the
designer of the subdivision, and the owners of the land immediately adjoining
the land to platted).
   E.   Schedule: Development schedule indicating:
      1.   Stages in which project will be built with emphasis on area,
density, use, and public facilities such as open space to be developed with
each stage. Overall design of each stage shall be shown on the plat and through
supporting graphic material
      2.   Estimated dates for beginning and completion of each stage.
      3.   If different land use types are to be included within the planned
unit development, the schedule must include the mix of uses to be built in each
stage.
   F.   Covenants: Proposed agreements, provisions, or covenants which will
govern the use, maintenance, and continued protection of the planned
development and any of its common open space.
   G.   Density: Provide information on the density of residential uses and the
number of dwelling units by type.
   H.   Nonresidential Use; Provide information on the type and amount of
ancillary and nonresidential uses in a residential development.
   I.   Service Facilities: Provide information on all service facilities and
off-street parking facilities.
   J.   Architectural Plans: Preliminary architectural plans for all primary
buildings shall be submitted in sufficient detail to permit an understanding of
the style of the development, the design of the building, and the number, size,
and type of dwelling units.
   K.   Facilities Plans: Preliminary plans for:
      1.   Roads including classification, width of right of way, width of
pavement, and typical construction details.
      2.   Sanitary sewers.
      3.   Storm drainage.
      4.   Water supply system.
      5.   Lighting program.
   L.   Need: Provide an economic feasibility study of the proposed
development, including information on land utilization and marketing potential.
(Ord., 4-7-70)
4-9-4-3: FINAL PLAT STAGE:
   A.   Final Detailed Plan: A final planned unit development plat, suitable
for recording with the County Recorder of Deeds shall be prepared. The purpose
of the planned unit development plat is to designate with particularity the
land subdivided into conventional lots as well as the division of other land,
not so treated, into common open areas and building areas. The final planned
unit development plat shall include, but not be limited to:
      1.   An accurate legal description of the entire area under immediate
development within the planned development.
      2.   If subdivided lands are included, a subdivision plat of all
subdivided lands in the same form and meeting all the requirements of a normal
subdivision plat.
      3.   An accurate legal description of each separate unsubdivided use
area, including common open space.
      4.   Designation of the exact location of all buildings to be
constructed.
      5.   Certificates, scale, and signatures required for the dedication of
lands, and recording the document.
      6.   Tabulations on separate unsubdivided use area, including land area,
number of buildings, number of dwelling units, and dwelling units per acre.
   B.   Common Open Space Documents: All common open space shall be either
conveyed to a Municipal or public corporation, conveyed to a not-for-profit
corporation or entity established for the purpose of benefiting the owners and
residents of the planned development or retained by the developer with legally
binding guarantees, in a form approved by the Village Attorney, that the common
open space will be permanently preserved as open area. All land conveyed to a
not-for-profit corporation or like entity, shall be subject to the right of
said corporation to impose a legally enforceable lien for maintenance and
improvement of the common open space.
   C.   Public Facilities: All public facilities and improvements made
necessary as a result of the planned unit development shall be either
constructed in advance of the approval of the final plat or escrow deposits, or
performance bonds posted to guarantee construction of the required
improvements.
   D.   Guarantee Deposit: A deposit shall be made to the Village in cash, or
maintenance bond equal to fifteen percent (15%) of the estimated cost of public
facility installations. This deposit shall be a guarantee of satisfactory
performance of the facilities constructed within the planned unit development
and shall be held by the Village for a period of eighteen (18) months. After
such eighteen (18) months, the deposit shall be refunded if no defects have
developed, then the balance of such deposit shall be refunded after
reimbursement for amounts expended in correcting defective facilities.
   E.   Delinquent Taxes: A certificate shall be furnished from the County
collector that he finds no delinquent taxes and that all special assessments
constituting a lien on the whole or any part of the property of the planned
unit development have been paid.
   F.   Covenants: Final agreements, provisions, or covenants which will govern
the use, maintenance and continued protection of the planned unit development.
(Ord., 4-7-70)
4-9-5: STANDARDS:
The planned unit development must meet the following standards:
   A.   Comprehensive Plan: A planned unit development must conform with the
intent and spirit of the proposals of the Comprehensive Plan.
   B.   Size: The site of the planned unit development must be under single
ownership and/or unified control and be not less than five (5) acres in area.
   C.   Compatibility: The uses permitted in a planned unit development must be
of a type and so located so as to exercise no undue detrimental influence upon
surrounding properties.
   D.   Need: A clear showing of need must be made.
   E.   Space Between Buildings: The minimum horizontal distance between
buildings shall be:
      1.   Fifteen feet (15') between one story, two (2) story, two and one-
half (21/2) story buildings or combinations thereof.
      2.   Equal to the height of the taller buildings in the case of
freestanding unattached buildings other than one, two (2) or two and one-half
(21/2) story buildings.
   F.   Yards: The required yards along the periphery of the planned unit
development shall be at least equal in width or depth to that of the adjacent
zoning district.
Buildings of more than twenty four feet (24') in height shall provide a setback
from any property line of not less than equal to the height of such buildings.
   G.   Parking Requirements: Adequate parking shall be provided and in no
event shall the parking be less than that provided for in Chapter 10 of this
Title.
   H.   Traffic: Adequate provision shall be made to provide ingress and egress
so designed as to minimize traffic congestion in the public streets.
   I.   Density: The density of any planned unit development shall not exceed,
by more than fifteen percent (15%), the density allowed in the district in
which the planned unit development is located. Land within the planned unit
development which is used for industrial purposes, commercial purposes, and
open space may be included as gross area for calculations of density.
   J.   Other Standards: The planned unit development may depart from strict
conformance with the required density, dimension, area, bulk, use, and other
regulations for the standard zoning districts and other provisions of this
Title to the extent specified in the preliminary land use and zoning plat and
documents authorizing the planned unit development so long as the planned unit
development will not be detrimental to or endanger the public health, safety,
morals, comfort, or general welfare. (Ord., 4-7-70)
4-9-6: FINDINGS:
The Plan Commission shall provide findings of fact setting forth the reasons
for the recommendation, and said findings shall set forth with particularity in
what respects the proposal would be in the public interest including but not
limited to findings of fact on the following:
   A.   In what respects the proposed plan is consistent with the stated
purpose of the planned unit development regulations.
   B.   The extent to which the proposed plan meets the requirements and
standards of the planned unit development regulations.
   C.   The extent to which the proposed plan departs from the zoning and
subdivision regulations otherwise applicable to the subject property, including
but not limited to the density, dimension, area, bulk, and use, and the reasons
why such departures are deemed to be in the public interest.
   D.   The physical design of the proposed plan and the manner in which said
design makes adequate provision for public services, provides adequate control
over vehicular traffic, provides for and protects designated common open space,
and furthers the amenities of light and air, recreation and visual enjoyment.
   E.   The relationship and compatibility of the proposed plan to the adjacent
properties and neighborhood.
   F.   The desirability of the proposed plan to physical development, tax base
and economic well-being of the entire community.
   G.   The conformity with the intent and spirit of the Comprehensive Plan.
(Ord., 4-7-70)
4-9-7: CONDITIONS AND GUARANTEES:
Prior to the granting of any planned unit development the Plan Commission may
recommend, and the Village Board may stipulate, such conditions and
restrictions upon the establishment, location, design, layout, height, density,
construction, maintenance, aesthetics, operation and other elements of the
planned unit development as deemed necessary for the protection of the public
interest, improvement of the development, protection of the adjacent area, and
to secure compliance with the standards specified in Section
 4-9-5 of this Chapter. In all cases in which planned unit developments are
granted, the Village Board shall require such evidence and guarantees as it may
deem necessary as proof that the conditions stipulated in connection therewith
are being, and will be complied with. (Ord., 4-7-70)
CHAPTER 10
OFF-STREET PARKING AND LOADING
SECTION:
4-10-1: Off-Street Parking
4-10-1-1: Scope
4-10-1-2: General Requirements
4-10-1-3: Location
4-10-1-4: Combined Facility
4-10-1-5: Design, Development and Maintenance
4-10-1-6: Units of Measurement
4-10-1-7: Space Required
4-10-1-8: Plot Plan
4-10-2: Off-Street Loading
4-10-2-1: When Required
4-10-2-2: Location
4-10-2-3: Design, Development and Maintenance
4-10-2-4: Amount of Space Required
4-10-1: OFF-STREET PARKING:
4-10-1-1: SCOPE:
The provisions of this Chapter shall apply and govern in all zoning districts.
(Ord., 4-7-70)
4-10-1-2: GENERAL REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   For all uses established or placed into operation after the effective
date hereof, there shall be constructed, provided, preserved, and maintained
the amount of off-street parking space hereinafter set forth.
   B.   Whenever the intensity of use of any structure or premises shall be
increased through the addition of dwelling units, gross floor area, seating
capacity, additional employment, or other unit of measurement, such additional
parking as required herein to provide for the expanded use shall be provided.
   C.   Parking in existence on the effective date hereof or that was provided
voluntarily after such effective date, shall not hereafter be reduced below, or
if already less than, shall not further be reduced below, the requirements of
this Title for a new use.
   D.   No vehicle shall be parked in any yard area except upon a regularly
constructed driveway which has a continuous connection to a public right-of-
way, public alley, or public access easement. A regularly constructed driveway
that currently exists as gravel or stone may be expanded upon with gravel or
stone. Formally constructed parking lots may be allowed in the front yard if
authorized by the Zoning Board of Appeals, and provided that the district does
not require that the front yard be landscaped and devoted to no other use, and
further provided that the parking is in accord with the other provisions of
this title. (Ord., 4-7-70; amd. Ord. 1303, 10-1-2019)
4-10-1-3: LOCATION:
Off-street parking space shall be located on the same lot as the use for which
provided, except as otherwise specifically provided:
   A.   Special Location Plan: Pursuant to the procedure hereinafter set forth,
either part or all of the required off- street parking space may be located off
the lot of the use for which the space is provided. Also two (2) or more uses
may share the same off-street parking space and each of such uses may be
considered as having provided such shared space individually. The following
limitations shall apply to the "special location plan".
      1.   Separation from Use: Off-street parking shall be located as
hereinafter specified; where a distance is specified, such distance shall be
the walking distance measured from the nearest point of the parking facility to
the nearest point of the building that such facility is required to serve.
         a.   In all residential districts, parking facilities shall be located
on the same lot or lots with the building they are required to serve.
         b.   In all commercial districts, parking facilities shall be located
within three hundred feet (300') of the building they are required to serve.
         c.   In all industrial districts, parking facilities shall be located
within six hundred feet (600') of the building they are required to serve.
      2.   Sharing of Space: Two (2) or more uses may share the same off-street
parking space if the schedules of operation of all such uses are such that none
of the uses sharing the space requires the off-street parking space the same
time as any other use sharing the space. Each such use that is sharing space
shall be considered as having provided such shared space individually.
      3.   Application: All applications for approval of a special location
plan hereunder shall be filed with the Plan Commission by the owners of the
entire land area to be included within the special location plan, the owner or
owners of all structures then existing on said land area and all encumbrances
of said land area and structures shall contain sufficient evidence to establish
to the satisfaction of the Plan Commission that the applicants are the owners
and encumbrancers of the designated land and structures; shall contain such
information and representations required by this Title or deemed necessary; and
shall include plans showing the following details:
         a.   The location of the uses or structures for which off-street
parking space is required.
         b.   The location at which the off-street parking space is to be
provided.
      4.   Procedure:
         a.   All applications shall be reviewed and approved by the Plan
Commission. Any approval may establish necessary conditions and limitations.
         b.   Upon approval of a special location plan, a copy of such plan
shall be registered and recorded among the records of the Village.
         c.   All special location plans registered and recorded hereunder
shall be binding upon the applicants for such special plans, their successors
and assigns, shall limit and control the issuance and validity of all zoning
permits and zoning certificates and shall restrict and limit the use and
operation of all land and structures included within such special plans to all
conditions and limitations specified in such plans and the approvals thereof.
         d.   All special location plans registered and recorded hereunder may
be amended pursuant to the same procedure and subject to the same limitations
and requirements by which such plans were approved, registered and recorded.
         e.   Upon application to the Plan Commission by the owner or owners of
the entire land area included within any special location plan registered and
recorded hereunder, the owner or owners of any structures then existing thereon
and all encumbrancers of said land and structures, any such plan may be
withdrawn, either partially or completely, from registration and released from
recording if all uses, land and structures remaining under such plan can be
made to comply with all conditions and limitations of the plan and all uses,
land and structures withdrawn from such plan can be made to comply with all
regulations established by this Title and unrelated to any special location
plan. (Ord., 4-7-70)
4-10-1-4: COMBINED FACILITY:
Off-street parking space shall be provided for each use. However, two (2) or
more uses may jointly provide for one combined parking facility.
   A.   Where off-street parking space is combined and used jointly by two (2)
or more uses having different standards for determining the amount of off-
street parking space required, the parking space shall be adequate in area to
provide the sum total of off-street parking space requirements of all such
uses.
   B.   Where off-street parking space is combined and used jointly by two (2)
or more uses having the same standards for determining the amount of off-street
parking space required, all such uses, for the purposes of this Chapter, shall
be considered a single unit and the gross floor area of all such uses in all
structures on the same lot or the number of employees of all such uses in all
structures on the same lot as fixed by the applicable standard, shall be taken
as a single total for the purpose of determining the amount of off- street
parking space required. (Ord., 4-7-70)
4-10-1-5: DESIGN, DEVELOPMENT AND MAINTENANCE:
Every parcel of land hereafter used as a public or private parking area,
including a commercial parking lot and also an automobile or trailer sales lot,
shall be designed, developed, and maintained in accordance with the following
requirements:
   A.   In the residential districts, unless fully enclosed, parking areas
shall be used only by vehicles up to three- fourths (3/4) ton manufacturer's
capacity rating.
   B.   Shall not be used for the sale, repair, dismantling or servicing of any
vehicles, equipment, materials or supplies; except when the zoning district
allows such use.
   C.   Shall be provided with an all-weather surfacing maintained at all times
in such a manner as to prevent the release of dust and to be free of dust,
trash and debris. If such surfacing would be detrimental because of the
excessive runoff of storm water, the Zoning Board of Appeals may direct such
area to be left unpaved and designed to remain dust-free and attractive.
   D.   Shall be pitched and drained so as to prevent the flow of water from
such areas onto adjoining property or onto streets or alleys that have no
drainage facilities.
   E.   Off-street parking areas for more than four (4) vehicles, that adjoin
or are across the street from property zoned for any residential use, shall
have a dense evergreen planting, fence, masonry wall, and/or such other
screening, as may be determined by the Plan Commission.
   F.   Shall be provided with entrances and exits not less than twelve feet
(12') or more than thirty five feet (35') in width and so located as to
minimize traffic congestion.
   G.   Shall be provided with wheel guards or bumper guards so located that no
part of parked vehicles will extend beyond the parking space.
   H.   Where hazards exist which can be eliminated or lessened by lighting,
the Plan Commission may require lighting at such hours and in such manner as
deemed necessary in the interest of the public safety and security. Such
lighting facilities shall be so arranged that they neither unreasonably disturb
occupants of adjacent residential properties nor interfere with traffic.
   I.   Each off-street parking space shall have an area of not less than one
hundred eighty (180) square feet exclusive of access drives or aisles, and
shall be of usable shape and conditions. (Ord., 4-7-70)
4-10-1-6: UNITS OF MEASUREMENT:
For purposes of this Chapter the following units of measurement shall apply:
   A.   Floor Area: In the case of offices, merchandising or service types of
uses, "floor area" shall mean the gross floor area or gross leasable area
designed for tenant or owner occupancy and exclusive use, including basements,
mezzanines, and upper floors, if any, expressed in square feet measured from
the center lines of joint partitions and exteriors of outside walls. It shall
not include areas used principally for utilities and space incidental to the
management or maintenance of the building.
   B.   Dwelling Unit: A dwelling unit shall mean one room, or a suite of two
(2) or more rooms, designed for or used by one family for living and sleeping
purposes and having only one kitchen or kitchenette.
   C.   Seat or Bench: A seat shall be the space intended for one individual;
in places where patrons or spectators occupy benches, pews, or other seating
facilities, each twenty inches (20") of such seating facilities shall be
counted as one seat.
   D.   Employees: Employees shall be based on the maximum number of persons on
duty or residing, or both, on the premises at any one time.
   E.   Fractions: When units of measurement result in the requirement of a
fractional space, any fraction shall require one parking space. (Ord., 4-7-70)
4-10-1-7: SPACE REQUIRED:
At least the following numbers of usable off-street parking spaces, shall be
provided; also adequate provision for ingress, egress, and maneuvering shall be
provided.
A.   Residential Uses:
                                                                                2 parking
   One-family dwellings and two-family dwellings                            spaces for
                                                                                each dwelling
                                                                                unit
                                                                                11/2 parking
   Multiple-family dwelling                                                 spaces for
                                                                                every dwelling
                                                                                unit
                                                                                1 parking
                                                                                space for each
                                                                                guest or
                                                                                sleeping room
   Hotels, motels, inns and auto courts                                     or suite, plus
                                                                                1 additional
                                                                                space for the
                                                                                owner or
                                                                                manager
                                                                                1 parking
                                                                                space for each
                                                                                2 lodging
   Lodging, rooming and boarding houses                                     rooms, plus 1
                                                                                space for the
                                                                                owner or
                                                                                manager.
B.   Commercial Uses:
                                                                                Stacking space
                                                                                shall be
                                                                                provided to
                                                                                accommodate
                                                                                waiting
                                                                                automobiles
                                                                                equal in
                                                                                number to 5
                                                                                times the
                                                                                maximum
                                                                                capacity of
                                                                                the automobile
                                                                                laundry for
                                                                                each wash
   Automobile laundry                                                       rack, plus 1
                                                                                parking space
                                                                                for each 2
                                                                                employees.
                                                                                Maximum
                                                                                capacity, in
                                                                                this instance,
                                                                                shall mean the
                                                                                greatest
                                                                                number of
                                                                                automobiles
                                                                                undergoing
                                                                                some phase of
                                                                                laundering at
                                                                                the same time.
                                                                                2 parking
                                                                                spaces for
                                                                                each island of
   Automobile service stations                                              pumps and each
                                                                                service stall
                                                                                plus 1 parking
                                                                                space for each
                                                                                2 employees.
                                                                                1 parking
                                                                                space for each
                                                                                200 square
                                                                                feet of floor
                                                                                area. Drive-in
                                                                                establishments
   Banks                                                                    shall provide
                                                                                6 stacking
                                                                                spaces per
                                                                                teller or
                                                                                customer
                                                                                service
                                                                                window.
                                                                                2 parking
                                                                                spaces for
   Barber shop                                                              each barber
                                                                                chair plus 1
                                                                                per each
                                                                                employee.
                                                                                1 parking
                                                                                space for each
   Beauty parlor                                                            150 square
                                                                                feet of floor
                                                                                area.
                                                                                3 parking
                                                                                spaces for
                                                                                each alley,
                                                                                plus such
                                                                                additional
   Bowling alleys                                                           spaces as may
                                                                                be required
                                                                                herein for
                                                                                affiliated
                                                                                users (bars,
                                                                                restaurants,
                                                                                and the like).
                                                                                1 parking
                                                                                space for each
   Furniture and appliance stores, household equipment or furniture repair   600 square
shops                                                                          feet of floor
                                                                                area in excess
                                                                                of 1,000
                                                                                square feet.
                                                                                1 parking
                                                                                space for each
   Motor vehicle sales and machinery sales                                  800 square
                                                                                feet of floor
                                                                                area.
                                                                                 
                                                                                1 parking
                                                                                space for each
                                                                                100 square
                                                                                feet of floor
                                                                                area, or 1
   Restaurants or establishments dispensing food and/or beverages for       parking space
consumption on the premises (not including drive-in establishments)             for each 3
                                                                                seats, plus 1
                                                                                parking space
                                                                                for each 3
                                                                                employees,
                                                                                whichever is
                                                                                greater.
                                                                                1 parking
   Restaurants (Carry-out)                                                  space for each
                                                                                50 square feet
                                                                                of floor area.
                                                                                1 parking
                                                                                space for each
   Restaurants (Drive-in) and/or refreshment stand (where food and/or        20 square feet
beverage is consumed in a vehicle)                                             of floor area,
                                                                                but not less
                                                                                than 10
                                                                                spaces.
                                                                                1 parking
                                                                                space for each
   Retail stores                                                            180 square
                                                                                feet of floor
                                                                                area.
                                                                                1 parking
                                                                                space for each
                                                                                4 seats up to
   Theaters (Indoor)                                                        400 seats,
                                                                                plus 1 for
                                                                                each 6 seats
                                                                                over 400
                                                                                seats.
                                                                                Reservoir
                                                                                parking spaces
                                                                                at the
                                                                                entrance to
   Theaters (Outdoor)                                                       the theater
                                                                                equal to 10%
                                                                                of the vehicle
                                                                                capacity of
                                                                                the theater.
                                                                                6 parking
                                                                                spaces for
                                                                                each chapel or
                                                                                parlor, or 1
                                                                                for each 50
                                                                                square feet of
                                                                                floor area
                                                                                used for
   Undertaking establishments, funeral parlors                              services,
                                                                                whichever is
                                                                                greater, plus
                                                                                1 parking
                                                                                space for each
                                                                                funeral
                                                                                vehicle kept
                                                                                on the
                                                                                premises.
C.   Office Uses:
                                                                                1 parking
                                                                                space for each
   Business or professional offices                                         250 square
                                                                                feet of floor
                                                                                area.
                                                                                2 parking
                                                                                spaces for
                                                                                each office,
   Medical or dental clinics                                                examining room
                                                                                or treatment
                                                                                room, plus 1
                                                                                for each
                                                                                employee.
D.   Industrial Uses:
                                                                                1 parking
                                                                                space for each
                                                                                2 employees,
   Manufacturing uses or any establishments engaged in production,           plus 1 parking
processing, cleaning, servicing, testing or repair of materials, goods, or     space for each
products                                                                        vehicle used
                                                                                in the conduct
                                                                                of the
                                                                                enterprise.
                                                                                1 parking
                                                                                space for each
   Truck terminals                                                          2 employees,
                                                                                plus 1 for
                                                                                each truck.
                                                                                1 parking
                                                                                space for each
                                                                                2 employees,
                                                                                plus 1 space
   Warehouses and storage buildings                                         for each
                                                                                vehicle used
                                                                                in the conduct
                                                                                of the
                                                                                enterprise.
                                                                                1 parking
                                                                                space for each
   Wholesale establishments (but not including warehouses and storage        600 square
buildings other than accessory)                                                feet of floor
                                                                                area in excess
                                                                                of 4,000
                                                                                square feet.
E.   Schools, Institutions, and Places of Assembly:
                                                                                1 parking
                                                                                space for each
                                                                                5 seats or
                                                                                parking spaces
   Auditoriums, gymnasiums, convention halls, and all places of assembly    equal to 1/
                                                                                5 the capacity
                                                                                of the
                                                                                facility in
                                                                                persons.
                                                                                1 parking
                                                                                space for each
   Churches                                                                 4 seats in the
                                                                                main
                                                                                auditorium.
                                                                                1 parking
                                                                                space for each
                                                                                5 students
                                                                                (based on the
                                                                                maximum number
                                                                                of students
   Colleges, universities, trade schools                                    that the
                                                                                facility is
                                                                                designed to
                                                                                handle at any
                                                                                one time),
                                                                                plus 1 for
                                                                                each 2
                                                                                employees.
                                                                                2 parking
                                                                                spaces for
                                                                                each
                                                                                classroom.
                                                                                However, if a
                                                                                place of
                                                                                assembly is
                                                                                provided in
                                                                                the school and
                                                                                the parking
                                                                                spaces
   Elementary school                                                        provided for
                                                                                the place of
                                                                                assembly is
                                                                                equal to or in
                                                                                excess of the
                                                                                requirement
                                                                                for the
                                                                                classrooms,
                                                                                the classroom
                                                                                requirement
                                                                                need not be
                                                                                provided.
                                                                                1 parking
                                                                                space for each
                                                                                2 beds, plus 1
                                                                                for each staff
   Hospitals                                                                doctor or
                                                                                visiting
                                                                                doctor, plus 1
                                                                                for each 2
                                                                                employees.
                                                                                1 parking
                                                                                space for each
                                                                                8 students
                                                                                (based on the
                                                                                maximum number
                                                                                of students
   Junior high and high school                                              that the
                                                                                facility is
                                                                                designed to
                                                                                handle at any
                                                                                one time),
                                                                                plus 1 for
                                                                                each 2
                                                                                employees.
                                                                                1 parking
   Nursery school                                                           space for each
                                                                                employee.
                                                                                1 parking
                                                                                space for each
   Nursing home, convalescent home and similar type establishments          3 beds, plus 1
                                                                                for each 2
                                                                                employees.
                                                                                1 parking
                                                                                space for each
   Library                                                                  1,000 square
                                                                                feet of floor
                                                                                area.
                                                                                Parking spaces
                                                                                equal to 1/
   Private clubs and lodges                                                 5 the capacity
                                                                                of the
                                                                                facility in
                                                                                persons.
 
   F.   Other Uses: For uses not listed heretofore in this schedule of parking
requirements, parking spaces shall be provided on the same basis as required
for the most similar listed uses, or as determined by the Zoning Board of
Appeals. (Ord., 4-7-70)
4-10-1-8: PLOT PLAN:
Any application for a building permit, or a certificate of occupancy shall
include therewith a plot plan, drawn to scale and fully dimensioned, showing
all parking facilities required by this Title. (Ord., 4-7-70)
4-10-2: OFF-STREET LOADING:
4-10-2-1: WHEN REQUIRED:
Off-street loading space shall be required and maintained in connection with
any building or part thereof, hereafter erected or altered which is to be
occupied by uses requiring the receipt or distribution of materials or
merchandise. (Ord., 4-7-70)
4-10-2-2: LOCATION:
Off-street loading space shall be located on the same lot as the structure for
which provided. (Ord., 4-7-70)
4-10-2-3: DESIGN, DEVELOPMENT AND MAINTENANCE:
Every parcel of land hereafter used for off-street loading space shall be
designed, developed, and maintained in accordance with the following
requirements:
   A.   Shall be graded for proper drainage and provided with an all-weather
surfacing maintained at all times in such a manner as to prevent the release of
dust and to be free of dust, trash and debris.
   B.   Off-street loading spaces that adjoin or are across the street from
property zoned for any residential use, shall have a dense evergreen planting,
fence, masonry wall, or such other screening, as may be determined by the Plan
Commission. The Plan Commission shall also determine the height, location and
density of screening used to provide adequate protection to adjoining property.
   C.   Shall be provided with entrances and exits not less than twelve feet
(12') or more than thirty five feet (35') in width and so located as to
minimize traffic congestion.
   D.   No portion of a vehicle shall project into a street or alley while
being loaded or unloaded.
   E.   Each off-street loading space shall be not less than ten feet (10') in
width, twenty five feet (25') in length, and twelve feet (12') in height,
exclusive of access drives. When more than three (3) spaces are required, the
spaces other than the first three (3) shall be twelve feet (12') in width,
sixty five feet (65') in length, and fifteen feet (15') in height.
   F.   Off-street loading space may occupy all or any part of any required
yard space, unless otherwise prohibited by this Title. (Ord., 4-7-70)
4-10-2-4: AMOUNT OF SPACE REQUIRED:
At least the following amounts of off-street loading space shall be provided,
plus an area or means adequate for maneuvering, ingress and egress:
 
Square Feet of Gross Floor Area         Required Number of Spaces
Up to 20,000 square feet                1
20,001 to 40,000 square feet            2
40,001 to 70,000 square feet            3
70,001 to 120,000 square feet           4
120,001 to 200,000 square feet          5
For each additional 100,000 square feet 1 additional
 
(Ord., 4-7-70)
CHAPTER 11
SIGNS
SECTION:
4-11-1: Scope
4-11-2: Interpretation
4-11-3: Rules
4-11-4: Definitions
4-11-5: Limit On Number Of Signs
4-11-6: Limit On Sign Area
4-11-7: Permits For Permanent Signs
4-11-8: Permits For Temporary Signs
4-11-9: Prohibited Signs
4-11-10: Placement Of Signs On Corner Lots
4-11-11: Placement Of Signs On Lots
4-11-12: Illumination Of Signs
4-11-13: Design, Safety And Maintenance
4-11-14: Certain Signs Permitted In All Districts
4-11-15: Signs Permitted In Residential And Agricultural Districts
4-11-16: Signs In Commercial Zoning Districts
4-11-17: Signs In Industrial Zoning Districts
4-11-18: Comprehensive Sign Plan
4-11-19: Nonconforming Signs
4-11-20: Duties
4-11-1: SCOPE:
From and after the effective date of this chapter, the use of all signs and
portions of signs erected, altered with respect to height and area of sign
face, added to, or relocated in the village shall be in conformity with the
provisions of this chapter. Any existing sign not in conformity with the
regulations herein prescribed shall be regarded as nonconforming. (Ord. 1035,
10-6-2009)
4-11-2: INTERPRETATION:
   A.   The provisions of this chapter shall be deemed to be an expression of
the maximum allowable number and size of signs which causes the least potential
conflict with surrounding uses and which promotes improved physical appearance
and aesthetics within the village.
   B.   Where the conditions imposed by any provision of this chapter upon the
control of signs are either more restrictive or less restrictive than
comparable conditions imposed by the provisions of any other law, code,
ordinance, statute, resolution, rule or regulation of any governmental body,
the regulations which are more restrictive or which impose higher standards
shall govern.
   C.   When a sign type is not specifically listed in the sections devoted to
permitted signs, it shall be assumed that such signs are hereby expressly
prohibited. (Ord. 1035, 10-6-2009)
4-11-3: RULES:
The language set forth in this chapter shall be interpreted as follows:
   A.   Words used in the present tense shall include the future; and words
used in the singular number shall include the plural number, and the plural the
singular.
   B.   The word "shall" is mandatory and not discretionary.
   C.   The word "may" is permissive.
   D.   All measured distances or standards shall be to the nearest integer; if
a fraction is one-half (1/2) or less, the integer next below shall be taken.
   E.   Height of signs shall be measured to the highest point thereon, from
the crown of the street directly opposite the sign, or from the average normal
grade level directly below the sign, whichever is higher. (Ord. 1035, 10-6-
2009)
4-11-4: DEFINITIONS:
The following terms when used in this chapter shall be construed as follows:
   CHANGEABLE COPY SIGN: A sign or portion thereof which has a reader board for
the display of text information in which each alphanumeric character, graphic
or symbol is defined by objects, not consisting of an illumination device and
may be changed or rearranged manually or mechanically with characters, letters,
or illustrations that can be changed or rearranged without altering the face or
the surface of the sign.
   CHANGEABLE COPY SIGN, ELECTRONIC: A sign or portion thereof that displays
electronic, nonpictorial, text information in which each alphanumeric character
is defined by a small number of matrix elements using different combinations of
light emitting diodes (LEDs), fiber optics, light bulbs or other illumination
devices within the display area.
   COMPREHENSIVE SIGN PLAN: A sign plan for a building and its associated
grounds, a multibuilding development site or a multi-tenant building indicating
the number, types, locations, dimensions, materials, and colors of signs
proposed.
   CORNER LOT: A lot with property lines of two (2) streets bisecting on an
angle.
   ELECTRONIC GRAPHIC DISPLAY SIGN: A sign or portion thereof that displays
electronic, static images, static graphics or static pictures, with or without
text information, defined by a small number of matrix elements using different
combinations of light emitting diodes (LEDs), fiber optics, light bulbs or
other illumination devices within the display area where the message change
sequence is accomplished immediately or by means of fade, repixalization or
dissolve modes. Electronic graphic display signs include computer programmable,
microprocessor controlled electronic or digital displays.
   FACADE: The face or wall of a building as it is presented to view; the
apparent width and/or height of a building as viewed from streets, driveways,
and parking lots. Minor changes in wall elevations do not constitute the
creation of additional facades.
   FREESTANDING SIGN: A permanent sign which is supported by a structure or
supports that are permanently anchored in the ground and that are independent
from any building or other structure.
   HUMAN SIGN: Animals or human beings, live or simulated, holding or carrying
a sign, or dressed in costume, designed or used so as to attract attention to
the premises or activity.
   MULTIVISION SIGN: Any sign composed in whole or in part of a series of
vertical or horizontal slats or cylinders that are capable of being rotated at
intervals so that partial rotation of the group of slats or cylinders produces
a different image and when properly functioning allows a single sign structure
to display at any given time one of two (2) or more images.
   NEON SIGN: Brightly colored signs produced by pumping neon and other noble
gases through a vacuum tube and applying electricity.
   PERMANENT SIGN: Any sign which is permanently attached to a structure or a
foundation.
   REAL ESTATE SIGN: A sign placed upon a property advertising that particular
property for sale or lease.
   RESIDENTIAL MONUMENT SIGN: A permanent freestanding sign placed at the major
entrances to and identifying a multi-family development or multi-family planned
unit development.
   SHOPPING CENTER: A commercial development in excess of ten (10) acres of
land improved with a structure of at least fifty thousand (50,000) square feet
containing five (5) or more distinct and separate retail businesses.
   SHOPPING PLAZA: A commercial development in excess of one acre of land,
improved with a structure containing three (3) or more distinct and separate
retail businesses, also sharing common parking areas and access drives.
   SIGN: Any structure, vehicle, device, or any part thereof, which shall be
used to identify, advertise, or attract attention to any object, product,
place, activity, person, institution, organization, firm, group, commodity,
profession, enterprise, industry, or business and which shall display or
include any letter, word, model, number, banner, flag, pennant, insignia,
device or representation used as an announcement, direction, or advertisement,
and which is intended to be seen by persons in the public right of way.
   SIGN AREA: Unless otherwise specified, the area of the smallest triangle,
rectangle, or circle which can wholly enclose the surface area of the sign. In
the event that individual letters or insignia of a wall sign are attached
directly to the wall and vary significantly in size, sign area may be computed
using not more than two (2) triangles, rectangles or circles per word or
insignia. Visible faces of a multifaced sign shall be treated as if it were a
single faced sign with only the area of the largest single faced sign visible
at any one time being computed to determine sign area.
   SIGN FACE: The surface of a sign or sign board upon, against or through
which a message is displayed.
   TEMPORARY MOBILE SIGN: Any sign which is manifestly designed to be
transported, including by trailer or on its own wheels, even though the wheels
of such sign may be removed and the remaining chassis or support is converted
to another sign or attached temporarily or permanently to the ground since this
characteristic is based on the design of the sign.
   TEMPORARY SIGN: Signs, freestanding panels, flags, streamers or banners used
to advertise products, prices and services or attract attention, intended to be
displayed a limited length of time and not permanently attached to a structure
or a foundation.
   TEMPORARY WINDOW SIGN: A sign or display installed inside a window or door
window and intended to be viewed from the adjacent public right of way and not
constructed or intended for long term use and permitting reasonable viewing of
the interior or exterior.
   VIDEO DISPLAY SIGN: A sign that changes its message or background in a
manner or method of display characterized by motion or pictorial imagery, which
may or may not include text and depicts action or a special effect to imitate
movement, the presentation of pictorials or graphics displayed in a progression
of frames which give the illusion of motion, including, but not limited to, the
illusion of moving objects, moving patterns or bands of light, or expanding or
contracting shapes, not including electronic changeable copy signs. Video
display signs include projected images or messages with these characteristics
onto buildings or other objects.
   WALL SIGN: A sign attached directly to a building wall which does not extend
more than twelve inches (12") therefrom, nor extend above the eaves line of a
gable, hip or gambrel roof, nor extend above the facade of a flat roof, nor
above the deck line of a mansard roof.
   WINDOW SIGN: A permanent wall sign which is visible to persons in the public
right of way and which is placed within or on the outside of a window or on the
inside of a glass window, or on the inside of a building and within one foot
(1') of a window. (Ord. 1035, 10-6-2009)
4-11-5: LIMIT ON NUMBER OF SIGNS:
The number of signs which may be maintained on any premises is governed by the
zoning district in which the property is located. A double faced sign shall
count as a single sign. When a premises or where a building has both a front
and rear public entrance, a rear sign may be erected. The rear sign shall not
exceed in size the front sign. Signs described in section
 4-11-14 of this chapter shall not be counted in calculating the total number
of signs. (Ord. 1035, 10-6-2009)
4-11-6: LIMIT ON SIGN AREA:
Each premises shall be allowed an aggregate total of four (4) square feet of
signage per linear foot of building frontage, for all signs located on the
property. Premises having frontage on more than one dedicated street will be
allowed signage for frontage on each street in accordance with the above
formula. (Ord. 1035, 10-6-2009)
4-11-7: PERMITS FOR PERMANENT SIGNS:
   A.   No permanent sign shall hereafter be erected, altered, or moved until
the person proposing to erect, alter, or move such sign shall have obtained a
permit therefor from the building commissioner. Such permit shall be issued
only when the sign complies with all of the applicable provisions of this
chapter.
   B.   Any person desiring such a permit shall file application therefor upon
a form which shall contain the following information:
      1.   Name, address, and telephone number of the applicant;
      2.   A plot plan drawn to scale showing the location of the building,
structure or lot to which the sign is to be attached or erected, and showing
the position of the sign in relation to nearby buildings and thoroughfares;
      3.   A plan drawn to scale showing the design of the sign, materials
used, method of construction, and means of attachment to the building or
ground;
      4.   The name of the person, firm, corporation, or association erecting,
altering, or moving said sign;
      5.   Written consent of the owner of the land on which the sign is to be
erected, altered, or relocated;
      6.   Any other information as the building and zoning officer shall
require in order to show full compliance with this and all other applicable
codes of the village. (Ord. 1035, 10-6-2009)
4-11-8: PERMITS FOR TEMPORARY SIGNS:
   A.   Permit Not Required: No permit shall be required for the installation
of temporary signs.
   B.   Duration Of Temporary Signs: Duration of temporary signs shall be as
follows:
      1.   Residential marketing signs, on and off site: Twelve (12) months,
renewable on a six (6) month basis thereafter;
      2.   Commercial or industrial real estate signs, exceeding six (6) square
feet in area: Six (6) months, renewable on a six (6) month basis;
      3.   Temporary mobile signs advertising a special sale or event not to
exceed thirty (30) days and not more than three (3) times per year with at
least thirty (30) days between such advertising periods.
      4.   Temporary signs advertising a special sale or event limited to three
(3) per business location not to exceed fifteen (15) days and not more than six
(6) times per year with at least fifteen (15) days between such advertising
periods.
      5.   A temporary sign displayed for the purpose of advertising a private,
governmental or charitable function prior to and during a unique special event
or occasion, gathering, happening, occurrence, incident, affair or function
(i.e., grand opening, festival, auto race, business anniversary, etc.)
occurring either in or within ten (10) miles of the corporate limits of the
village that is designed to attract people to or through the village.
Signs for unique special events shall be limited to one per business location
and shall not be erected or displayed longer than thirty (30) days prior to the
event unless additional signs and/or a longer period is approved by the village
board of trustees for unique circumstances and must be removed within forty
eight (48) hours upon conclusion of the event. Such signs shall be constructed
of materials that are durable, wind resistant, neat and professional in
appearance and properly secured. Signs for unique special events may only be
erected or displayed on private property and only with the owners' written
permission.
   C.   Searchlights: The use of searchlights for grand openings shall not
exceed seventy two (72) hours in duration. The use of large inflatables (i.e.,
hot air balloons) for special events shall not exceed seventy two (72) hours in
duration.
   D.   Sandwich Board: One sandwich board per public street frontage. The
placement of sandwich board signs under this subsection shall be further
restricted as follows:
      1.   The placement and use of a sandwich board sign is restricted to the
business hours of operation.
      2.   There shall be no less than five feet (5') of unobstructed clearance
upon the sidewalk between the street curb and the building frontage in order to
permit safe and unimpeded pedestrian flow upon the public sidewalks.
      3.   A sandwich board sign shall not be placed in the public roadway.
      4.   A sandwich board sign shall not be permanently anchored to the
ground, shall not exceed five feet (5') in height as measured from the
sidewalk, lawn or other surrounding grade upon which it stands, and shall have
no sign panel in excess of ten (10) square feet in area. (Ord. 1035, 10-6-2009)
4-11-9: PROHIBITED SIGNS:
The following signs are prohibited:
   A.   Moving, rotating or animated signs, except traditional barber poles,
not exceeding two feet (2') in height and projecting not more than twelve
inches (12") from the building, utilized only to identify a haircutting
establishment. In authorizing the latter exemption, the corporate authorities
find it in the public interest to retain this historic symbol of American
commerce.
   B.   Searchlights other than for grand openings.
   C.   Sign illumination that is not steady and constant.
   D.   Signs that emit noise, an odor or other visible matter.
   E.   Signs attached to trees, standpipes, or fire escapes.
   F.   Signs attached to fences, public utility poles or stanchions located in
the right of way other than signs or banners of a community oriented nature
issued by or approved by government officials or public utilities.
   G.   Windows painted or posted in excess of an amount that would restrict
reasonable view of the interior or exterior.
   H.   Human signs.
   I.   Video display signs.
   J.   Multivision signs.
   K.   Signs not listed in sections
4-11-14,
4-11-15,
4-11-16,
4-11-17,
4-11-18 and
4-11-19 of this chapter shall be deemed to be prohibited, even though such
signs are not specifically listed in this section.
   L.   Electronic graphic display signs. (Ord. 1035, 10-6-2009)
4-11-10: PLACEMENT OF SIGNS ON CORNER LOTS:
No sign having a height of more than thirty inches (30") above the crown of the
adjacent streets shall be constructed or placed within the part of the yard or
open area of a corner lot which is included within a triangular area of twenty
five feet (25') from the point of intersection of the two (2) street right of
way lines forming such corner lot. (Ord. 1035, 10-6-2009)
4-11-11: PLACEMENT OF SIGNS ON LOTS:
With the exception of wall mounted signs not projecting more than twelve inches
(12") from wall, no sign shall be placed closer than five feet (5') from any
lot line. Temporary mobile signs shall be located not less than one foot (1')
from the property line and shall not obstruct the view of traffic. (Ord. 1035,
10-6-2009)
4-11-12: ILLUMINATION OF SIGNS:
The illumination of signs shall be diffused or indirect and shall be arranged
so no direct rays shall reflect into a public way or any lot on the perimeter
of the premises on which the signs are located. Exposed light bulbs, flashing,
blinking or traveling and similar illumination are not permitted. (Ord. 1035,
10-6-2009)
4-11-13: DESIGN, SAFETY AND MAINTENANCE:
   A.   All freestanding signs shall be built with similar materials, colors
and design as the primary structure such as wood, brick, stone or other masonry
materials. Colors and design must complement the principal structure.
   B.   Every sign and all parts thereof, including framework, supports,
background, anchors, and wiring systems shall be constructed and maintained in
compliance with the building, electrical and fire protection codes of the
village.
   C.   All signs and all parts thereof shall be kept in a good state of
repair.
   D.   In addition to the general requirements for sign maintenance, all
changeable copy signs shall bear a legible message, other suitable display or
left blank. Electronic devices when not in use may be left blank and unlighted.
Any lighted or electronic changeable copy sign in which the electrical or
lighting components are operating in an erratic, broken or damaged fashion
shall be turned off or removed. (Ord. 1035, 10-6-2009)
4-11-14: CERTAIN SIGNS PERMITTED IN ALL DISTRICTS:
Unless otherwise stated, signs listed in this section are permitted in all
zoning districts and shall not require a sign permit nor be counted when
calculating the number of signs or square footage on a premises. However, such
signs shall conform to all other general regulations in this chapter, for
example, height, area, setback, clearance, etc.:
   A.   Name and address plates which give only the name and address of the
resident of the building, and which are not more than one square foot in sign
area.
   B.   Memorial signs or tablets and signs denoting the date of erection of
buildings, no larger than five (5) square feet.
   C.   No trespassing signs or other such signs regulating the use of a
property, not more than two (2) square feet in sign area in residential
districts and six (6) square feet in all commercial and industrial districts.
   D.   Real estate signs, not exceeding six (6) square feet per side in all
districts. Such real estate signs shall be removed within fifteen (15) days
after the premises so advertised has been sold or leased.
   E.   Signs regulating on premises traffic and parking, and signs denoting
building facilities such as lavatories and public telephone areas, when less
than six (6) square feet in area and bearing no commercial advertising.
   F.   Signs erected by a governmental body, or under the direction of such a
body, and bearing no commercial advertising, such as traffic signs, railroad
crossing signs, safety signs, and signs identifying public schools and
playgrounds.
   G.   The flag, pennant, or insignia of any government, or of any religious,
charitable, or fraternal organization.
   H.   One logo flag of a company shall be allowed provided it is flown with
and is not larger than the American flag.
   I.   Garage sale signs, not exceeding six (6) square feet in area, may be
placed at the curb in residential areas for not to exceed ten (10) days.
   J.   Temporary signs no larger than thirty two (32) square feet in area
advertising the sale of edible farm products on the premises, advertising
auctions, political candidates, or special events of charitable, governmental
or public service groups. Such signs, must be located entirely on privately
owned property and must be removed upon close of the event.
   K.   Temporary window signs of paper or similar material shall be allowed in
commercial districts, provided that such signs are to be used to notify the
public of special sales or current prices, and further provided that such signs
do not restrict the reasonable viewing of the interior or exterior. (Ord. 1035,
10-6-2009)
4-11-15: SIGNS PERMITTED IN RESIDENTIAL AND AGRICULTURAL DISTRICTS:
   A.   All signs enumerated in section
4-11-14 of this chapter.
   B.   Name and address plates for buildings containing more than two (2)
dwelling units, provided that such signs shall not be more than three (3)
square feet in area.
   C.   Identification signs for nonresidential uses, i.e., churches,
cemeteries, golf courses, private nonprofit recreational areas, provided that
such signs are limited to one sign per building entrance, and provided that
each such sign be limited to thirty two (32) square feet of area, and eight
feet (8') in height if a freestanding sign.
   D.   Permanent residential monument signs at entrances to a residential
development or a residential planned unit development and containing no
commercial advertising, constructed entirely upon privately owned property,
constructed of material which is the same or of a more permanent nature than
the material used in the buildings and as approved by the planning and zoning
commission and village board.
   E.   Temporary residential marketing signs at major entrances to planned
unit developments or residential subdivisions; not to exceed one hundred (100)
square feet in area or fifteen feet (15') in height, containing the name of the
development and the names of builders or units therein.
   F.   Temporary residential marketing signs, off site shall be allowed at not
more than four (4) off site locations within the village to call attention and
give directions to the development. Each sign shall be located entirely on
private property, shall not exceed thirty two (32) square feet in area and
shall not have a total height of more than ten feet (10'). Such signs may be
located in any zoning district. Location and construction shall be approved by
the village board upon recommendation of the planning and zoning commission.
G.   Identification signs for churches, cemeteries, golf courses and private
non- profit uses which have street frontage on a state highway may follow the
requirements set forth in Section
4-11-16, provided that such signs must be located directly on the frontage of a
state highway. (Ord. 1035, 10-6-2009; amd. Ord. 1300-19, 9-3-2019)
4-11-16: SIGNS IN COMMERCIAL ZONING DISTRICTS:
The following signs are permitted, subject to area, height and location
requirements of this chapter. A comprehensive sign plan may deviate from all of
the requirements of this chapter except subsections
4-11-9A through L of this chapter.
   A.   Permitted Signs: All signs permitted in the residential districts
(sections
4-11-14 and
4-11-15 of this chapter).
   B.   Freestanding Signs: Freestanding signs as follows:
      1.   Single Or Combined Use Building And Lot: One per street frontage,
not to exceed one hundred (100) square feet in area and ten feet (10') in
height.
      2.   Shopping Plaza: One per street frontage, not to exceed one hundred
fifty (150) square feet in area and fifteen feet (15') in height.
      3.   Shopping Center: One per street frontage, not to exceed one hundred
eighty (180) square feet in area or fifteen feet (15') in height; plus one per
street frontage, not to exceed one hundred (100) square feet in area per sign
face, or fifteen feet (15') in height, provided that advertising displayed
thereon shall be limited to business, merchandise, and services found within
the shopping center.
      4.   Real Estate Signs: One per street frontage except as defined in
subsection
4-11-14D of this chapter, not to exceed thirty two (32) square feet of sign
area per face for each one acre of land area up to a maximum of one hundred
(100) square feet of sign area per face; not to exceed ten feet (10') in
height.
      5.   Gasoline Price Signs: No more than one gasoline price sign per
street frontage with a maximum sign size of fifteen (15) square feet if
attached to poles. The sign must be permanently mounted on a pole and will not
be included in the computation of the total signage requirement. Gasoline price
signs greater than fifteen (15) square feet shall be included in the
computation of the total signage requirement.
      6.   Pole Mounted Banners: Shall be located only in shopping plazas and
shopping centers and must be constructed of cloth, canvas or light fabric, not
to exceed ten (10) square feet in area, located on a light pole within the
retail area of a shopping center. The lower limit of the face of any such
banner shall be a minimum height of nine feet (9') from the ground.
      7.   Addresses: Building addressing shall not be included in the
computation of the total signage requirement provided that it is not greater
than six (6) square feet.
   C.   Wall Signs: Wall signs as follows:
      1.   Single Use Building And Lot: Two (2) signs per facade, but not to
exceed a total of four (4) such signs.
      2.   Combined Use Building And Lot: Three (3) signs per facade, but not
to exceed a total of six (6) such signs.
      3.   Shopping Plaza: One sign per individual business or other
enterprise; two (2) signs per corner unit, one on each facade.
      4.   Shopping Center: Same as shopping plaza.
      5.   Sign Area: The above signs are limited to an area equal to two (2)
square feet for each linear foot of the facade of the building containing the
business or other enterprise or the facade upon which the sign is to be
mounted.
   D.   Total Sign Area Per Lot: See section
4-11-6 of this chapter.
   E.   Awning Signs: Awning signs as follows:
      1.   Awning shall not project more than forty eight inches (48") from the
wall of the building.
      2.   Awning shall not project beyond the lot line.
      3.   Awning signs shall comply with all other requirements of wall signs.
   F.   Changeable Copy Signs, Electronic:
      1.   Changeable copy signs, electronic, shall utilize a single monochrome
color such as white, red or amber. No RGB (red-green-blue) technology or other
multicolored display shall be permitted in an electronic message center sign in
a manner that would create a video display sign or an "electronic graphic
display sign" as defined by section
4-11-4 of this chapter.
      2.   Displays shall not appear to flash, undulate, pulse, or portray
explosions, fireworks, flashes of light, blinking or chasing lights. Displays
shall not appear to move toward or away from the viewer, expand or contract,
bounce, rotate, spin, twist, or otherwise portray graphics or animation as it
moves onto, is displayed on or leaves the signboard.
      3.   Displays shall contain static messages only, changed only through
dissolve or fade transitions which may otherwise not have movement.
      4.   Each message on the sign must be displayed for a minimum of four (4)
seconds. Transitions shall be no more than two (2) seconds.
      5.   The electronic message display board must consist of only alphabetic
or numeric characters on a plain background and may not include any graphic,
pictorial or photographic images.
      6.   Lightness, brightness and color must remain constant within a
message and between messages.
      7.   The electronic sign must not exceed a maximum illumination of five
thousand (5,000) nits (candelas per square meters) during daylight hours and a
maximum illumination of five hundred (500) nits (candelas per square meters)
between dusk to dawn as measured from the sign's face at maximum brightness.
      8.   All electronic message display signs shall be required to have an
ambient light monitor or similar device that will automatically adjust the
brightness level based on ambient light conditions.
   G.   Changeable Copy Signs: Changeable copy signs shall only be permitted if
covered with glass, Plexiglas or other material to secure and protect letters.
(Ord. 1035, 10-6-2009)
4-11-17: SIGNS IN INDUSTRIAL ZONING DISTRICTS:
The following signs are permitted, subject to area, height and location
requirements of this chapter. A comprehensive sign plan may deviate from all of
the requirements of this chapter except subsections
4-11-9A through K of this chapter.
   A.   Permitted Signs: All signs enumerated in sections
4-11-14 and
4-11-15 of this chapter.
   B.   Wall Signs: Wall signs are limited to an area equal to two (2) square
feet for each one linear foot of the tenant building frontage.
   C.   Freestanding Signs: One per street frontage, provided that the maximum
size of signs in the industrial zone shall be two hundred (200) square feet.
   D.   Real Estate Signs (Except As Defined In Subsection
4-11-14D Of This Chapter): One per street frontage, not to exceed thirty two
(32) square feet of sign area per face for each one acre of contiguous land
area, but not to exceed a maximum of two hundred (200) square feet of area per
sign face; not to exceed fifteen feet (15') in height.
   E.   Maximum Height: No sign shall project higher than thirty five feet
(35') above the normal finished grade beneath it.
   F.   Industrial Development Signs: Permanent industrial development signs at
entrances to industrial parks not exceeding two hundred (200) square feet,
constructed entirely upon privately owned property, constructed of material
which is the same or of a more permanent nature than the material used in the
buildings and as approved by the planning and zoning commission and village
board.
   G.   Changeable Copy Signs, Electronic:
      1.   Changeable copy signs, electronic, shall utilize a single monochrome
color such as white, red or amber. No RGB (red-green-blue) technology or other
multicolored display shall be permitted in an electronic message center sign in
a manner that would create a video display sign or an "electronic graphic
display sign" as defined by section
4-11-4 of this chapter.
      2.   Displays shall not appear to flash, undulate, pulse, or portray
explosions, fireworks, flashes of light or blinking or chasing lights. Displays
shall not appear to move toward or away from the viewer, expand or contract,
bounce, rotate, spin, twist, or otherwise portray graphics or animation as it
moves onto, is displayed on or leaves the signboard.
      3.   Displays shall contain static messages only, changed only through
dissolve or fade transitions which may otherwise not have movement.
      4.   Each message on the sign must be displayed for a minimum of four (4)
seconds. Transitions shall be no more than two (2) seconds.
      5.   The electronic message display board must consist of only alphabetic
or numeric characters on a plain background and may not include any graphic,
pictorial or photographic images.
      6.   Lightness, brightness and color must remain constant within a
message and between messages.
      7.   The electronic sign must not exceed a maximum illumination of five
thousand (5,000) nits (candelas per square meters) during daylight hours and a
maximum illumination of five hundred (500) nits (candelas per square meters)
between dusk to dawn as measured from the sign's face at maximum brightness.
      8.   All electronic message display signs shall be required to have an
ambient light monitor or similar device that will automatically adjust the
brightness level based on ambient light conditions.
   H.   Changeable Copy Signs: Changeable copy signs shall only be permitted if
covered with glass, Plexiglas or other material to secure and protect letters.
(Ord. 1035, 10-6-2009)
4-11-18: COMPREHENSIVE SIGN PLAN:
The purpose of a comprehensive sign plan is to provide for the establishment of
signage criteria that are tailored to a specific development or location, and
which may vary from specific ordinance provisions. The intent is to provide for
flexible sign criteria that promotes superior design through architectural
integration of the site, buildings and signs. A comprehensive sign plan shall
be granted as a special use in accordance with the following procedure,
standards and other requirements of the other chapters of this title:
   A.   The comprehensive sign plan shall include the location, size, height,
construction material and color, type of illumination and orientation of all
proposed signs, either permanent or temporary.
   B.   A comprehensive sign plan containing elements which exceed the
permitted height, area and number of signs specified in this chapter may be
permitted as a special use with a recommendation from the planning and zoning
commission and approval by the village board only upon a finding that:
      1.   The development site contains unique or unusual physical conditions,
such as topography, proportion, size or relation to a public street that would
limit or restrict normal sign visibility; or
      2.   The proposed or existing development exhibits unique characteristics
of land use, architectural style, site location, physical scale, historical
interest or other distinguishing features that represent a clear variation from
conventional development; or
      3.   The proposed signage incorporates special design features such as
logos, emblems, murals or statuaries that are integrated with the building
architecture; or
      4.   The proposed deviations from the standards of this chapter result in
a more unified sign package and greater aesthetic appeal between signs on the
site.
The construction and placement of individual signs contained in the approved
comprehensive sign plan shall be subject to the issuance of sign permits in
accordance with section
4-12-2-1 of this title.
   C.   The comprehensive sign plan review shall consider five (5) elements
that shall govern all signs within the development: location, materials, size,
color and illumination. The comprehensive sign plan application shall include
details, specifications, dimensions, and plans showing the proposed locations
of signs and how such signs conform to or vary from the requirements of this
chapter. It shall also show the computations of the maximum total sign area
permitted for the site as well as any special computations regarding additional
signs proposed.
   D.   The following may be included as part of a comprehensive sign plan and
shall be exempt from sign permits in accordance with section
4-12-2-1 of this title:
      1.   Signs, not to exceed twelve feet (12') in height and sixteen (16)
square feet in area, that direct pedestrians to major retailers or amenities
within a planned shopping center. Such signs shall not be visible from any
major arterial street and may be ground, wall or blade mounted. Such signs may
be illuminated.
      2.   Planned shopping center map sign, not to exceed eight feet (8') in
height and thirty two (32) square feet in area, that directs pedestrians to
multiple store locations within a planned shopping center. Such signs shall not
be visible from any major arterial street and may be illuminated.
      3.   Parking lot identification signs, not to exceed six (6) square feet
in area, located on light poles within the parking lot of a planned shopping
center, that direct automotive and pedestrian traffic to designated parking
areas. The lower limit of the face of any sign shall be a minimum height of
thirteen and one-half feet (13.5') and may be illuminated.
      4.   Any sign/banner/flag constructed of cloth, canvas or light fabric,
not to exceed ten (10) square feet in area, located on a light pole within the
retail area of a planned shopping center, which identifies a shopping district/
area. The lower limit of the face of any such sign shall be a minimum height of
nine feet (9'), shall not be visible from any major arterial street, and may be
illuminated.
      5.   Signs, not to exceed seven feet (7') in height and three (3) square
feet in area, that direct automobile traffic to locations that offer valet
parking services. Each business offering valet services shall be limited to two
(2) such signs. Such signs may be ground or wall mounted.
      6.   Signs, not to exceed three (3) square feet in area, located on light
poles within a planned shopping center, which identify the name of private
drive aisles within such planned shopping center. The lower limit of the face
of any such sign shall be a minimum height of nine feet (9'), shall not be
visible from any major arterial street, and may be illuminated.
      7.   Signs, not to exceed five (5) square feet in area, which identify
delivery service areas. Such signs may be ground or wall mounted and may be
illuminated.
      8.   Signs, not to exceed eight (8) square feet in area, that direct
pedestrians to restrooms, management offices, and other amenities within a
planned shopping center. The lower limit of the face of any such sign shall be
a minimum height of nine feet (9'), shall not be visible from any major
arterial street, and shall be wall mounted.
      9.   Electronic graphic display signs, provided that they shall only
display static images and be equipped with a regulator to automatically dim the
sign during periods of low light or darkness.
   E.   An applicant may request a change in an approved comprehensive sign
plan. A change in an approved comprehensive sign plan which results in a major
change shall require approval of the amendment by the village board of trustees
after recommendation on the matter by the village planning and zoning
commission. All major amendments shall follow the procedures and conditions
herein required for the original application submittal and review. A change
considered only a minor change shall require only the submission of a revised
plan to the village administrator or his/her designee for approval.
      1.   Guidelines for a major change:
         a.   A change in the original concept of the comprehensive sign plan.
         b.   An increase in the number of freestanding signs.
         c.   An increase in size of any freestanding sign exceeding ten
percent (10%).
      2.   Guidelines for a minor change:
         a.   Any variation in the comprehensive sign plan that does not
constitute a major change.
         b.   An increase in size of any freestanding sign not exceeding ten
percent (10%). (Ord. 1035, 10-6-2009)
4-11-19: NONCONFORMING SIGNS:
   A.   Any permanent sign which was legally in existence at the time of
passage of this chapter but which does not conform to one or more provisions of
this chapter may be continued in use, repaired or replaced in its entirety
without regard to the cost of restoration. The area and height of the
replacement sign must not exceed the area and height of the original
nonconforming sign. The restoration or repair must be started within a period
of thirty (30) days from the date of damage or destruction, and diligently
prosecuted to completion.
   B.   Whenever a nonconforming sign has been discontinued for a period of six
(6) consecutive months, or whenever there is evidently a clear intent on the
part of the owner to abandon a nonconforming sign, such sign shall not, after
being discontinued or abandoned, be reestablished, and the sign thereafter
shall be brought into conformity with the regulations of this chapter. Any such
discontinued sign shall be taken down and removed by the owner, agent, or
person having the beneficial use of the structure upon which such sign may be
found within ten (10) days after written notification from the building
commissioner, and upon failure to comply with such notice within the time
specified in such order, the building commissioner may cause removal of such
sign, and any expense incident thereto shall be paid by the owner of the
property to which such sign is attached. (Ord. 1035, 10-6-2009)
4-11-20: DUTIES:
The building commissioner shall examine all applications for permits for
erection of new signs to ensure conformity with the requirements of this
chapter, record and file all applications for permits with any accompanying
plans and documents, make a periodic inspection of all signs in the village,
and submit reports as directed by the village board. (Ord. 1035, 10-6-2009)
CHAPTER 12
ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT
SECTION:
4-12-1: Administration
4-12-1-1: Building Commissioner
4-12-1-2: Planning And Zoning Commission (PZC)
4-12-1-3: Village Board Of Trustees
4-12-2: Certificates
4-12-2-1: Zoning Certificates
4-12-2-2: Certificate Of Occupancy
4-12-3: Variations
4-12-4: Appeals
4-12-5: Special Use Permits
4-12-6: Amendments
4-12-7: Temporary Permits
4-12-8: Fees
4-12-9: Penalties
4-12-1: ADMINISTRATION:
The administration of this title is vested in the offices or agencies of the
village government as follows:
   Office of the building commissioner
   Planning and zoning commission
   Village board of trustees
(Ord., 4-7-1970; amd. Ord. 846, 2-15-2005)
4-12-1-1: BUILDING COMMISSIONER:
The building commissioner and his authorized organizational personnel, shall
administer and enforce this title, and in addition thereto and in furtherance
of said authority, shall:
   A.   Issue all zoning certificates, and make and maintain records thereof.
   B.   Issue all certificates of occupancy, and make and maintain records
thereof.
   C.   Conduct inspections of buildings, structures, and land to determine
compliance with this title, and notify in writing the person responsible for
any violation found, indicating the nature of the violation and ordering the
action necessary to correct it.
   D.   Order the discontinuance of illegal use of land, buildings, or
structures; removal of illegal buildings or structures or of illegal additions,
alterations, or structural changes; discontinuance of any illegal work being
done; or shall take any other action authorized by statute or by this title to
ensure compliance with or to prevent violation of its provisions.
   E.   Prepare and cause to be published, on or before March 31 of each year,
a map showing the existing zoning uses, divisions, restrictions, regulations,
and classifications in effect on the preceding December 31.
   F.   Maintain permanent and current records of this title, including, but
not limited to, all maps, amendments, special use permits, planned unit
developments, variations, appeals, and applications therefor.
   G.   Provide and maintain a source of public information relative to all
matters arising out of this title.
   H.   Receive, file, and forward to the plan commission all applications for
special use permits, for planned unit development approvals, and for amendments
to this title.
   I.   Receive, file, and forward to the zoning board of appeals all
applications for appeals, variations, and other matters on which the board is
required to pass under this title.
   J.   Initiate, direct, and review, from time to time, a study of the
provisions of this title and make recommendations to the plan commission as
such study requires.
   K.   Keep the village board advised of zoning activities.
   L.   Decide or make recommendations on all matters under this title upon
which the building commissioner is required to act. (Ord., 4-7-1970)
4-12-1-2: PLANNING AND ZONING COMMISSION (PZC):
   A.   Creation: There is hereby created a planning and zoning commission of
the village of Manhattan. The commission shall be known as the planning and
zoning commission (PZC).
   B.   Membership And Appointment:
      1.   The PZC shall consist of seven (7) members appointed by the
president with the advice and consent of the board of trustees. Each member
shall reside in the village of Manhattan. The president with the advice and
consent of the board of trustees may remove any member of the commission for
cause following public hearing after notice to the member and to the public.
      2.   The president with the advice and consent of the board of trustees
shall appoint one of the members of the PZC to act as its chairperson and one
member as vice chairperson. The term of the chairperson and vice chairperson
shall be two (2) years.
   C.   Terms Of Members: Members of the PZC appointed after the effective date
hereof shall be initially appointed to the following terms:
      1.   Two members shall be appointed to a term which shall expire on May
1, 2022.
      2.   Two members shall be appointed to a term which shall expire on May
1, 2023.
      3.   Two members shall be appointed to a term which shall expire on May
1, 2024.
      4.   One member shall be appointed to a term which shall expire on May 1,
2025.
Upon expiration of the terms set forth in subsections C1 through C4 of this
section, subsequent members shall be appointed for a term of four (4) years.
Members of the PZC shall serve until their successors have been duly appointed
and qualified. Appointments to fill a vacancy shall be for the unexpired term
of the member whose place has become vacant.
   D.   Compensation: See subsection
1-8-3C of this code for PZC compensation.
   E.   Meetings And Rules: All meetings of the PZC shall be at the call of the
chairman and at such other times as the PZC may determine. All hearings
conducted by said PZC shall be in accordance with Illinois statutes. The
chairman, or in his absence the vice chairman, may administer oaths and compel
the attendance of witnesses. All testimony by any witness at any hearing
provided for in this title shall be given under oath. All meetings of the PZC
shall be open to the public. The PZC shall keep minutes of its proceedings,
showing the vote of each member upon every question, or if absent or failing to
vote, indicating that fact, and shall also keep records of its examinations and
other official actions. No hearing shall be conducted without a quorum of the
PZC being present, which shall consist of a majority of all the members. The
PZC shall adopt its own rules and procedures, not in conflict with this section
or with applicable Illinois statutes.
   F.   Jurisdiction: The planning and zoning commission is hereby vested with
the following jurisdiction and authority:
      1.   To hear and decide applications for variations from the terms in
this title in the manner prescribed by and subject to the standards set out in
section
4-12-3 of this chapter; and
      2.   To hear and decide appeals in which it is alleged that there is
error in any order, requirement, decision, interpretation, or determination
(all hereinafter referred to collectively as "decision") made by the building
commissioner under this title, in the manner and subject to the standards set
out in section
4-12-4 of this chapter; and
      3.   To hear and decide all other matters referred to it or upon which it
is required to pass under this title; and
All of the above decisions made by the PZC shall be subject to further review
if the decision(s) of the PZC is appealed. Any appeal of the PZC decision shall
be heard and decided by the village board.
      4.   To hear, consider, and recommend to the village board matters
dealing with amendments to this title; and
      5.   To hear, consider and recommend to the village board matters dealing
with the granting of planned unit developments; and
      6.   To consider and decide upon all matters which it is required to act
upon under the terms of this title; and
      7.   To prepare and recommend to the corporate authorities a
comprehensive plan for the present and future development or redevelopment of
the village; and
      8.   Recommend to the corporate authorities ordinances to implement the
comprehensive plan; and
      9.   Recommend to the corporate authorities from time to time changes in
the official comprehensive plan; and
      10.   Prepare and recommend to the corporate authorities from time to
time plans for specific improvements in furtherance of the official
comprehensive plan; and
      11.   Give aid to the village officials charged with the direction of
projects for improvements embraced within the comprehensive plan, to further
the making of these projects, and, generally, to promote the realization of the
official comprehensive plan; and
      12.   Make recommendations to the corporate authorities regarding the
subdivision ordinance and to review all plats of subdivision and site plans for
development and make recommendation to the corporate authorities on such plats
and site plans; and
      13.   Exercise such other powers and duties germane to the powers and
duties granted by state statutes and this chapter or as may from time to time
be conferred on the PZC by the corporate authorities; and
      14.   To establish reasonable standards of design for subdivisions and
for resubdivisions of improved land and of areas subject to redevelopment in
respect to public improvements; and
      15.   To establish reasonable requirements governing the location, width,
course, and surfacing of public streets and highways, alleys, ways for public
service facilities, curbs, gutters, sidewalks, streetlights, parks,
playgrounds, school grounds, size of lots to be used for residential purposes,
storm water drainage, water supply and distribution, sanitary sewers, and
sewage collection and treatment; and
      16.   To designate land suitable for annexation to the municipality and
the recommended zoning classification for such land upon annexation; and
      17.   To initiate, study, and make recommendations regarding matters
dealing with the planning of the community; and
      18.   To initiate, direct and review, from time to time, studies of the
provisions of this title, and to make recommendations to the village board
regarding any changes to this title.
All decisions and findings of the PZC upon application(s) for a variation or on
appeal(s) after hearing in all instances or upon applications for a variation,
after a hearing, shall in all instances not be final administrative decisions
and shall be subject to review in all cases by the village board.
   G.   Subdivision Or Resubdivision; Official Map: At any time or times,
before or after the formal adoption of the official comprehensive plan by the
corporate authorities, an official map may be designated by ordinance, which
map may consist of the whole area included within the official comprehensive
plan, or one or more separate geographical or functional parts, and may include
all or any part of the contiguous unincorporated area within one and one-half
(11/2) miles from the corporate limits of the village. All requirements for
public hearing, filing of notice of adoption with the county recorder of deeds,
and filing of said plan and ordinances, including the official map, with the
village clerk shall be complied with as provided by law.
No map or plat of any subdivision or resubdivision presented for record
affecting land within the corporate limits of the village or within contiguous
territory which is not more than one and one-half (11/2) miles beyond the
corporate limits shall be entitled to record or shall be valid unless the
subdivision shown thereon provides for standards of design, and standards
governing streets, alleys, public ways, ways for public service facilities,
streetlights, public grounds, size of lots to be used for residential purposes,
storm and flood water runoff channels and basins, water supply and
distribution, sanitary sewers and sewage collection and treatment in conformity
with the applicable requirements of the village ordinances, including the
official map.
   H.   Expenditures: The planning and zoning commission may, at the discretion
of the village board of trustees employ a paid secretary or staff, or both,
whose salaries, wages and other necessary expenses shall be provided for by the
village board of trustees from the public funds.
   I.   Actions And Decisions: All actions taken by the PZC shall be
recommendations made to the corporate authorities for final action.
   J.   Fees: The corporate authorities shall establish from time to time the
fees necessary to appear and conduct business before the PZC, including fees
for reproduction of any public records of the commission.
   K.   Records: Every rule, regulation, amendment, or repeal thereof and every
order, requirement, decision or determination of the PZC shall immediately be
filed in the office of the village clerk and shall be public record. These
records are available for inspection by the public during regular office hours
in accordance with state statutes and ordinances of the village.
   L.   Prior Decisions And Recommendations: All prior decisions and
recommendations of the previously existing zoning board of appeals and/or plan
commission shall be deemed valid and to have survived the adoption of this
section.
   M.   References: All references in this code to the zoning board of appeals,
the "board" as it relates to the zoning board of appeals, the plan commission
or the "commission" as it relates to the plan commission are after the
effective date hereof amended to and deemed to be references to the planning
and zoning commission ("PZC"). (Ord. 846, 2-15-2005; amd. Ord. 1359-21, 7-20-
2021)
4-12-1-3: VILLAGE BOARD OF TRUSTEES:
The village board of trustees shall establish the standards, procedures, and
content of this title and shall reserve all matters of final decision to itself
and may delegate certain other matters to other individuals or agencies.
Decisions of the village board shall be subject to judicial review as the law
may provide. The village board is hereby vested with the following jurisdiction
and authority:
   A.   To decide amendments to this title after public hearing and report by
the planning and zoning commission (PZC).
   B.   To decide on special use permits after public hearing and report by the
planning and zoning commission (PZC).
   C.   To decide on planned unit developments after public hearing and report
by the planning and zoning commission (PZC).
   D.   To decide on any appeal or challenge to a decision made by the planning
and zoning commission (PZC).
   E.   To make appointments to the planning and zoning commission (PZC).
   F.   To decide all other matters required by this title. (Ord. 846, 2-15-
2005)
4-12-2: CERTIFICATES:
4-12-2-1: ZONING CERTIFICATES:
   A.   Certificates Required: No building or structure shall be erected,
constructed, reconstructed, enlarged, moved, or structurally altered, nor shall
any excavation or grading for any building or structure be done, without a
building permit. No building permit, and no other permit pertaining to the use
of land, buildings, or structures, shall be issued by any employee of the
village unless the proposed building or structure and the proposed use thereof
comply with all the provisions of this title, nor shall any such permit be
issued unless the application for such permit has affixed to it or stamped
thereon a certificate of the building commissioner certifying such compliance.
Any permit or zoning certificate issued in conflict with the provisions of this
title shall be void.
   B.   Application: Every application for a building permit shall also be
deemed an application for a zoning certificate, shall be made in duplicate in
such form as the building commissioner may from time to time provide, and shall
include:
      1.   Plans in duplicate, drawn to scale, showing the actual shape and
dimensions of the lot to be built upon; the sizes and locations on the lot of
buildings and structures already existing, if any; the location and dimensions
of the proposed building or alteration; the location and dimensions of all
proposed off street parking and loading spaces and accessways thereto; and such
other matters as the building commissioner may deem necessary to determine
conformance with this title.
      2.   Information describing the existing and proposed case of each
building and land area on the lot; the number of families or dwelling units
proposed to be accommodated; and such other matters as the building
commissioner may deem necessary to determine conformance with this title.
      3.   A certificate of a registered architect or a registered structural
engineer licensed by the State of Illinois, or, if no architect or engineer was
employed, affidavits of the owner and builder, that the proposed construction
and the proposed use thereof comply with all the provisions of this Title, or
stating the extent of noncompliance. Where the use requires compliance with
manufacturing performance standards herein set forth, the certification of a
professional engineer, licensed in the State of illinois and having an
expertise in such standards, shall be required.
   C.   Action by Building Commission: Within fifteen (15) days after the
receipt of an application for a zoning certificate, the Building Commissioner
shall issue the certificate, provided all applicable provisions of this Title
are complied with, or the Building Commissioner shall refuse to issue a zoning
certificate and shall advise the applicant in writing of the reasons for the
refusal. If the Building Commissioner fails to act within fifteen (15) days,
the applicant may then file with the Building Commissioner a written demand
that action be taken immediately. If the Building Commissioner fails to act
within three (3) days after receipt of said written demand, the applicant may
treat the application as denied and may appeal from such denial to the Zoning
Board of Appeals in the manner and subject to the standards of Section
4-12-4 of this Chapter.
   D.   Period of Validity: No building permit shall be valid for a period
longer than one hundred eighty days (180) from the date of its issuance unless
the work authorized by it is substantially under way by the end of said period.
(Ord., 4-7-70)
4-12-2-2: CERTIFICATE OF OCCUPANCY:
   A.   Certificate Required: It shall be unlawful to use or occupy or permit
the use or occupancy of any building or premises, or both, or part thereof
hereafter created, erected, changed, converted, or wholly or partly altered or
enlarged in its use of structure until a certificate of occupancy shall have
been issued therefor by the Building Commissioner. No such certificate shall be
issued unless the proposed use or occupancy complies with all the provisions of
this Title. Any certificate of occupancy issued in conflict with the provisions
of this Title shall be void.
   B.   Application: Every application for a building permit shall also be
deemed an application for a certificate of occupancy. Where no building permit
is required, an application for a certificate of occupancy shall be made to the
Building Commissioner in such form as he may from time to time provide.
   C.   Issuance: No certificate of occupancy for a building, structure, or
portion thereof, constructed after the effective date hereof, shall be issued
until construction has been completed and the premises inspected and certified
to be in conformity with the plans and specifications upon which the zoning
certificate was based. Pending issuance of a regular certificate, a temporary
certificate may be issued, to be valid for a period not to exceed six (6)
months from its date, during the completion of any addition or during partial
occupancy of the premises. A certificate of occupancy shall be issued, or
written notice shall be given to the applicant stating the reasons why a
certificate cannot be issued, not later than fifteen (15) days after the
Building Commissioner is notified in writing that the building or premises is
ready for occupancy.
   D.   Period of Validity: No certificate of occupancy shall be valid for a
period longer than ninety (90) days from the date of its issuance unless the
use or occupancy authorized by it shall have been established within such
period. (Ord., 4-7-70)
4-12-3: VARIATIONS:
   A.   Authority: In specific cases in which there are practical difficulties
or particular hardship in the way of carrying out the strict letter of the
regulations of this Title, the Zoning Board of Appeals shall have the power and
duty to determine and vary the applications of such regulations, in harmony
with their general purpose and intent, but only in accordance with the
requirements hereinafter set forth.
   B.   Application and Notice of Hearing: An application for a variation shall
be filed in duplicate with the Village Clerk, who shall forward a copy of the
application to the Board without delay. The application shall be in such form,
contain such information, and be accompanied by such plans, as the Board may by
rule require. The Board shall hold a public hearing on such application not
more than sixty (60) days after its filing. Notice of the time and place of
such public hearing shall be published at least once. Not more than thirty (30)
days nor less than fifteen (15) days before the hearing, in a newspaper of
general circulation in the Village. The published notice may be supplemented by
such additional form of notice as the Board may provide by rule.
   C.   Standards:
      1.   The Zoning Board of Appeals shall not vary the provisions of this
Title as authorized in this Section, unless it shall have made findings based
upon the evidence presented to it in the following cases:
         a.   The property in question cannot yield a reasonable return if
permitted to be used only under the conditions allowed by the regulations
governing the district in which it is located;
         b.   The plight of the owner is due to unique circumstances; or
         c.   The variation, if granted, will not alter the essential character
of the locality.
      2.   A variation shall be permitted only if the evidence in the judgment
of the Board of Appeals, sustains each of the three (3) conditions enumerated
above.
      3.   For the purpose of supplementing the above standards, the Zoning
Board of Appeals, in making this determination whenever there are practical
difficulties or particular hardship, shall also take into consideration the
extent to which the following facts, favorable to the applicant, have been
established by the evidence:
         a.   The particular physical surroundings, shape, or topographical
conditions of the specific property involved will bring a particular hardship
upon the owner as distinguished from a mere inconvenience if the strict letter
of the regulations were to be carried out;
         b.   The conditions upon which the petition for variation is based
would not be applicable generally to other property within the same zoned
classification;
         c.   The purpose of the variation is not based exclusively upon a
desire to make more money out of the property;
         d.   The alleged difficulty or hardship has not been created by any
person presently having an interest in the property;
         e.   The granting of the variation will not be detrimental to the
public welfare or unduly injurious to other property or improvements in the
neighborhood in which the property is located; or
         f.   The proposed variation will not impair an adequate supply of
light and air to adjacent property, or substantially increase the danger of
fire, or otherwise endanger the public safety, or substantially diminish or
impair property values within the neighborhood.
      4.   The Zoning Board of Appeals may require each conditions and
restrictions upon the premises benefited by a variation as may be necessary to
comply with the standards set forth in this Section to reduce or minimize the
effect of such variation upon other property in the neighborhood, and to
implement the general purpose and intent of this Title. (Ord., 4-7-1970)
   D.   Authorized Variations: The Zoning Board of Appeals shall decide
variations from the provisions of this Zoning Ordinance that are in harmony
with its general purpose and intent, and shall only vary them in specific
instances where it has made a finding of facts based on the standards provided
in subsection C of this Section, and may be granted only in the following
instances, and in no others:
      1.   To permit any variations from the setback, lot coverage,
landscaping, lighting, screening, building height, general zoning provisions
listed in Chapter 3 of this Zoning Ordinance and IEPA regulations adopted by
reference in this Zoning Ordinance.
      2.   To permit the use of a lot or lots of record on the effective date
hereof for a use otherwise prohibited solely because of insufficient area or
width of the lot or lots, but in no event shall the respective area and width
of the lot or lots be less than ninety percent (90%) of the required area and
width.
      3.   To permit the same off-street parking facility to qualify as
required facilities for two (2) or more uses, provided that substantial use of
such facility by each user does not take place at approximately the same hours
of the same days of the week.
      4.   To reduce the applicable off-street parking or loading facilities
required by twenty percent (20%) of the applicable regulations.
      5.   To increase by not more than twenty five percent (25%) the maximum
distance that required parking spaces are permitted to be located from the use
served.
      6.   To increase by not more than twenty percent (20%) the gross area of
a sign. (Ord. 700, 7-6-1999)
   E.   Effective Period: No order of the board granting a variation shall be
valid for a period longer than one hundred eighty (180) days from the date of
such order unless a building permit is obtained within such period and the
erection or alteration of a building is started or the use is commenced within
such period. The board may grant one extension of this period, valid for no
more than one hundred eighty (180) additional days, upon written application,
and good cause shown, without notice of hearing. If any of the benefits
conferred by any variation, whether heretofore or hereafter granted, are
abandoned, or are not utilized for any continuous period of one year, said
variation shall, to the extent of such abandonment or nonutilization, become
void.
   F.   Decisions: Not more than sixty (60) days after the close of the public
hearing, the board shall make its findings of fact and its determination, in
writing, and shall forthwith transmit a copy thereof to the applicant. The
concurring vote of four (4) members of the board shall be necessary to grant a
variation. (Ord., 4-7-1970)
   G.   Appeal Of PZC Decision: Within thirty (30) days after a written
decision of the PZC is transmitted to the applicant, the applicant may appeal
said decision to the village board. All decisions and findings of the village
board on appeals of a PZC shall in all instances be final administrative
decisions and shall be subject to judicial review as the law may provide. (Ord.
846, 2-15-2005)
4-12-4: APPEALS:
   A.   Authority: The zoning board of appeals shall hear and decide appeals
from an administrative order, requirement, or determination under this title.
   B.   Scope Of Appeals: An appeal, in which it is alleged that there is error
in any decision made by the building commissioner under this title, may be
taken to the board by any person or governmental agency aggrieved by such
decision or by any department, officer, board, or bureau of the village. Such
an appeal shall be taken, within such time as shall be prescribed by the board
by rule, by filing with the village clerk a notice of appeal in such form as
the board may provide by rule. The building commissioner shall, without delay,
forward to the board a copy of the notice of appeal together with all of the
papers constituting the record upon which the decision appealed from was made.
   C.   Stay Of Proceedings: An appeal shall stay all proceedings in
furtherance of the decision appealed unless the building commissioner certifies
to the board, after the notice of the appeal has been filed with him, that by
reason of facts stated in the certificate, a stay would, in his opinion, cause
imminent peril to life or property, in which case the proceeding shall not be
stayed unless by a restraining order, which may be granted by the board or by a
court of record on application, on notice to the building commissioner and on
due cause shown.
   D.   Hearing: The board shall select a reasonable time and place for the
hearing of the appeal and give notice thereof to the parties, including the
appellant, the building commissioner, and any other affected party who has
requested in writing that he be so notified. (Ord., 4-7-1970)
   E.   Decisions: The planning and zoning commission (PZC) shall render a
written decision on the appeal within a reasonable time, but in no event more
than sixty (60) days after the filing of the notice of appeal, and shall
promptly forward a copy of the decision to the parties. The PZC may affirm or
may, upon the concurring vote of four (4) members, reverse, wholly or in part,
or modify, the decision of the building commissioner, as in its opinion ought
to be done, and to that end shall have all the powers of the building
commissioner. All decisions, after hearing, of the PZC on appeals from an
administrative order, requirement, decision or determination of the building
commissioner shall be an administrative determination and shall be subject to
further review by the village board.
   F.   Appeal Of PZC Decision: Within thirty (30) days after a written
decision of the PZC is transmitted to the applicant, the applicant may appeal
said decision to the village board. All decisions and findings of the village
board on appeals of a PZC shall in all instances be final administrative
decisions and shall be subject to judicial review as the law may provide. (Ord.
846, 2-15-2005)
4-12-5: SPECIAL USE PERMITS:
   A.   Purpose: This title is based upon the division of the village into
districts, within which the use of land, and the uses and bulk of buildings and
structures, are substantially uniform. It is recognized, however, that there
are special uses which, because of their unique characteristics, can only be
properly classified in any particular district or districts upon consideration
in each case of the impact of those uses upon neighboring land and of the
public need for the particular use at the particular location. Such special
uses fall into two (2) categories:
      1.   Uses publicly operated or traditionally affected with a public
interest; and
      2.   Uses entirely private in character, but of such an unusual nature
that their operation may give rise to unique problems with respect to their
impact upon neighboring property, public facilities, or the Village as a whole.
   B.   Authority: Special use permits may be granted by the Village Board, but
only in accordance with the requirements hereinafter set forth.
   C.   Application and Notice of Hearing: An application for special use
permit shall be filed in duplicate with the Village Clerk, who shall forward a
copy of the application to the Plan Commission without delay. The application
shall be in such form, contain such information, and be accompanied by such
plans, as the Plan Commission may by rule require. The Plan Commission shall
hold a public hearing on such application not more than sixty (60) days after
its filing. Notice of the time and place of such hearing shall be published at
least once, not more than thirty (30) days nor less than fifteen (15) days
before the hearing, in a newspaper of general circulation in the Village. the
published notice may be supplemented by such additional form of notice as the
Commission may provide by rule.
   D.   Report: Within sixty (60) days after the close of the hearing, unless
the applicant shall have consented to a longer period, the Commission shall
transmit to the Village Board a written report giving its findings and
recommendations for action to be taken by the Village Board on the application.
The report shall include any recommended conditions or restrictions to be
imposed upon the premises benefited by the special use permit.
   E.   Standards: No special use permit may be granted unless:
      1.   The proposed use is designated by this Title as a special use in the
district in which the use is to be located.
      2.   The proposed use will comply with all applicable regulations in the
district in which the use is to be located.
      3.   The location and size of the proposed use, the nature and intensity
of the operation involved in or conducted in connection with it, the size of
the site in relation to it, and the location of the site with respect to
streets giving access to it are such that it will be in harmony with the
appropriate and orderly development of the district in which it is located.
      4.   The location, nature, and height of buildings, walls, and fences,
and the nature and extent of the landscaping on the site are such that the use
will not unreasonably hinder or discourage the appropriate development and use
of adjacent land and buildings.
      5.   Parking areas will be of adequate size for the particular use;
properly located, and suitably screened from adjoining uses, and the entrance
and exit drives will be laid out so as to prevent traffic hazards and
nuisances.
      6.   The proposed use will not cause substantial injury to the value of
other property in the neighborhood.
      7.   Conditions in the area have substantially changed and at least one
year has elapsed since any denial by the Village Board of any prior application
for a special use permit that would have authorized substantially the same use
of all or part of the site.
The Village Board shall impose such conditions and restrictions upon the
premises benefited by a special use permit as may be necessary to assure
compliance with the above standards, to reduce or minimize the effect of such
permit upon other properties in the neighborhood, and to better carry out the
general intent of this Title. Failure to comply with such conditions or
restrictions shall constitute a violation of this Title.
   F.   Effective Period: No special use permit shall be valid for a period
longer than one hundred eighty (180) days from the date it is granted unless a
building permit or certificate of occupancy is obtained within such period and
the erection or alteration of a building is started or the use is commenced
within such period. The Board may grant one extension of this period, valid for
no more than one hundred eighty (180) additional days, upon written application
and good cause shown, without notice or hearing. If any special use is
abandoned, or is discontinued for a continuous period of one year, the special
use permit for such use shall become void, and such use shall not thereafter be
re-established unless a new special use permit is obtained.
   G.   Decisions: The Village Board, upon report of the Plan Commission and
without further public hearing, may grant or deny any proposed special use in
accordance with applicable statutes of the State of Illinois, or may refer it
back to the Plan Commission for further consideration.
   H.   Planned Unit Development: A planned unit development shall be granted a
special use. The standards, requirements, an procedures granted shall be in
accord with Chapter 9 of this Title. (Ord., 4-7-70)
4-12-6: AMENDMENTS:
   A.   Authority: The regulations and districts established by this Title may
be amended from time to time, by the Village Board through the enactment of an
amending ordinance. No such amendment shall be made without a public hearing
before the Plan Commission and after a report of findings and recommendations
has been submitted to the Village Board by the Plan Commission.
   B.   Initiation: Amendments may be proposed by the Village Board, Plan
Commission, and by any other person, firm, or corporation having a freehold
interest, a possessory interest entitled to exclusive possession, a contractual
interest which may become a freehold interest, an option to purchase, or any
exclusive possessory interest which is specifically enforceable on the land
which is described in the application for an amendment.
No application for amendment to this Title shall be made which proposes
reclassification of any of the same property for the same zoning district that
has been the subject of a public hearing held by the Plan Commission within the
twelve (12) months preceding the date of filing.
   C.   Processing: The process for obtaining an amendment shall be as follows:
      1.   An application for an amendment shall be filed with the Village
Clerk, and thereafter entered into the records of the first meeting thereafter
of the Village Board.
      2.   A copy of such application shall thereafter be forwarded by the
Village Clerk to the Zoning Board of Appeals with a request to hold a public
hearing and submit to the Village Board a report of its findings and
recommendations.
      3.   The Plan Commission shall hold a public hearing within sixty (60)
days after receiving the application from the Village Board. Notice of the time
and place of such hearing shall be published at least once, not more than
thirty (30) days nor less than fifteen (15) days before the hearing, in a
newspaper of general circulation in the Village.
      4.   The Plan Commission shall, within sixty (60) days after the hearing,
transmit a written report giving its findings and recommendations to the
Village Board.
   D.   Decisions: The Village Board, upon report of the Plan Commission and
without further public hearing, may grant or deny any proposed amendment in
accordance with applicable Illinois statutes, or may refer it back to the Plan
Commission for further consideration.
If no action is taken by the Village Board within six (6) months after the
report of the Plan Commission, the application shall be deemed to have been
denied and shall not thereafter be granted,
In case a written protest against any proposed amendment signed and
acknowledged by owners of twenty percent (20%) of the frontage proposed to be
altered, or by the owners of twenty percent (20%) of the frontage immediately
adjoining, or by owners of twenty percent (20%) of the frontage directly
opposite the frontage to be altered, is filed with the Village Clerk, the
amendment cannot be passed except on the favorable vote of two-thirds (2/3) of
all members of the Village Board. (Ord., 4-7-70)
4-12-7: TEMPORARY PERMITS:
   A.   Authority: The Building Commissioner is authorized by this Title to
issue a temporary permit for uses specifically authorized in particular zoning
districts as temporary permit uses.
   B.   Application: An application for a temporary permit shall be made to the
Building Commissioner in writing on a form provided by the Village. The
Building Commissioner shall issue a permit only after he is satisfied that the
use allowed by the temporary permit will not adversely affect the public
health, safety or general welfare of the Village and/or immediate neighborhood.
   C.   Hearing: The Building Commissioner may, if he so desires, hold a public
hearing on the request for a temporary permit, or may contact the property
owners affected by the proposed use regarding their opinion of the use.
   D.   Conditions: The building commissioner may require that certain
conditions relating to the public health, safety or general welfare be complied
with before the issuance of a temporary permit.
   E.   Decisions: The building commissioner shall render a written decision on
the application for a temporary permit within a reasonable time and promptly
forward a copy of the decision to the petitioner. Appeals from the decision of
the building commissioner can be made to the zoning board of appeals. (Ord., 4-
7-1970)
4-12-8: FEES:
The village board shall establish a schedule of fees, charges, and expenses
required for building permits, zoning certificates, certificates of occupancy,
variations, special use permits, temporary use permits, amendments, planned
unit development approvals, and other matters pertaining to this title.
Until all such required fees have been paid, no application for any of the
above shall be deemed to have been filed and no action shall be taken on such
application.
All fees shall be paid to the village clerk and none shall in any event be
refunded. (Ord., 4-7-1970)
4-12-9: PENALTIES:
Any person who violates, disobeys, omits, neglects, or refuses to comply with,
or who resists enforcement of any provisions of this title, shall be subject to
a fine as established in section
1-4-1 of this code for each offense. Each day a violation is permitted to exist
after notification thereof shall constitute a separate offense. (Ord., 4-7-
1970; amd. Ord. 1061, 4-20-2010)
The owner or tenant of any building, structure, or land, and any architect,
builder, contractor, agent, or other person who commits, participates in,
assists in, or maintains such violation may each be found guilty of a separate
offense and suffer the penalties herein provided.
Nothing herein contained shall prevent the village from taking such other
lawful action as is necessary to prevent or remedy any violation. (Ord., 4-7-
1970)
CHAPTER 13
MANHATTAN LOWLAND CONSERVANCY OVERLAY DISTRICT
SECTION:
4-13-1: Authority
4-13-2: Short Title
4-13-3: Purpose And Intent
4-13-4: Definitions
4-13-5: Special Use Permit
4-13-6: General Provisions; Area Affected
4-13-6-1: Lowland Conservancy Overlay District
4-13-6-2: District Boundary
4-13-6-3: Minimum Setback Of Development Activity
4-13-6-4: Site Development Plan
4-13-6-5: Geologic And Soil Characteristics; Report
4-13-6-6: Hydrologic Controls; Drainage Control Plan
4-13-6-7: Site Grading And Excavation Plan
4-13-6-8: Natural Vegetation Strip Required; Landscape Plan
4-13-7: Watercourse Relocation And Minor Modifications
4-13-8: Impact Assessment
4-13-9: Stream Maintenance Easement
4-13-10: Nonconforming Uses
4-13-11: Board Of Appeals
4-13-12: Bonds
4-13-13: Liability
4-13-14: Separability
4-13-15: Retroactivity
4-13-16: Enforcement
4-13-17: Violations And Penalties
4-13-1: AUTHORITY:
The Lowland Conservancy Overlay District is adopted by the Corporate Authority
of the Village under the authority of the Village Home Rule Powers as set forth
in article 7, section 6, of the 1970 Illinois Constitution. (Ord. 642, 12-3-
1996)
4-13-2: SHORT TITLE:
This Chapter shall be known and may be cited as the VILLAGE OF MANHATTAN
LOWLAND CONSERVANCY OVERLAY DISTRICT ORDINANCE. (Ord. 642, 12-3-1996)
4-13-3: PURPOSE AND INTENT:
It is the purpose and intent of this Chapter to promote the health, safety and
general welfare of the present and future residents of the Village and
downstream drainage areas by providing for the protection, preservation, proper
maintenance, and use of the Village watercourses, lakes, ponds, flood plain and
wetland areas. This Chapter is more specifically adopted:
   A.   To prevent flood damage by preserving storm and flood water storage
capacity;
   B.   To maintain the normal hydrologic balance of streams, flood plains,
ponds, lakes, wetlands, and ground water by storing and providing for
infiltration of wet-period runoff in flood plains and wetlands, and releasing
it slowly to the stream to maintain instream flow;
   C.   To manage storm water runoff and maintain natural runoff conveyance
systems, and minimize the need for major storm sewer construction and
drainageway modification;
   D.   To improve water quality, both by filtering and storing sediments and
attached pollutants, nutrients, and organic compounds before they drain into
streams or wetlands, and by maintaining the natural pollutant-assimilating
capabilities of streams, flood plains and wetlands;
   E.   To protect shorelines and stream banks from soil erosion, using natural
means and materials wherever possible;
   F.   To protect fish spawning, breeding, nursery and feeding grounds;
   G.   To protect wildlife habitat;
   H.   To preserve areas of special recreational, scenic, or scientific
interest, including natural areas and habitats of endangered species;
   I.   To maintain and enhance the aesthetic qualities of developing areas;
and
   J.   To encourage the continued economic growth and high quality of life of
the Village which depends in part on an adequate quality of water, a pleasing
natural environment, and recreational opportunities in proximity to the
Village.
In order to achieve the purpose and intent of this Chapter, the Village hereby
designates the Lowland Conservancy Overlay District which shall be considered
as an overlay to the zoning districts created by the Village zoning ordinances
as amended 1 . Any proposed development activity within the District must
obtain a special use permit as approved by the governing body of the Village 2
. (Ord. 642, 12-3-1996)
 
Notes
1 1. See Section
  4-13-1  of this Chapter.
2 2. See Section
  4-13-5  of this Chapter.
4-13-4: DEFINITIONS:
   ARMORING: A form of channel modification which involves the placement of
materials (concrete, riprap, bulkheads, etc.) within a stream channel or along
a shoreline to protect property above streams, lakes and ponds from erosion and
wave damage caused by wave action and stream flow.
   BULKHEAD: A retaining wall that protects property along water.
   CHANNEL: A natural or artificial watercourse or perceptible extent that
periodically or continuously contains moving water, or which forms a connecting
link between two (2) bodies of water. It has a definite bed and banks that
serve to contain the water.
   CHANNEL MODIFICATION OR CHANNELIZATION: To alter a watercourse by changing
the physical dimension or materials of the channel. Channel modification
includes damming, riprapping (or other armoring), widening, deepening,
straightening, relocating, lining and significant removal of bottom or woody
vegetation. Channel modification does not include the clearing of debris or
trash from the watercourse. Channelization is a severe form of channel
modification involving a significant change in the channel cross section and
typically involving relocation of the existing channel (e.g., straightening).
   CONTROL STRUCTURE: A structure designed to control the rate of storm water
runoff that passes through the structure, given a specific upstream and
downstream water surface elevation.
   CULVERT: A structure designed to carry drainage water or small streams below
barriers such as roads, driveways, or railway embankments.
   DEPRESSIONAL AREA: Any area which is lower in elevation on all sides than
surrounding properties (i.e., does not drain freely), or whose drainage is
severely limited such as by a restrictive culvert. A depressional area will
fill with water on occasion when runoff into it exceeds the rate of
infiltration into underlying soil or exceeds the discharge through its
controlled outlet. Large depressional areas may provide significant storm water
or flood plain storage.
   DEVELOPMENT: The carrying out of any building, agricultural, or mining
operation, or the making of any change in the use or appearance of land, and
the dividing of land into two (2) or more parcels. The following activities or
uses shall be taken, for the purposes of this Chapter, to involve "development"
as defined herein:
   A.   Any construction, reconstruction, or alteration of a structure to
occupy more or less ground area, or the on-site preparation for same;
   B.   Any change in the intensity of use of land, such as an increase in the
number of dwelling units on land, or a material increase in the site coverage
of businesses, manufacturing establishments, offices, and dwelling units,
including mobile homes, campers, and recreational vehicles, on land;
   C.   Any agricultural use of land including, but not limited to, the use of
land in horticulture, floriculture, forestry, dairy, livestock, poultry,
beekeeping, pisciculture, and all forms of farm products and farm production;
   D.   The commencement of drilling, except to obtain soil samples, or the
commencement of mining, filling, excavation, dredging, grading or other
alterations of the topography;
   E.   Demolition of a structure or redevelopment of a site;
   F.   Clearing of land as an adjunct of construction for agricultural,
private residential, commercial or industrial use;
   G.   Deposit of refuse, solid or liquid waste, or fill on a parcel of land,
or the storage of materials;
   H.   Construction, excavation, or fill operations relating to the creation
or modification of any road, street, parking facility or any drainage canal, or
to the installation of utilities or any other grading activity that alters the
existing topography;
   I.   Construction or erection of dams, levees, walls, fences, bridges or
culverts; and
   J.   Any other activity that might change the direction, height, or velocity
of flood or surface waters.
   DISTRICT: The "Lowland Conservancy Overlay District" as defined in
subsection
4-13-6-1 of this Chapter.
   EROSION: The general process whereby soils are moved by flowing water or
wave action.
   FILTERED VIEW: The maintenance or establishment of woody vegetation of
sufficient density to screen developments from a stream or wetland, to provide
for streambank stabilization and erosion control, to serve as an aid to
infiltration of surface runoff, and to provide cover to shade the water. The
vegetation need not be so dense as to completely block the view. Filtered view
means no clear cutting.
   FLOOD PLAIN: That land adjacent to a body of water with ground surface
elevations at or below the 100-year frequency flood elevation.
   FLOODWAY: That portion of the flood plain (sometimes referred to as the base
flood plain or special flood hazard area) required to store and convey the base
flood. The floodway is the 100-year floodway as designated and regulated by the
Illinois Department of Transportation/Division of Water Resources. The
remainder of the flood plain which is outside the regulatory floodway is
referred to as the flood fringe or floodway fringe.
   HYDRAULIC CHARACTERISTICS: The features of a watercourse which determine its
water conveyance capacity. These features include, but are not limited to: size
and configuration of the cross section of the watercourse and floodway; texture
and roughness of materials along the watercourse; alignment of watercourse;
gradient of watercourse; amount and type of vegetation within the watercourse;
and size, configuration, and other characteristics of structures within the
watercourse. In low-lying areas the characteristics of the overbank area also
determine water conveyance capacity.
   LAKE OR POND: Any inland waterbody, fed by spring or surface water flow.
   LOT: An area of land, with defined boundaries, that is designated in
official assessor's records as being one parcel.
   NATURAL (In Reference To Watercourses): Those stream channels, grassed
waterways and swales formed by the existing surface topography of the earth
prior to changes made by unnatural causes. A natural stream tends to follow a
meandering path; its flood plain is not constrained by levees; the area near
the bank has not been cleared, mowed or cultivated; the stream flows over soil
and geologic materials typical of the area with no alteration of the course or
cross section of the stream caused by filling or excavating.
   ORDINARY HIGH-WATER MARK (OHWM): The point on the bank or shore, up to which
the presence and action of surface water is so continuous so as to leave a
distinctive mark such as by erosion, destruction or prevention of terrestrial
vegetation, predominance of aquatic vegetation, or other easily recognized
characteristics.
   QUALIFIED PROFESSIONAL: A person trained in one or more of the disciplines
of biology, geology, soil science, engineering, or hydrology whose training and
experience ensure a competent analysis and assessment of stream, lake, pond and
wetland conditions and impacts.
   REGISTERED PROFESSIONAL ENGINEER: A professional engineer registered under
the provisions of "The Illinois Professional Engineering Act" and any act
amendatory thereof.
   RETENTION/DETENTION FACILITY: A facility that provides for storage of storm
water runoff and controlled release of this runoff during and after a flood or
storm.
   RUNOFF: The portion of precipitation on the land that is not absorbed by the
soil or plant material and which runs off the land.
   SEDIMENTATION: The processes that deposit soils, debris, and other materials
either on other ground surfaces or in water bodies or watercourses.
   SETBACK: The horizontal distance between any portion of a structure or any
development activity and the ordinary high- water mark of a perennial or
intermittent stream, the ordinary high-water mark of a lake or pond, or the
edge of a wetland, measured from the structure's or development's closest point
to the ordinary high-water mark, or edge.
   STREAM: A body of running water flowing continuously or intermittently in a
channel on or below the surface of the ground. 7.5 minute topographic maps of
the U.S. Geological Survey are one reference for identifying perennial and
intermittent streams. For purposes of this Chapter, the term "stream" does not
include storm sewers.
   STRUCTURE: Anything that is constructed, erected or moved to or from any
premises which is located above, on, or below the ground including, but not
limited to, tents, camper trailers, and recreation vehicles are not considered
structures when used less than one hundred eighty (180) days per year and
located landward of the minimum setback provided as a natural vegetation strip.
   VEGETATION: All plant growth, especially trees, shrubs, mosses, and grasses.
   WATERCOURSE: Any river, stream, creek, brook, branch, natural or artificial
depression, ponded area, slough, gulch, draw, ditch, channel, conduit, culvert,
swale, grass waterway, gully, ravine, wash, or natural or manmade drainageway,
which has a definite channel, bed and banks, in or into which storm water
runoff and flood water flow either regularly or intermittently.
   WETLAND: Those transitional lands between terrestrial and aquatic system
where the water table is usually at or near the surface or the land is covered
by shallow water. Classification of areas as wetlands shall follow the
Classification of Wetlands and Deepwater Habitats of the United States as
published by the U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service (FWS/OBS-79/31). (Ord. 642, 12-
3-1996)
4-13-5: SPECIAL USE PERMIT:
   A.   Request For Permit: To ensure that proposed development activity can be
carried out in a manner which is compatible and harmonious with the natural
amenities of the Lowland Conservancy Overlay District and with surrounding land
uses, a request for a special use permit for such development activity must be
submitted for approval by the governing body of the Village.
No special use permit shall be issued unless the Village finds that:
      1.   The development will not detrimentally affect or destroy natural
features such as ponds, streams, wetlands, and forested areas, nor impair their
natural functions, but will preserve and incorporate such features into the
development's site;
      2.   The location of natural features and the site's topography have been
considered in the designing and siting of all physical improvements;
      3.   Adequate assurances have been received that the clearing of the site
of topsoil, trees, and other natural features will not occur before the
commencement of building operations; only those areas approved for the
placement of physical improvements may be cleared;
      4.   The development will not reduce the natural retention storage
capacity of any watercourse, nor increase the magnitude and volume of flooding
at other locations; and that in addition, the development will not increase
stream velocities; and
      5.   The soil and subsoil conditions are suitable for excavation and site
preparation, and the drainage is designed to prevent erosion and
environmentally deleterious surface runoff.
There shall be no development, including the immediate or future clearing or
removal of natural ground cover and/or trees, within the Lowland Conservancy
Overlay District for any purpose, unless a special use permit is granted
subject to the provisions of this Chapter or the provisions of the Village
Zoning Ordinance.
Dumping, filling, mining, excavating, dredging, or transferring of any earth
material within the District is prohibited unless a special use permit is
granted.
No ponds or impoundments shall be created nor other alterations or improvements
shall be allowed in the District for recreational uses, storm water management,
flood control, agricultural uses or as scenic features unless a special use
permit is granted.
   B.   Application For Permit: Application for a special use permit shall be
made by the owner of the property, or his/her authorized agent, to the Village
on a form furnished for that purpose. Each application shall bear the name(s)
and address(es) of the owner or developer of the site and of any consulting
firm retained by the applicant together with the name of the applicant's
principal contact at such firm. Each application shall include certification
that any land clearing, construction, or development involving the movement of
earth shall be in accordance with the plans approved upon issuance of the
permit.
   C.   Submissions: Each application for a special use permit shall be
accompanied by the following information as specified in the Chapter sections
cited:
General Provisions:
Site development plan               Section
                                    4-13-6-4
Geologic and soil report            Section
                                    4-13-6-5
Drainage control plan               Section
                                    4-13-6-6
Site grading and excavation plan    Section
                                    4-13-6-7
Landscape plan                      Section
                                    4-13-6-8
Justification For Watercourse Relocation And Minor Modifications:
Stream modification/relocation plan subsection
                                     4-13-7C
Channel and bank armoring           subsection
                                    4-13-7D
Culverts                            subsection
                                    4-13-7E
On-stream impoundments              subsection
                                    4-13-7F
Impact assessment                   Section
                                    4-13-8
 
Where a proposed development activity is less than two and one-half (21/2)
acres in area the corporate authority, upon recommendation of the Village
Engineer, may waive or simplify any or all of the submission requirements 1
provided that the person responsible for any such development shall implement
necessary protection measures to satisfy the purpose and intent set forth in
Section
 4-13-3 of this Chapter 2 .
   D.   Bonds: The applicant may be required to file with the Village a
faithful performance bond or bonds, letter of credit, or other improvement
security satisfactory to the Village Attorney, in an amount deemed sufficient
by the Village to cover all costs of improvements, landscaping, for such period
as specified by the Village, and engineering and inspection costs to cover the
cost of failure or repair of improvements installed on the site.
   E.   Review And Approval: Each application for a special use permit shall be
reviewed and acted upon according to the following procedures:
      1.   The Village will review each application for a special use permit to
determine its conformance with the provisions of this Chapter. The Village may
also refer any application to any other local government or public agency
within whose jurisdiction the site is located for review and comments. Within
sixty (60) days after receiving an application, the Village shall in writing:
a) approve the permit application, if it is found to be in conformance with the
provisions of this Chapter, and issue the permit; b) approve the permit
application subject to such reasonable conditions as may be necessary to secure
substantially the objectives of this Chapter, and issue the permit subject to
these conditions; or c) disapprove the permit application, indicating the
deficiencies and the procedure for submitting a revised application and/or
submission.
      2.   No special use permit shall be issued for an intended development
site unless:
         a.   The development, including, but not limited to, subdivisions and
planned unit developments, has been approved by the Village where applicable;
or
         b.   Such permit is accompanied by or combined with a valid building
permit issued by the Village; or
         c.   The proposed development is coordinated with any overall
development program previously approved by the Village for the area in which
the site is situated.
      3.   Failure of the Village to act on an original or revised application
within thirty (30) days of receipt shall authorize the applicant to proceed in
accordance with the plans as filed, unless such time is extended by agreement
between the Village and the applicant. Pending preparation and approval of a
revised plan, development activities shall be allowed to proceed in accordance
with conditions established by the Village.
   F.   Permit Exceptions: The provisions of this Chapter shall not apply to:
      1.   Emergency work necessary to preserve life or property; when
emergency work is performed under this Section, the person performing it shall
report the pertinent facts relating to the work to the corporate authority
within ten (10) days after commencement of the work and shall thereafter obtain
a special use permit and shall perform such work as may be determined by the
agency to be reasonably necessary to correct any impairment to the watercourse,
lake, pond, flood plain or wetland 3 ;
      2.   Work consisting of the operation, repair, or maintenance of any
lawful use of land existing on the date of adoption of this Chapter;
      3.   Lands adjacent to farm ditches if:
         a.   Such lands are not adjacent to a natural stream or river; or
         b.   Those parts of such drainage ditches adjacent to such lands were
not streams before ditching; or
         c.   Such lands are maintained in agricultural uses without buildings
and structures.
Where farm ditches are found to contribute to adverse environmental impacts or
hazards to persons or property, the Village may include designated farm ditches
in the District. The Village may also require that linings, bulkheads, dikes
and culverts be removed to mitigate hazards, or that other mitigative measures
be taken, such as the maintenance of a natural vegetation buffer strip.
   G.   Effect On Other Permits: The granting of a special use permit under the
provisions herein shall in no way affect the owner's responsibility to obtain
the approval required by any other statute, ordinance, or regulation of any
state agency or subdivision thereof, or to meet other Village ordinances and
regulations. Where State and/or Federal permits are required, a special use
permit will not be issued until they are obtained. (Ord. 642, 12-3-1996)
 
Notes
  1. See Sections
1 4-13-6-4 through
  4-13-6-8 of this Chapter.
2 2. See subsection
  4-13-11A of this Chapter.
  1. See subsections
3 4-13-3A through
  4-13-3J of this Chapter.
4-13-6: GENERAL PROVISIONS; AREA AFFECTED:
This Chapter applies to development in or near streams, lakes, ponds and
wetlands within the Village. Streams, lakes, and ponds (including intermittent
streams) are those which are shown on the United States Department of the
Interior Geological Survey (USGS) 7.5 minute quadrangle maps and those
additional streams, lakes, and ponds delineated on maps adopted as part of this
Chapter. Those maps are hereby made a part of this Chapter, and two (2) copies
thereof shall remain on file in the office of the Village Administrator for
public inspection. Within the jurisdiction of the Village, those waterbodies
and watercourses that are named and are subject to the provisions of this
Chapter are Wilson Creek, Prairie Creek and Jackson Creek. Wetlands are those
designated in the U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service/Illinois Department of
Conservation wetland inventory and those additional wetlands delineated on maps
adopted as part of this Chapter.
If new drainage courses, lakes, ponds or wetlands are created as part of a
development, the requirements for setbacks and uses within setbacks, and the
criteria for watercourse relocation and minor modification shall apply. The
District shall be amended as appropriate to include these areas. (Ord. 642, 12-
3-1996)
4-13-6-1: LOWLAND CONSERVANCY OVERLAY DISTRICT:
The Lowland Conservancy Overlay District shall be considered as an overlay to
the zoning districts created by the Village Zoning Ordinance as amended. In
addition to the requirements of this Chapter, applicants for a special use
permit within the District shall meet all requirements of the underlying zoning
districts. In the event of a conflict between the overlay district requirements
and the underlying zoning district requirements, the most restrictive
requirements prevail. (Ord. 642, 12-3-1996)
4-13-6-2: DISTRICT BOUNDARY:
The procedures, standards and requirements contained in this Chapter shall
apply to all lots within wetlands and streams, and all lots lying wholly or in
part:
   A.   Within the Special Flood Hazard Area (SFHA) designated by the Federal
Emergency Management Agency (FEMA); or
   B.   Within one hundred feet (100') of the ordinary high-water mark (OHWM)
of a perennial stream or intermittent stream, the ordinary high-water mark of a
lake or pond, or the edge of a wetland; or
   C.   Within depressional areas serving as flood plain or storm water storage
areas, as designated on the Lowland Conservancy District Map.
The District is designated on a map labeled "Lowland Conservancy Overlay
District Map", which is made to be part of this Chapter and which has the same
force and effect as if all the notations, references, and descriptions shown
thereon were set forth or described herein. Designated areas are attached as
Exhibit "B" 1  and additional areas may be approved from time to time and be
made exhibits hereto. (Ord. 642, 12-3-1996)
 
Notes
1 1. Exhibit "B" is on file in the Village Clerk's office.
4-13-6-3: MINIMUM SETBACK OF DEVELOPMENT ACTIVITY:
   A.   Absolutely no development activity (except as provided below) may occur
within the minimum setback which is defined as one hundred feet (100') from the
ordinary high-water mark of streams, lakes and ponds, or the edge of wetlands,
or within a designated depressional area. In no case shall the setback be less
than the boundary of the 100-year floodway as defined by FEMA. These setback
requirements do not apply to a stream in a culvert unless the stream is taken
out of the culvert as part of development activity. If a culvert functions as a
low-flow culvert, where water is intended to periodically flow over it, the
setback requirements apply.
   B.   The following development activities may be permitted, subject to
issuance of a special use permit, within the minimum setback areas only if, as
a practical matter, they cannot be located outside the setback area. Such
development activities will only be approved based upon a report, prepared by a
qualified professional, which demonstrates that they will not adversely affect
water quality; destroy, damage or disrupt significant habitat area; adversely
affect drainage and/or storm water retention capabilities; adversely affect
flood conveyance and storage; lead to unstable earth conditions, create erosion
hazards, or be materially detrimental to any other property in the area of the
subject property or to the Village as a whole, including the loss of open space
or scenic vistas:
      1.   Minor improvements such as walkways, benches, comfort stations,
informational displays, directional signs, foot bridges, observation decks, and
docks;
      2.   The maintenance, repair, replacement, and reconstruction of existing
highways and bridges, electrical transmission and telecommunications lines,
poles, and towers; and
      3.   The establishment and development of public and private parks and
recreation areas, outdoor education areas, historic natural and scientific
areas, game refuges, fish and wildlife improvement projects, game bird and
animal farms, wildlife preserves and public boat launching ramps.
   C.   Review of the proposed development activity within the minimum setback
area will consider the following:
      1.   Only limited filling and excavating necessary for the development of
public boat launching ramps, swimming beaches, or the development of park
shelters or similar structures is allowed. The development and maintenance of
roads, parking lots and other impervious surfaces necessary for permitted uses
are allowed only on a very limited basis, and where no alternate location
outside of the setback area is available.
      2.   Land surface modification within the minimum setback shall be
permitted for the development of storm water drainage swales between the
developed area of the site (including a storm water detention facility on the
site) and a stream, lake or pond, or wetland. Detention basins within the
setback are generally discouraged, unless it can be shown that resultant
modifications will not impair water quality, habitat, or flood storage
functions.
      3.   No filling or excavating within wetlands is permitted except to
install piers for the limited development or walkways and observation decks.
Walkways and observation decks should avoid high quality wetland areas, and
should not adversely affect natural areas designated in the Illinois Natural
Areas Inventory or the habitat of rare or endangered species.
      4.   Wetland area occupied by the development of decks and walkways must
be mitigated by an equal area of wetland habitat improvement.
      5.   Modification of degraded wetlands for purposes of storm water
management is permitted where the quality of the wetland is improved and total
wetland acreage is preserved. Where such modification is permitted, wetlands
shall be protected from the effects of increased storm water runoff by measures
such as detention or sedimentation basins, vegetated swales and buffer strips,
and sediment and erosion control measures on adjacent developments. The direct
entry of storm sewers into wetlands shall be avoided.
   D.   Environmental impact analysis of wetland modification may be required
in accordance with Section
4-13-8 of this Chapter.
   E.   An applicant for a special use permit 1  must stabilize areas left
exposed after land surface modification with vegetation normally associated
with that stream or wetland. The planting of native riparian vegetation is
recommended as the preferred stabilization measure. Other techniques should be
used only when and where vegetation fails to control erosion. The preferred
alternative is riprap, using natural rock materials where practicable,
installed on eroding bank areas in a manner that provides interstitial space
for vegetative growth and habitat for macroinvertebrates and other stream
organisms. Linings of the stream channel bottom is not permitted.
   F.   The applicant shall minimize access to the applicant's proposed
development activity within all or part of the Lowland Conservancy Overlay
District where such access could adversely affect the stream, lake, pond,
wetland, or related environmentally sensitive areas. (Ord. 642, 12-3-1996)
 
Notes
1 1. See Section
  4-13-5 of this Chapter.
4-13-6-4: SITE DEVELOPMENT PLAN:
   A.   A site development plan must be prepared for any proposed development
within, or partly within, the Lowland Conservancy Overlay District and must
indicate:
      1.   Dimension and area of parcel, showing also the vicinity of the site
in sufficient detail to enable easy location, in the field, of the site for
which the special use permit is sought, and including the boundary line,
underlying zoning, a legend, a scale, and a north arrow. (This requirement may
be satisfied by the submission of a separate vicinity map.);
      2.   Location of any existing and proposed structures;
      3.   Location of existing or proposed on-site sewage systems or private
water supply systems;
      4.   Location of any perennial or intermittent stream, lake or pond, and
its ordinary high-water mark;
      5.   Location and landward limit of all wetlands;
      6.   Location of setback lines as defined in this Chapter;
      7.   Location of the 100-year floodway;
      8.   Location of existing or future access roads;
      9.   Specifications and dimensions of stream, wetland or other water
areas proposed for alterations;
      10.   Cross sections and calculations indicating any changes in flood
storage volumes; and
      11.   Such other information as reasonably requested by (local government
name).
   B.   The applicant shall present evidence, prepared by a qualified
professional, that demonstrates that the proposed development activity will not
endanger health and safety, including danger from the obstruction or diversion
of flood flow. The developer shall also show, by submitting appropriate
calculations and resource inventories, that the proposed development activity
will not substantially reduce natural flood water storage capacity, destroy
valuable habitat for aquatic or other flora and fauna, adversely affect water
quality or ground water resources, increase storm water runoff velocity so that
water levels on other lands are substantially raised or the danger from
flooding increased, or adversely impact any other natural stream, flood plain,
or wetland functions, and is otherwise consistent with the intent of this
Chapter. (Ord. 642, 12-3-1996)
4-13-6-5: GEOLOGIC AND SOIL CHARACTERISTICS; REPORT:
The site proposed for development shall be investigated to determine the soil
and geologic characteristics, including soil erosion potential. A report,
prepared by a licensed professional engineer, geoscientist, or soil scientist
experienced in the practice of geologic and soil mechanics, shall be submitted
with every application for land development within the Lowland Conservancy
Overlay District. This report shall include a description of soil type and
stability of surface and subsurface conditions. Any area which the
investigation indicates as being subject to geologic or soil hazards shall not
be subjected to development, unless the engineer or soil scientist can
demonstrate conclusively that these hazards can be overcome. (Ord. 642, 12-3-
1996)
4-13-6-6: HYDROLOGIC CONTROLS; DRAINAGE CONTROL PLAN:
A drainage control plan that describes the hydraulic characteristics of on-site
and nearby watercourses as well as the proposed drainage plan, prepared by a
registered professional engineer experienced in hydrology and hydraulics, shall
be submitted with each application for land development within the Lowland
Conservancy Overlay District. Unless otherwise noted, the following
restrictions, requirements and standards shall apply to all development within
the Lowland Conservancy Overlay District:
   A.   Natural open channel drainageways shall be preserved; and
   B.   Runoff from areas of concentrated impervious cover (e.g., roofs,
driveways, streets, patios, etc.) shall be collected and transported to a
drainageway (preferably a natural drainageway) with sufficient capacity to
accept the discharge without undue erosion or detrimental impact. Vegetated
drainage swales, are preferred over conveyances constructed of concrete or
other manufactured materials.
The drainage control plan shall identify appropriate measures, such as recharge
basins and detention/retention basins, which will limit the quantitative and
qualitative effects of storm water runoff to predevelopment conditions. (Ord.
642, 12-3-1996)
4-13-6-7: SITE GRADING AND EXCAVATION PLAN:
This Section applies to the extent that grading and excavation and erosion
control plans, which satisfy the following requirements, are not already
required by a jurisdiction.
   A.   A site grading and excavation plan, prepared by a registered
professional engineer, trained and experienced in civil engineering, shall be
submitted with each application for a special use permit and shall include the
following:
      1.   Details of the existing terrain and drainage pattern with one foot
(1') contours;
      2.   Proposed site contours at one foot (1') intervals;
      3.   Dimensions, elevation and contours of grading, excavation and fill;
      4.   A description of methods to be employed in disposing of soil and
other material that is removed from allowable grading and excavation sites,
including location of the disposal site if on the property;
      5.   A schedule showing when each stage of the project will be completed,
including the total area of soil surface to be disturbed during each stage, and
estimated starting and completion dates. The schedule shall be prepared so as
to limit, to the shortest possible period, the time soil is exposed and
unprotected. In no case shall the existing natural vegetation be destroyed,
removed or disturbed more than fifteen (15) days prior to initiation of the
improvements; and
      6.   A detailed description of the revegetation and stabilization methods
to be employed, to be prepared in conjunction with the landscape plan per
Section
4-13-6-8 of this Chapter. This description should include locations of erosion
control measures such as sedimentation basins, straw bales, diversion swales,
etc.
The grading and excavation plan must be consistent with all the provisions of
this Chapter.
   B.   Unless otherwise provided in this Chapter, the following restrictions,
requirements and standards shall apply to all development within the District:
      1.   Every effort shall be made to develop the site in such a manner so
as to minimize the alteration of the natural topography;
      2.   No grading, filling, cleaning, clearing, terracing or excavation of
any kind shall be initiated until final engineering plans are approved and the
special use permit is granted by the Village; and
      3.   The depositing of any excavation, grading or clearing material
within a stream, lake, pond or wetland area (i.e., within the District) shall
be prohibited.
In addition to locating all site improvements on the subject property to
minimize adverse impacts on the stream, lake, pond, or wetland, the applicant
shall install a berm, curb, or other physical barrier during construction, and
following completion of the project, where necessary, to prevent direct runoff
and erosion from any modified land surface into a stream, lake, pond, or
wetland. All parking and vehicle circulation areas should be located as far as
possible from a stream, lake, pond, or wetland.
   C.   The Village may limit development activity in or near a stream, lake,
pond, or wetland to specific months, and to a maximum number of continuous days
or hours, in order to minimize adverse impacts. Also, the Village may require
that equipment be operated from only one side of a stream, lake, or pond in
order to minimize bank disruption. Other development techniques, conditions,
and restrictions may be required in order to minimize adverse impacts on
streams, lakes, ponds or wetlands, and on any related areas not subject to
development activity. (Ord. 642, 12-3-1996)
4-13-6-8: NATURAL VEGETATION STRIP REQUIRED; LANDSCAPE PLAN:
   A.   To minimize erosion, stabilize the streambank, protect water quality,
maintain water temperature at natural levels, preserve fish and wildlife
habitat, to screen manmade structures, and also to preserve aesthetic values of
the natural watercourse and wetland areas, a natural vegetation strip shall be
maintained along with edge of the stream, lake, pond, or wetland. The natural
vegetation strip shall extend landward a minimum of twenty five feet (25') from
the ordinary high-water mark of a perennial or intermittent stream, lake or
pond and the edge of a wetland.
Within the natural vegetation strip, trees and shrubs may be selectively pruned
or removed for harvest of merchantable timber, to achieve a filtered view of
the waterbody from the principal structure and for reasonable private access to
the stream, lake, pond, or wetland. Said pruning and removal activities shall
ensure that a live root system stays intact to provide for streambank
stabilization and erosion control.
   B.   A landscape plan, prepared by a professional landscape architect, shall
be submitted with each special use permit application for development activity
within the Lowland Conservancy Overlay District and contain the following:
      1.   A plan describing the existing vegetative cover of the property and
showing those areas where the vegetation will be removed as part of the
proposed construction; and
      2.   A plan describing the proposed revegetation of disturbed areas
specifying the materials to be used.
The vegetation must be planned in such a way that access for stream maintenance
purposes shall not be prevented. (Ord. 642, 12-3-1996)
4-13-7: WATERCOURSE RELOCATION AND MINOR MODIFICATIONS:
   A.   Relocations And Modifications Through Special Use Permit: Watercourse
relocation or modification is generally not permitted because these activities
are not usually consistent with the purposes of this Chapter. Under certain
circumstances, relocation and minor modification may be permitted through a
special use permit where certain problems can be mitigated by relocation and/or
minor modification, specifically when:
      1.   Off-site hydrologic conditions are causing erosion, flooding and
related problems; or
      2.   On-site soil and geologic conditions are resulting in unstable
conditions that pose hazards to life, health, and existing structures or
property; or
      3.   The quality of previously modified or relocated streams can be
improved through restoration; or
      4.   Officially adopted storm water management plans call for placement
of detention or retention facilities in a stream; or
      5.   Public utilities, including sanitary sewers, pipelines, and roadways
require stream crossing or relocation where there are not practical
alternatives.
Modification or watercourses as a convenience for site design purposes is not
permitted.
   B.   Conditions And Restrictions For Permitting Stream Modification: Stream
modification, when permitted, is subject to the following conditions and
restrictions:
      1.   Water quality, habitat and other natural functions must be
significantly improved by the modification; no significant habitat area may be
destroyed;
      2.   The amount of flow and velocity of a stream is not to be increased
or decreased as the stream enters or leaves a subject property, unless this
reflects an improvement over previous conditions in terms of reduced flooding,
reduced erosion, or enhanced low-flow conditions;
      3.   Prior to diverting water into a new channel, a qualified
professional approved by the Village shall inspect the stream modification, and
issue a written report to the Village that the modified stream complies with
the requirements in subsection C of this Section; and
      4.   Stream channel enlargement, or other modifications that would
increase conveyance, shall not be permitted if the intended purpose is to
accommodate development activities in the flood plain.
   C.   Required Content: Stream relocation may be permitted in accordance with
a stream relocation plan which provides for:
      1.   The creation of a natural meander pattern, pools, riffles, and
substrate;
      2.   The formation of gentle side slopes (at least 3 feet horizontally
per 1 foot vertically), including installation of erosion control features;
      3.   The utilization of natural materials wherever possible;
      4.   The planting of vegetation normally associated with streams,
including primarily native riparian vegetation;
      5.   The creation of spawning and nesting areas wherever appropriate;
      6.   The reestablishment of the fish population wherever appropriate;
      7.   The restoration of water flow characteristics compatible with fish
habitat areas, wherever appropriate;
      8.   The filling and revegetation of the prior channel;
      9.   A proposed phasing plan, specifying time of year for all project
phases;
      10.   Plans for sediment and erosion control; and
      11.   Establishment of a low-flow channel which reflects the conditions
of a natural stream.
   D.   Criteria For Permitting Armoring Of Channels And Banks: Armoring in the
form of bulkheads, riprap or other materials or devices is not permitted except
in accordance with the following:
      1.   Significant erosion cannot be prevented in any other way and the use
of vegetation and gradual bank slopes has not sufficiently stabilized the
shoreline or bank;
      2.   The bulkhead or other device is not placed within a wetland, or
between a wetland and a lake or pond;
      3.   The bulkhead, riprap or other device will minimize the transmittal
of wave energy or currents to other properties; and
      4.   The change in the horizontal or vertical configuration of the land
must be kept to a minimum.
Where permission to install bulkheads or other armoring devices is requested as
part of the special use permit application, documentation and certification
pertaining to the items above must be submitted.
   E.   Criteria For The Use Of Culverts: Culverts are not permitted in streams
except in accordance with the following:
      1.   Where a culvert is necessary for creating access to a property; use
of culverts as a convenience, in order to facilitate general site design, is
not to be considered;
      2.   The culvert must allow passage of fish inhabiting the stream, and
accommodate the 100-year flood event without increasing upstream flooding,
except where a restricting culvert is desirable as part of an overall storm and
flood water management plan;
      3.   The culvert must be maintained free of debris and sediment to allow
free passage of water, and if applicable, fish; and
      4.   The stream bottom should not be significantly widened for the
placement of a culvert as this increases siltation; if multiple culverts must
be installed, one culvert should be at the level of the bottom of the stream
and the others at or above normal water elevation.
   F.   Criteria For On-Stream Impoundments: Impoundment of streams is not
permitted except in accordance with the following:
      1.   The impoundment is determined to be in the public interest by
providing regional storm water detention, flood control, or public recreation;
      2.   The impoundment will not prevent the upstream migration of
indigenous fish species;
      3.   A nonpoint source control plan has been implemented in the upstream
watershed to control the effects of sediment runoff as well as minimize the
input of nutrients, oil and grease, metals, and other pollutants;
      4.   Impoundments without permanent low-flow pools are preferred except
where a permanent pool is necessary to achieve the intended benefits of the
impoundment (e.g., recreation or water quality mitigation); and
      5.   Impoundment design shall include gradual bank slopes, appropriate
bank stabilization measures, and a presedimentation basin. (Ord. 642, 12-3-
1996)
4-13-8: IMPACT ASSESSMENT:
The Village may ask an applicant to submit a report prepared by a qualified
professional, and approved by the Village, in order to assess the potential
impact of proposed development on a lake, stream or wetland and associated
environmentally sensitive areas, including loss of flood storage potential,
loss of habitat, changes in species diversity and quantity, impacts on water
quality, increases in human intrusion, and impacts on associated streams,
lakes, ponds, wetlands or downstream areas. (Ord. 642, 12-3-1996)
4-13-9: STREAM MAINTENANCE EASEMENT:
The applicant shall grant an access easement for stream maintenance purposes to
the Village over twenty five feet (25') parallel to the stream bank. (Ord. 642,
12-3-1996)
4-13-10: NONCONFORMING USES:
Nonconforming uses shall conform to the requirements of Chapter 8 of this
Title. (Ord. 642, 12-3-1996)
4-13-11: BOARD OF APPEALS:
   A.   The Board of Appeals shall conform to the requirements of Section
4-12-1-2 of this Title.
   B.   Variances shall conform to the requirements of Section
4-12-3 of this Title.
   C.   Appeals shall conform to the requirements of Section
4-12-4 of this Title. (Ord. 642, 12-3-1996)
4-13-12: BONDS:
The Village may require the posting of a bond or surety to ensure compliance
with any aspect of this Chapter. (Ord. 642, 12-3-1996)
4-13-13: LIABILITY:
Prior to issuance of a construction permit, the applicant shall enter into an
agreement with the Village which runs with the property, in a form acceptable
to the Village for any damage resulting from development activity on the
subject property which is related to the physical condition of the stream or
wetland. (Ord. 642, 12-3-1996)
4-13-14: SEPARABILITY:
Every section, provision, or part of this Chapter is declared separable from
every other section, provision, or part; and if any section, provision, or part
thereof shall be held invalid, it shall not affect any other section,
provision, or part. (Ord. 642, 12-3-1996)
4-13-15: RETROACTIVITY:
The requirements of this Chapter apply to all platted and unplatted lands
within the jurisdiction of Village. (Ord. 642, 12-3-1996)
4-13-16: ENFORCEMENT:
Authority for administration of this Chapter resides with the Zoning
Administrator. Appeals regarding decisions of the Zoning Administrator in
granting special permits shall be made according to the provisions of
subsection
4-13-11C of this Chapter.
   A.   Stop-Work Order; Revocation Of Permit: In the event any person holding
a special use permit pursuant to this Chapter violates the terms of the permit,
or carries on-site development in such a manner so as to materially and
adversely affect the health, welfare, or safety of persons residing or working
in the neighborhood of the development site, or so as to be materially
detrimental to the public welfare or injurious to property or improvements in
the neighborhood, the Village may suspend or revoke the special use permit.
      1.   Suspension of a permit shall be by a written stop-work order issued
by the Village and delivered to the permittee or his agent or the person
performing the work. The stop-work order shall be effective immediately, shall
state the specific violations cited, and shall state the conditions under which
work may be resumed. A stop-work order shall remain in effect until the next
regularly scheduled meeting of the Board of Appeals, at which the conditions of
subsection A2 of this Section can be met.
      2.   No special use permit shall be permanently suspended or revoked
until a hearing is held by the Board of Appeals. Written notice of such hearing
shall be served on the permittee, either personally or by registered mail, and
shall state:
         a.   The grounds for complaint or reasons for suspension or
revocation, in clear and concise language; and
         b.   The time when and place where such hearing will be held. Such
notice shall be served on the permittee at least five (5) days prior to the
date set for the hearing. At such hearing, the permittee shall be given an
opportunity to be heard and may call witnesses and present evidence on his/her
behalf. At the conclusion of the hearing the Board of Appeals shall determine
whether the permit shall be suspended or revoked. (Ord. 642, 12-3-1996)
4-13-17: VIOLATIONS AND PENALTIES:
No person shall undertake or continue any development activity contrary to or
in violation of any terms of this chapter. Any person violating any of the
provisions of this chapter shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor, and each
day during which any violation of any of the provisions of this chapter is
committed, continued, or permitted shall constitute a separate offense. Upon
conviction of any such violation, such person shall be punished by a fine as
established in section
1-4-1 of this code for each offense. In addition to any other penalty
authorized by this section, any person convicted of violating any of the
provisions of this chapter shall be required to restore the site to the
condition existing prior to commission of the violation, or to bear the expense
of such restoration. (Ord. 642, 12-3-1996; amd. Ord. 1061, 4-20-2010)
CHAPTER 14
SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESSES
SECTION:
4-14-1: Definitions
4-14-2: Liquor License
4-14-3: Location Of Sexually Oriented Businesses
4-14-4: Exterior Display
4-14-1: DEFINITIONS:
For the purpose of this Chapter, the words and phrases used herein shall have
the following meanings, unless clearly indicated by the context:
   ADULT BOOKSTORE: An establishment having as more than twenty five percent
(25%) of its stock and trade in books, films, videocassettes (whether for
viewing off-premises or on- premises), toys, devices, mechanisms, or magazines
and other periodicals which are distinguished or characterized by their
emphasis on matter depicting, describing or relating to "specified sexual
activities" or "specified anatomical areas" as defined herein.
   ADULT CABARET: A cabaret which features topless dancers, go-go dancers,
exotic dancers, strippers, male or female impersonators, or similar
entertainers.
   ADULT ENTERTAINMENT: Any exhibition of any adult-oriented motion pictures,
live performance, display or dance of any type, which has as a significant or
substantial portion of such performance any actual or simulated performing of
specified sexual activities or exhibition and viewing of specified anatomical
areas, removal of articles of clothing or appearing unclothed, pantomime,
modeling, or any other personal service offered customers.
   ADULT MINI-MOTION PICTURE THEATER: An enclosed building with a capacity of
fifty (50) or less persons regularly used for presenting material distinguished
or characterized by an emphasis on matter depicting, describing or relating to
"specified sexual activities" or "specified anatomical areas", as defined
herein, for observation by patrons therein.
   ADULT MOTION PICTURE THEATER: An enclosed building with a capacity of fifty
(50) or more persons regularly used for presenting material having as a
dominant theme or presenting material distinguished or characterized by an
emphasis on matter depicting, describing or relating to "specified sexual
activities" or "specified anatomical areas", as defined herein, for the
observation by patrons therein.
   PERSON: Any individual, partnership, corporation, association,
proprietorship, or other legal entity.
   RELIGIOUS INSTITUTION: A building in which persons regularly assemble for
religious worship intended primarily for purposes connected with such worship
or for propagating a particular form of religious belief.
   SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESS: Any premises to which the public patrons or
members are invited or admitted and which are so physically arranged as to
provide booths, cubicles, rooms, compartments, or stalls separate from the
common areas of the premises for the purpose of viewing adult-oriented motion
pictures, or wherein an entertainer provides adult entertainment to a member of
the public, a patron, or a member, when such adult entertainment is held,
conducted, operated or maintained for a profit, direct or indirect. A sexually
oriented business further includes, without being limited to, adult bookstores,
adult motion picture theaters, adult mini-motion picture establishments, adult
cabaret, adult entertainment studio or any premises that is physically arranged
and used as such, whether advertised or represented as an adult entertainment
studio, rap studio, exotic dance studio, encounter studio, sensitivity studio,
modeling studio or any other term of like import.
   SPECIFIED ANATOMICAL AREAS: A. Less than completely and opaquely covered:
      1.   Human genitals, pubic region;
      2.   Buttocks;
      3.   Female breasts below a point immediately above the top of the
areola; and
   B.   Human male genitals in a discernibly turgid state, even if completely
and opaquely covered.
   SPECIFIED SEXUAL ACTIVITIES: A. Human genitals in a state of sexual
stimulation or arousal;
   B.   Acts of human masturbation, sexual intercourse or sodomy;
   C.   Fondling or erotic touching of human genitals, pubic region, buttock or
female breasts. (Ord. 702, 8-3-1999)
4-14-2: LIQUOR LICENSE:
No liquor license shall be issued and no liquor shall be sold or consumed on
the premises of any sexually oriented businesses. (Ord. 702, 8-3-1999)
4-14-3: LOCATION OF SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESSES:
Sexually oriented businesses are permitted in the I-2 Light Industrial and I-
3 Heavy Industrial Zoning Districts, provided that no person shall operate or
cause to be operated a sexually oriented business within one thousand feet
(1,000') of the property boundary of a preexisting:
   A.   Public or private elementary or secondary school; or
   B.   Licensed daycare center; or
   C.   Cemetery; or
   D.   Public park; or
   E.   Public housing; or
   F.   Municipal and other public buildings; or
   G.   Place of religious worship; or
   H.   Residential zoning district; or
   I.   Sexually oriented business.
For the purpose of this Section, measurements shall be made in a straight line,
without regard to intervening structures or objects, from the nearest portion
of the building or structure used as part of the premises where sexually
oriented business is conducted, to the nearest property line of the specified
use. (Ord. 702, 8-3-1999)
4-14-4: EXTERIOR DISPLAY:
No sexually oriented business shall be conducted in any manner that permits the
observation of any material depicting, describing or relating to "specified
sexual activities" or "specified anatomical areas" from any public way or from
any property not registered as an adult use. This provision shall apply to any
display, decoration, sign, side window or other opening. (Ord. 702, 8-3-1999)
CHAPTER 15
PERSONAL WIRELESS TELECOMMUNICATIONS FACILITIES REGULATIONS
SECTION:
4-15-1: Purpose
4-15-2: Definitions
4-15-3: Locations
4-15-4: Permits And Fees Required
4-15-5: Design And Construction
4-15-6: Application
4-15-7: Collocation
4-15-8: Signs
4-15-9: Compliance
4-15-10: Abandoned Or Unused Facilities
4-15-11: Grandfather Provisions
4-15-1: PURPOSE:
The purpose of this Chapter is to provide specific regulations for the
placement, construction and modification of personal wireless
telecommunications facilities. (Ord. 709, 10-5-1999)
4-15-2: DEFINITIONS:
For the purpose of this Chapter, the following words shall have the meanings as
ascribed to them in this Section:
   ANTENNA: The surface from which wireless radio signals are sent and received
by a personal wireless service facility. Antenna should not be used as a
synonym for cell site.
   CARRIER: A company that provides wireless services.
   COLLOCATION: The use of a single mount on the ground by more than one
carrier (vertical collocation) and/or several mounts on an existing building or
antenna by more than one carrier.
   CORPORATE AUTHORITIES: The Village President and Board of Trustees of the
Village of Manhattan.
   LICENSED CARRIER: A company authorized by the Federal Communications
Commission (FCC) to construct and operate a commercial mobile radio services
system.
   MOUNT: The structure or surface upon which antennas are mounted. There are
four (4) types of mounts: a) roof mount – mounted on the roof of a building; b)
side mount – mounted on the side of a building; c) ground mount – mounted on
the ground (freestanding); d) structure mount – mounted on a structure other
than a building.
   PERSONAL WIRELESS SERVICE FACILITY: A facility for the provision of personal
wireless services, as defined by the Telecommunications Act of 1996, as may
have been or may be amended. A personal wireless service facility is the
appropriate term for cell site in ordinances and other official documents.
   PERSONAL WIRELESS SERVICES: The commercial mobile radio services, unlicensed
wireless services, and common carrier wireless exchange access services.
   TELECOMMUNICATIONS: Any transmission, emission, or reception of signs,
signals, writing, images, and sounds or information of any nature by wire,
radio, visual, or the electromagnetic system. (Ord. 709, 10-5-1999)
4-15-3: LOCATIONS:
   A.   Permitted Locations:
      1.   Subject to site plan approval, personal wireless service facilities
shall be permitted in all zoning districts only if located on Village-owned
property pursuant to an executed agreement with the corporate authorities and
further provided that such facilities are so designed as to allow and encourage
collocation by other users.
      2.   Subject to site plan approval, personal wireless service facilities
shall be a permitted use within the I-2 or I-3 Zoning Districts. Antennas
mounted in connection with buildings or other structures shall not extend to a
height greater than twenty feet (20') higher than the height of the building to
which the personal wireless service facility is attached.
      3.   Subject to site plan approval, personal wireless service facilities
shall be a permitted use if installed upon existing churches if camouflaged as
steeples or bell towers.
   B.   Special Uses:
      1.   Subject to site plan approval, personal wireless service facilities
shall be permitted as a special use, if the personal wireless service facility
complies with the standards for a special use established in Section
4-12-5 of the zoning code, in the C-1, C-2, C-3, CBD and I-1 Zoning Districts,
if the personal wireless service facility complies with the standards for a
special use established in Section
4-12-5 of the zoning code and the provisions of this Chapter. Antennas mounted
in connection with buildings or other structures shall not extend to a height
greater than ten percent (10%) or twenty feet (20'), whichever is less, of the
building to which the personal wireless service facility is attached.
      2.   In considering a request for approval of a special use or variation
to permit the installation of a personal wireless service facility or
facilities as described in this Chapter, the Zoning Board of Appeals, or the
Board of Trustees, as the case may be, shall, in addition to the standards for
review set forth herein, also give due consideration and weight to whether the
plans submitted will provide for collocation of other personal wireless service
equipment on the same structure, so as to minimize the proliferation of
antenna- supporting structures. (Ord. 709, 10-5-1999)
4-15-4: PERMITS AND FEES REQUIRED:
Prior to the erection or mounting of a personal wireless service facility or
facilities, the owner shall obtain a permit. A permit shall not be granted
until such time as the Building Commissioner or his designee has verified the
personal wireless service facility has complied with all building codes and all
local, State and Federal regulations and the provisions of this Chapter as
provided for herein, has an approved site plan and paid the required permit
fees. Permit fees for each personal wireless service facility shall be
sufficient to cover all of the Village's costs for plan review and inspections
plus ten percent (10%). Permit fees shall be calculated by the Building
Commissioner or his designee and shall be final. (Ord. 709, 10-5-1999)
4-15-5: DESIGN AND CONSTRUCTION:
   A.   Mount:
      1.   Personal wireless service facilities may be ground-mounted
(freestanding), roof-mounted, side-mounted, or structure- mounted. Water towers
are to be considered roof-mounted and antennas shall not extend more than
twenty feet (20') in height when mounted to a water tower.
      2.   Roof-, side- and structure-mounted facilities shall match or blend
with the building to which they are attached and shall not be visible to the
casual observer.
   B.   Construction Requirements:
      1.   Personal wireless service facilities shall be designed in accordance
with the building code of the Village, as may be amended from time to time, and
all State and Federal regulations. Notwithstanding the foregoing, antenna
towers shall be constructed with at least one release point so as to bend and
fold over on themselves.
      2.   Personal wireless service facilities shall be fully automated.
      3.   All utility buildings and structures constituting or accessory to a
personal wireless service facility shall be architecturally designed to blend
in with the surrounding environment and be compatible with neighboring
buildings, and shall be subject to the approval of the Building Commissioner or
his designee, said approval shall not be unreasonably withheld. Support
structures and antennas shall have a noncontrasting blue, gray or similar color
that minimizes their visibility and is compatible with the surrounding
landscape.
      4.   Guyed or lattice towers shall be prohibited.
      5.   The maximum height for a single antenna tower shall be one hundred
twenty five feet (125').
   C.   Location Requirements:
      1.   All utility buildings and structures constituting or accessory to a
personal wireless service facility must meet the minimum setback requirements
of the underlying zoning district and be a minimum of five hundred feet (500')
from any residential district.
      2.   Antenna towers must be separated by a minimum of two thousand
(2,000) lineal feet.
   D.   Screening:
      1.   A combination of landscaping, berming, fencing or other screening
materials shall be utilized to maintain or enhance the existing character of
the surrounding area, and shall be subject to the approval of the Building
Commissioner or his designee, said approval shall not be unreasonably withheld.
Ground-mounted personal wireless service facilities shall have a one hundred
percent (100%) complete screening when visible from residential and public
rights of way. (Ord. 709, 10-5-1999)
4-15-6: APPLICATION:
An application for a permit to construct or locate a personal wireless service
facility shall include the following information:
   A.   A report from a qualified and licensed professional engineer which:
      1.   Describes the tower height and design, including a cross section and
elevation;
      2.   Documents the height above grade for all potential mounting
positions for collocated antennas and the minimum separation distances between
antennas;
      3.   Describes the tower's capacity, including the number and types of
antennas that it can accommodate;
      4.   Documents what steps the applicant will take to avoid interference
with established public safety telecommunications;
      5.   Includes site and landscape screening plans drawn to scale;
      6.   Demonstrates the tower's compliance with Federal structural and
electrical standards;
      7.   Includes an engineer's stamp and registration number; and
      8.   Includes any other information required by the Village to evaluate
the request.
   B.   Proof that the proposed tower complies with regulations administered by
the Federal Aviation Administration.
   C.   Proof of ownership of the proposed site or authorization to utilize it.
If leased, a copy of the lease, which shall specify maintenance
responsibilities. Collocation leases shall renew or expire on the same date so
a facility or tower may be dismantled and removed in accordance with the
provisions herein.
   D.   A letter of intent committing the tower owner and successors to allow
the shared use of the same if an additional user agrees in writing to meet
reasonable terms and conditions for shared use.
   E.   Ambient, predictive, and cumulative measurements of radio frequency
radiation emissions for the site, in order to establish a preoperational
baseline for future analysis.
   F.   A copy of the intermodulation interference report submitted to the FCC.
   G.   A map to scale showing the lot lines, land uses, and tree coverage,
including average tree height, for all properties within three hundred feet
(300') of the proposed site.
   H.   A map showing the existing personal wireless service facilities within
the Village and one and one-half (11/2) miles outside the Village limits.
Following receipt of the application, the Building Commissioner or his designee
shall determine whether the application meets the standards set forth in this
Chapter or a special use permit is required. In the course of reviewing any
request for an approval required under this Chapter made by the applicant to
provide personal wireless service or to install personal wireless service
facilities, the Building Commissioner, Zoning Board of Appeals or the Board of
Trustees, as the case may be, shall act within a reasonable period of time
after the request is duly filed with the Village, taking into account the
nature and scope of the request, and any decision to deny such a request shall
be in writing and supported by substantial evidence contained in a written
record. Should the application of this Chapter have the effect of prohibiting a
person or entity from providing personal wireless service to all or a portion
of the Village, such provider may petition the Board of Trustees for an
amendment to this Chapter, in the manner provided in Section
4-12-6 of the zoning code. The Board of Trustees, upon receipt of such a
petition, shall promptly undertake review of the petition and shall make a
determination on the petition within a reasonable period of time, following the
holding of any public hearings as may be required, taking into account the
nature and scope of the petition, and any reason to deny such a petition shall
be in writing and supported by evidence contained in the written record. (Ord.
709, 10-5-1999)
4-15-7: COLLOCATION:
The Village strongly encourages collocation of personal wireless service
facilities in order to minimize the proliferation of antenna-supporting
structures. The Village may grant access to Municipal property (water tower,
rights of way, etc.) and/or lower permit fees to applicants locating as a
second or more user on a single tower or other location. In order to be
eligible for a separate personal wireless service facility, the applicant
shall:
   A.   Supply documentation showing the proposed antenna cannot be
accommodated on an existing or permitted tower or building within a quarter
mile of the proposed tower due to one or more of the following reasons:
      1.   The planned equipment would exceed the structural capacity of the
existing or approved tower or building, as documented by a qualified and
licensed professional engineer, and the existing or approved tower cannot be
reinforced, modified, or replaced to accommodate the planned or equivalent
equipment at a reasonable cost;
      2.   The planned equipment would cause interference materially impacting
the usability of other existing or planned equipment at the tower or building,
as documented by a qualified and licensed professional engineer, and the
interference cannot be prevented at a reasonable cost;
      3.   Existing or approved towers and buildings within a quarter mile
cannot accommodate the planned equipment at a height necessary to function
reasonably, as documented by a qualified and licensed professional engineer; or
      4.   Other unforeseen reasons that make it infeasible to locate the
planned telecommunications equipment upon an existing or approved tower or
building.
   B.   Any proposed commercial wireless telecommunication service facility
shall be designed structurally, electrically, and in all respects, to
accommodate both the applicant's antenna(s) and compatible antenna(s) for at
least two (2) additional antennas if the tower is over eighty feet (80') in
height or for at least three (3) additional antennas if the tower is over one
hundred feet (100') in height. Towers must be designed to allow for future
rearrangement of antennas upon the tower and to accept antennas mounted at
varying heights. (Ord. 709, 10-5-1999)
4-15-8: SIGNS:
The use of any portion of a personal wireless service facility tower for signs
other than warning or equipment information is prohibited. Signs used for
warnings or equipment information shall be no larger than as are required by
FCC regulations. (Ord. 709, 10-5-1999)
4-15-9: COMPLIANCE:
All personal wireless service facilities must maintain compliance with the
approved plans and specifications. If the personal wireless service facility
becomes noncompliant with the approved plans and specifications due to, but not
limited to: discoloration, cracking, missing components, rusting, settling,
damage or general disrepair, or failure to maintain the required landscaping,
berming and/or screening; then the owners of the personal wireless service
facility and the owner of the building or lot on which the personal wireless
service facility is located will be jointly and severally responsible for
remedying the specific nonconformities. These nonconformities must be remedied
within forty five (45) days after written notice, detailing these
nonconformities, is sent by the Village to the owner of the personal wireless
service facility and the owner of the building or lot. Failure to remedy all of
the cited nonconformities, within the forty five (45) day time period, shall be
punishable by a fine not exceeding five hundred dollars ($500.00) per day that
the violation continues. (Ord. 709, 10-5-1999)
4-15-10: ABANDONED OR UNUSED FACILITIES:
Abandoned or unused facilities, towers, or portions of towers shall be removed
as follows:
   A.   Facilities which cease operations shall notify the FCC and Village
within ten (10) days of ceasing operations. Such facilities shall be removed
within three (3) months of notifying the FCC and Village of intent to cease
operations at the site unless a time extension is approved by the corporate
authorities. A copy of the relevant portions of a signed lease which requires
the applicant to remove the tower and associated facilities upon cessation of
operations at the site shall be submitted at the time of application. In the
event that a tower and associated facilities is not removed within three (3)
months of the cessation of operations at a site, the tower and associated
facilities may be removed by the Village and the costs of removal assessed
against the property.
   B.   Unused portions of towers above a manufactured connection shall be
removed within two (2) months of the time of antenna relocation. The
replacement of portions of a tower previously removed shall require the
issuance of a new permit following review and approval by the Village in
accordance with the provisions herein. (Ord. 709, 10-5-1999)
4-15-11: GRANDFATHER PROVISIONS:
Existing personal wireless service facilities located within the corporate
limits of the Village at the time of the adoption of this Chapter, which
currently are the properties located at 100 Park Road and 100 Elwood/Brown
Road, shall be exempt from the provisions of this Chapter until such time they
cease operations in accordance with the provisions herein or the existing
personal wireless service facility is modified to conform with the provisions
of this Chapter. (Ord. 709, 10-5-1999)
CHAPTER 16
SITE PLAN REVIEW
SECTION:
4-16-1: Purpose And Intent
4-16-2: Applicability
4-16-3: Classification Of Projects
4-16-4: Application And Review Procedures
4-16-5: Approval Criteria And Standards
4-16-6: Amendments To Approved Plans
4-16-7: Fees
4-16-1: PURPOSE AND INTENT:
The intent of this chapter is to establish procedures and standards for the
review and approval of site plans to ensure full compliance with all local,
state and federal ordinances and regulations and to ensure that a proposed land
use or activity is compatible with the character of the surrounding area, the
adjacent uses of land, the natural environment, the capacities of public
services and will protect the public health, safety and welfare. (Ord. 918, 9-
5-2006)
4-16-2: APPLICABILITY:
   A.   This chapter shall apply to the following:
      1.   The construction of any new, nonresidential building or structure;
      2.   The expansion of any nonresidential building or structure;
      3.   The conversion, in whole or in part, of an existing building from
residential to nonresidential use;
      4.   The construction of any new residential structure containing three
(3) or more dwelling units;
      5.   The modification or expansion of an existing residential structure
which results in an increase in the number of dwelling units in the structure
to three (3) or more;
      6.   Any development in any district for which a special use permit is
required;
      7.   The construction or expansion of paved areas, including access
drives and parking lots, involving an area of more than one thousand (1,000)
square feet; or
      8.   The establishment of a new nonresidential use even if no buildings
or structures are proposed.
   B.   This chapter does not apply to the construction or modification of
single-family detached homes, two-family homes, agricultural buildings or
structures, or existing buildings or premises legally established prior to the
adoption of this chapter unless one or more of the factors described in
subsection A of this section is present.
   C.   No land, building, or structure shall be erected or used and no
building permit or sign permit shall be issued for a development within the
scope of this chapter unless and until a site plan has been approved in
accordance with this chapter. No land, building or structure shall be occupied
or used and no certificate of occupancy shall be issued until all requirements
and conditions of the site plan approval have been implemented and all
improvements completed in accordance with an approved site plan. (Ord. 918, 9-
5-2006)
4-16-3: CLASSIFICATION OF PROJECTS:
Any development or construction which is subject to the scope of this chapter
under subsection
4-16-2A of this chapter shall be classified as either a minor or major site
plan. The determination of this classification shall be made by the zoning
officer or village administrator according to the following criteria:
   A.   Minor Site Plan Review: A project requiring minor site plan review
shall be any of the following:
      1.   An expansion of any nonresidential building or structure not
exceeding one thousand (1,000) square feet or ten percent (10%) of the existing
floor area, whichever is less.
      2.   A change in use of an existing building that does not comply with
current site design standards such as, but not limited to, landscaping,
lighting, parking, signs or drainage.
      3.   The construction or expansion of paved areas, including access
drives and parking lots, involving an area of more than one thousand (1,000)
square feet but not more than five thousand (5,000) square feet.
   B.   Major Site Plan Review: A project requiring major site plan review
shall be any project which is not classified as a minor site plan review. (Ord.
918, 9-5-2006)
4-16-4: APPLICATION AND REVIEW PROCEDURES:
   A.   Application: Application for site plan approval may be made separate
from or in conjunction with an application for land subdivision. The village
board may approve a site plan prior to the platting, division, or consolidation
of land conditioned upon such platting, division or consolidation. Site plans
for which the proposed use requires a zoning map amendment shall only be acted
upon by the village after a map amendment has been approved according to the
procedures set forth in the zoning ordinance.
   B.   Preapplication Conference: Prior to submitting a site plan application,
the applicants or agent must schedule a preapplication conference with the
village staff. The purpose of this meeting is to familiarize the applicant with
the review procedures and submission requirements and to familiarize the
village staff with the nature of the project. No decisions relative to the
acceptability of the plan may be made at this meeting. At this time the
determination will be made, based on the presented information, as to whether
the project shall be considered a minor or major site plan. The applicant
should bring to this meeting any working drawings, plans, sketches, surveys,
reports or other such information that will aid the village staff in assessing
the project.
   C.   Site Plan Review Committee (SPRC): In conjunction with the formal
application process in subsection E of this section, the applicant must attend
a meeting of the site plan review committee (SPRC). This committee will consist
of a licensed architect, the village planner, a village board member, and a
village planning and zoning commission member. The SPRC meets on an "as needed"
basis.
      1.   The applicant will contact the village planner, to schedule a
meeting with the SPRC two (2) weeks prior to the requested meeting date. The
applicant shall also provide to the village four (4) copies of a three-
dimensional color rendering of the proposed building or structure two (2) weeks
prior to the initial SPRC meeting. This drawing shall depict all four (4) sides
of the proposed building or structure, including proposed screening of
mechanical equipment and dumpsters. Samples of building materials are strongly
encouraged to be submitted at this time as well.
      2.   The applicant and applicant's architect will then present the
building elevations of the proposed project to the SPRC for review and comment.
The SPRC may advise the applicant of any suggested changes or additions to the
proposed elevations at this time.
      3.   The applicant shall reappear before the SPRC with any suggested
changes in response to the initial meeting. At this time, the SPRC may submit a
recommendation to the village board and planning and zoning commission on the
proposed elevations. If the SPRC submits a negative recommendation, the project
must receive a two-thirds (2/3) majority vote from the village board for
approval. The applicant may request to appear before the SPRC as many times as
needed to receive a favorable recommendation. Village staff will submit copies
of the proposed layout and elevations to the village board and planning and
zoning commission simultaneously once the SPRC has made a recommendation.
   D.   Planning And Zoning Commission And Village Board Workshop Session:
After receiving a recommendation from the SPRC, the village will schedule a
workshop session with the planning and zoning commission and the village board
(in no particular order) for review of the proposed building elevations and
conceptual site layout. Fifteen (15) copies of the conceptual site layout and
color rendering of the building shall be provided to village staff one week
prior to each scheduled meeting.
   E.   Application Procedure:
      1.   Minor Site Plan: The applicant shall submit a formal application for
review and approval of a site plan to the village. The application shall
consist of the following:
The applicant shall submit all information requested by the village staff that
is deemed necessary to review the minor site plan:
         a.   A fully executed and signed copy of the application for site plan
review and application fee;
         b.   A fully executed professional fee agreement and deposit;
         c.   All information requested by the village staff that is deemed
necessary to review the minor site plan including drawings, sketches, and
calculations.
      2.   Major Site Plan: In conjunction with appearing before the site plan
review committee, the applicant shall submit a formal application for review
and approval of a site plan to the village. The application shall consist of
the following:
         a.   A fully executed and signed copy of the application for site plan
review and application fee.
         b.   Five (5) copies of the site plan and supporting documents as
described in subsection F2 of this section.
         c.   A fully executed professional fee agreement and deposit.
         d.   Upon receipt of the application the village planner shall review
the completeness of the application and upon determination that the application
is complete, forward a copy of the application to the village administrator,
village engineer, public works department, and any other department or agency
deemed necessary. If the application is incomplete, the village planner shall
notify the applicant in writing of this determination and specify what
materials or information are required to complete the application. No action
will be taken on the application until the application has been determined to
be complete.
   F.   Submission Requirements: The site plan application shall include at a
minimum the following:
      1.   Minor Site Plan: As determined and requested by village staff.
      2.   Major Site Plan: A drawing or drawings prepared at a scale of not
less than one inch to one hundred feet (1" = 100') which shall include:
         a.   General Information:
            (1)   Name, address and phone number of the developer.
            (2)   Name, address and phone number of the record owner if
different from developer.
            (3)   Name, address and phone number of the architect, engineer,
landscape architect, land planner, surveyor or consulting firm responsible for
preparing the plan(s).
            (4)   Seal and registration of any architect, engineer, landscape
architect or similar professional involved in the preparation of the plan(s).
            (5)   Date of plan preparation/revision.
            (6)   North arrow and scale.
            (7)   Legal description of the property.
            (8)   If applicable, a site data table indicating the gross
acreage, net acreage, site coverage percentage, building area(s), floor to area
ratio.
         b.   Existing Conditions:
            (1)   Zoning and use of the property.
            (2)   Zoning and use of all adjacent properties.
            (3)   The bearings and distance of all property lines and the
source of this information.
            (4)   Existing topography of the site shown at two foot (2')
intervals and extending a minimum of twenty five feet (25') beyond the property
lines of the site.
            (5)   Building setback lines.
            (6)   Location and extent of any water bodies, wetlands, streams
and floodplains on or adjacent to the site.
            (7)   Location and size of existing trees.
            (8)   Location of other notable natural features.
            (9)   Location and dimension of any existing easements.
            (10)   Copies of any applicable covenants or deed restrictions.
            (11)   Location, size, and ground floor elevation of all existing
buildings on the site.
            (12)   The location and dimension of any other structures or
improvements on the site.
            (13)   Location, names, and widths of existing streets and rights
of way within or adjacent to the site.
            (14)   Location and size of any existing storm sewer, water main,
sanitary sewer, culverts, drains, field tiles, on site disposal systems, wells,
power or telephone poles, electrical lines, telephone lines, and gas lines on
the subject site or of any such entities off site that will serve the subject
site.
            (15)   The location, front view and dimension of existing signs.
         c.   Proposed Development:
            (1)   Proposed use and zoning.
            (2)   A grading plan showing the proposed changes in the topography
of the site at two foot (2') intervals with spot grades provided at significant
points.
            (3)   The location and dimensions of all provisions for water
supply and sanitary sewer.
            (4)   A storm water detention/retention plan including storm water
runoff and detention calculation. The methods for computing such requirements
shall be those specified in the village's subdivision ordinance.
            (5)   The location, elevation, and size of all catch basins,
ditches, swales, retention basins and storm sewers.
            (6)   An erosion control plan, the requirements for which shall be
consistent with the village's subdivision ordinance.
            (7)   The location, dimensions, and foundation/floor elevations of
all proposed buildings or expansions on the site.
            (8)   The location and dimensions of proposed driveways, parking
areas, loading areas, and sidewalks.
            (9)   The location, dimensions, front view and materials of
proposed signs.
            (10)   The location and type of exterior lighting, including a
point by point photometric plan if required by the village.
            (11)   The location and nature of electrical, telephone, gas, cable
or other utility services to be installed at the site.
            (12)   Building plans showing at a minimum the floor plans and
elevations of all proposed principal and accessory buildings and a schedule of
the type and color of exterior surface materials. A three-dimensional color
rendering of the proposed building or structure must be provided.
            (13)   Landscape plans including a schedule of all plantings by
type and size as well as any berming, fencing, screening, or other hardscape
features proposed.
         d.   Other: Supporting reports, documents, exhibits, etc.
   G.   Review Procedures:
      1.   Minor Site Plan:
         a.   The village staff shall review the information requested and
either approve the minor site plan or prepare a report to the applicant
indicating any deficiencies in the site plan in meeting all applicable
requirements of this code. The applicant shall modify the site plan to correct
any deficiencies or apply for formal relief or variance for the deficiency if
such application is available.
         b.   Upon completion of revisions to the minor site plan that correct
the deficiencies identified by the village staff, the minor site plan shall be
placed on the next available board of trustees agenda for consideration. The
village board will approve or deny the site plan application based on the
approval criteria and standards. The village board may impose conditions upon
the site plan provided they relate to the approval criteria and standards and
are necessary to meet the intent of this chapter. If any formal relief or
variance is sought by the applicant it shall follow the adopted procedures for
such relief or variance.
      2.   Major Site Plan:
         a.   Written Review: Within twenty (20) days of the application being
determined to be complete, the village planner, village engineer, code
enforcement officer, public works department, and any other notified department
shall provide the village administrator or zoning officer a written review of
the application. These reviews shall evaluate the application's conformance
with the approval criteria and standards of this chapter and identify any areas
in which there are deficiencies in meeting the criteria and standards.
         b.   Staff Report: The village planner shall prepare a report to the
applicant indicating or enclosing the review comments and the applicant's
conformance with the review criteria. This report shall be provided to the
applicant within thirty five (35) days of the application being determined to
be complete. If the staff report does not identify any issues or deficiencies
with the plans, an agenda date will be assigned for the application to be
reviewed by the village plan commission. If, however, the staff report
identifies concerns or deficiencies, a staff workshop shall be scheduled prior
to scheduling a plan commission agenda date.
         c.   Staff Workshop: If the staff report identifies any concerns,
issues, or deficiencies with the site plan or any areas in which the staff does
not believe that the approval criteria are met, the village planner shall
schedule a staff workshop with the applicant. This workshop is intended to
provide the applicant with guidance on how the application could be modified to
comply with the review criteria and standards or address concerns raised in the
review process. The staff shall work with the applicant to resolve all issues.
         d.   Pending Application Intentions: Within ten (10) days of the staff
workshop, the applicant shall advise the village planner of his/her intention
with regard to the pending application. If the applicant desires to proceed
without revisions to the application, the village planner shall schedule a plan
commission agenda date for the application. If after the staff workshop the
applicant chooses to revise the site plan and/or submit additional materials,
fifteen (15) copies of these materials shall be submitted.
         e.   Review Of Revised Plan: Within five (5) days of receiving the
revised plans/materials, the village planner shall distribute copies to the
village departments for review. Each department shall provide a revised written
review to the village planner within ten (10) days of receiving the revised
plans/materials. Within ten (10) days of receipt of the revised reports, the
village planner shall provide the applicant with a revised staff report
indicating that all issues or deficiencies previously identified have been
addressed or indicating any remaining concerns or deficiencies in the plans.
         f.   Notice Of Intention: Within ten (10) days of receiving the
revised staff report the applicant shall notify the village planner in writing
of his/her intention with regard to the pending application. The applicant may
elect to: 1) proceed to have the application set for a plan commission agenda,
2) request another staff workshop or 3) provide revised plans or materials to
address the remaining concerns/deficiencies. If the applicant chooses to
conduct another staff workshop or submit additional revisions/information, the
procedures shall be the same as before.
         g.   Consideration By The Plan Commission: The application shall be
placed on the agenda of the village plan commission for its review and
recommendation. The plan commission shall be provided a copy of the staff
reports regarding the application. After review of the application, the plan
commission shall, within sixty (60) days, by majority vote of the members
present, make a recommendation to the village board regarding action on the
application based on its conformance with the approval criteria and standards.
Such recommendation shall be provided to the village board in writing within
thirty (30) days of the plan commission's decision.
         h.   Consideration By The Village Board Of Trustees:
            (1)   Following receipt of the recommendation of the plan
commission, the village board shall consider the application and its
conformance with the approval criteria and standards and take action on the
application within sixty (60) days of the plan commission's review.
            (2)   If the applicant submits a revised application or
supplemental submissions while the application is under consideration by the
plan commission or village board, the planning commission or village board
shall table the application to allow for review of the new information. The
application may be tabled by the plan commission or village board for a period
of time not exceeding the maximum original review periods established in this
chapter.
         i.   Conditions Of Approval: The village board may impose conditions
on the site plan. Any condition imposed must relate directly to the approval
criteria and standards and be necessary to meet the intent of this chapter.
(Ord. 918, 9-5-2006)
4-16-5: APPROVAL CRITERIA AND STANDARDS:
   A.   Criteria And Standards: The village staff, plan commission and village
board shall review the site plan application to ensure that it complies with
all of the criteria and standards below:
      1.   Site Configuration: Buildings and structures will meet or exceed
setback standards, height and other dimensional standards and be appropriately
placed in relation to natural features of the site.
      2.   Buildings: Buildings shall be designed, situated and constructed so
as to conform to any applicable design criteria of the village. All buildings
shall have a strong visual relationship and design compatibility between the
building, the site, and adjacent development. The exterior appearances and mass
of the building(s) shall complement the existing development and character
within the surrounding area.
      3.   Impact On Surrounding Land Uses And Zoning: The proposed site plan
will be harmonious with and not harmful or injurious to existing and planned
uses in the immediate area. The proposed improvements will be coordinated with
improvements serving the site and other properties in the area. The site plan
shall meet the intent of this chapter and the intent of the village zoning
ordinance.
      4.   Preservation Of Natural Features: The site plan shall demonstrate
judicious effort to preserve the integrity of the land, natural topography,
drainage, wetlands, watercourses, floodplains, and existing vegetation.
      5.   Public Services And Utilities: The site plans shall be served
adequately with sanitary sewer, public water, and storm sewer and such
utilities shall be provided in accordance with the recommendations of the
village engineer.
      6.   Signs: Proposed signs shall meet the requirements of all applicable
village regulations and shall be generally complementary with surrounding
properties and traffic operations. The size, location, design and lighting of
the signs shall be considered in relation to adjacent sites, glare, traffic
safety, and compatibility with adjoining properties.
      7.   Exterior Lighting: The site plan shall provide for exterior lighting
that meets the following standards:
         a.   At the expense of the developer, all roads, driveways, sidewalks,
parking lots and other common areas and facilities in unsubdivided and other
developments shall be sufficiently illuminated to ensure the security of
property and the safety of persons using such roads, driveways, sidewalks,
parking lots and other common areas and facilities. Without limiting the
generality of the foregoing standards, the following minimum standards shall
apply:
            (1)   For residential uses, lights shall be installed in parking
areas containing five (5) or more parking spaces and shall be illuminated
between dusk and dawn. For nonresidential uses, lights shall be installed in
all parking areas containing five (5) or more parking spaces and shall be
illuminated between dusk and dawn, whenever said premises are open for
operation. "Open for operation" shall be construed to mean any time that a
retail business is open for the sale of goods or services or a retail, office
or industrial facility actually has employees working within or upon said
premises, other than guards or watchmen. Lights shall not be more than fifteen
feet (15') in height in residential zoning districts, and not more than thirty
feet (30') in height in other zoning districts.
            (2)   Where lighted areas are required, lighting shall be provided
as follows:
 
                             Minimum* Maximum*
Residential zoning districts 1.0      2.0
Commercial zoning districts  1.0      3.0
Industrial zoning districts  2.5      5.0
*Average ground level foot-candles.
 
Average foot-candles at property line shall not exceed 0.5 foot-candles as
measured at the property line.
         b.   All lighting shall be constructed, positioned and maintained in
such a way so as not to reflect light either directly or indirectly onto
adjacent properties.
      8.   Parking And Loading: The number, location and dimensions of all
parking and loading spaces and the design of parking and loading areas shall
meet the requirements of all applicable village regulations.
      9.   Landscaping And Screening: Landscaping and screening on the site
shall be provided in accordance with the following requirements:
         a.   Landscaping and screening shall be provided along property lines
between nonresidential uses and residential uses.
         b.   All yards and open spaces surrounding buildings, parking lots,
access drives and streets shall be landscaped with trees and shrubs, and shall
be maintained by the property owner.
         c.   Trees in front yards shall be planted at a ratio of at least one
21/2-inch caliper shade tree (as measured 12 inches above grade) for every
thirty feet (30') of street frontage. Strategic grouping of trees is
encouraged, as opposed to even spacing of trees.
         d.   Yard areas shall be landscaped at a ratio of at least one shrub
or tree for every ten feet (10') of the principal building's nearest exterior
wall. Strategic grouping is also encouraged.
         e.   For parking areas greater than thirty (30) spaces, a minimum of
twenty (20) square feet of interior landscaped area per space shall be
provided. In order to qualify as an interior landscaped area, said area shall
be located wholly within or projecting inward from the boundaries of the
parking area.
         f.   All trash enclosure areas and containers shall be fully screened
from streets and adjacent properties with a six foot (6') high sight obscuring
fence, wall or landscaped area placed around said facility. All trash
enclosures must be placed on a concrete pad sufficient to support said
enclosure to the satisfaction of the zoning administrator.
         g.   All permanent outdoor storage areas of goods, products,
materials, supplies, machinery equipment or overnight parking of commercial
vehicles shall not be allowed in the front yard. Where permitted, permanent
outdoor storage areas of goods, products, materials, supplies, machinery
equipment or overnight parking of commercial vehicles shall be enclosed to a
height of eight feet (8') above grade and screened to an opacity of not less
than seventy five percent (75%). These requirements can be achieved by using
any one or a combination of the following methods:
            (1)   The storage area can be screened with trees having a leafy
structure or with fences having structural components through which only twenty
five percent (25%) of the image is visible.
            (2)   Fences, berms and/or landscaping can be installed to a height
where only twenty five percent (25%) of the image is visible.
            (3)   Fences, berms and/or landscaping can be installed having a
width or design where only twenty five percent (25%) of the remaining
horizontal image is visible.
      10.   Vehicular Access And Circulation: The site plan shall provide for
the safe, convenient, uncongested and well defined access and circulation of
vehicles. Access to the site shall be designed to minimize traffic conflicts.
All streets and driveways shall be designed to meet all applicable village
regulations.
      11.   Nonmotorized Transportation Access And Circulation: Safe,
convenient, and aesthetically pleasing pedestrian and bicycle circulation
routes shall be provided within and accessing the site.
      12.   Drainage And Storm Water Management: The site plan shall provide
for site surface drainage and storm water management facilities that meet or
exceed the applicable standards of the village. (Ord. 918, 9-5-2006)
4-16-6: AMENDMENTS TO APPROVED PLANS:
   A.   Amendments: An applicant may request a change in an approved site plan.
A change in an approved site plan which results in a major change shall require
approval of the amendment by the village board of trustees after recommendation
on the matter by the village planning commission. All amendments shall follow
the procedures and conditions herein required for the original application
submittal and review. A change considered only a minor change shall require
only the submission of a revised plan to the village administrator or zoning
officer.
   B.   Determination Of Major And Minor Changes: A determination of whether a
change in an approved site plan is a major or minor change shall be made by the
village administrator or zoning officer according to the guidelines below. The
applicant may appeal the determination of a major change to the village
planning commission in writing at least seven (7) days prior to the next
regular scheduled planning commission meeting. The planning commission will
vote to either uphold or reverse the determination. If the determination is
upheld then the amendment shall proceed only according to the procedures set
forth herein.
      1.   Guidelines For Major Change:
         a.   A change in the original concept of the development;
         b.   A change in the original use or character of the development;
         c.   A change in the type of dwelling unit as identified on the
approved site plan;
         d.   An increase in the number of dwelling units planned;
         e.   Rearrangement of lots, blocks, or building tracts;
         f.   A change in the character or function of any street;
         g.   A reduction in the amount of land set aside for common open
space;
         h.   An increase or decrease in any building area over five percent
(5%);
         i.   An increase or decrease over five percent (5%) in any building
height;
         j.   Significant variations in the design layout of the site plan,
such as, but not limited to, the deletion, relocation or addition of on site
improvements such as drives, parking lots, structures, berms, curbs,
landscaping, utilities.
      2.   Guidelines For Minor Changes:
         a.   Any minor variations in layout that do not constitute a major
change;
         b.   An increase or decrease in any building area less than five
percent (5%);
         c.   An increase or decrease less than five percent (5%) in any
building height;
         d.   Changes in the species of required trees, shrubs or ground cover
designated on the site plan. (Ord. 918, 9-5-2006)
4-16-7: FEES:
Fees for the review of site plans shall be established by resolution of the
village board of trustees. In addition to the application fee for a site plan,
the applicant shall also be required to execute a professional fee agreement
and post the required deposit for such agreement. No action on any site plan
application shall be taken by the village until the application fee,
professional fee agreement, and deposit have been made. (Ord. 918, 9-5-2006)
CHAPTER 17
ADULT USE CANNABIS REGULATIONS
SECTION:
4-17-1: Definitions
4-17-2: Purpose And Applicability
4-17-3: Special Use Permit Required
4-17-4: Adult Use Cannabis Facility Standards
4-17-5: Adult Use Cannabis Craft Grower
4-17-6: Adult Use Cannabis Cultivation Center
4-17-7: Adult Use Cannabis Dispensing Organization
4-17-8: Adult Use Cannabis Infuser Organization
4-17-9: Adult Use Cannabis Processing Organization
4-17-10: Adult Use Cannabis Transporting Organization
4-17-11: Additional Requirements
4-17-12: Co-Location Of Cannabis Establishments
4-17-1: DEFINITIONS:
For the purpose of this Chapter, the words and phrases used herein shall have
the following meanings, unless some other meaning is clearly indicated by the
context:
                                        The Cannabis Regulation and Tax Act,
ACT:                                    P.A. 101-0027, as amended from time to
                                        time.
                                        An adult-use cannabis cultivation
ADULT-USE CANNABIS BUSINESS             center, craft grower, processing
ESTABLISHMENT:                          organization, infuser organization,
                                        dispensing organization or transporting
                                        organization.
                                        A facility operated by an organization
                                        or business that is licensed by the
                                        Illinois Department of Agriculture to
                                        cultivate, dry, cure, and package
                                        cannabis and to perform other necessary
ADULT-USE CANNABIS CRAFT GROWER:        activities to make cannabis available
                                        for sale at a dispensing organization
                                        or use at a processing organization,
                                        per the Act, as it may be amended from
                                        time to time, and regulations
                                        promulgated thereunder.
                                        A facility operated by an organization
                                        or business that is licensed by the
                                        Illinois Department of Agriculture to
                                        cultivate, process, and transport
                                        cannabis and to perform other necessary
ADULT-USE CANNABIS CULTIVATION CENTER:  activities to provide cannabis and
                                        cannabis-infused products to licensed
                                        cannabis business establishments, per
                                        the Act, as it may be amended from time
                                        to time, and regulations promulgated
                                        thereunder.
                                        A facility operated by an organization
                                        or business that is licensed by the
                                        Illinois Department of Financial and
                                        Professional Regulation to acquire
                                        cannabis from licensed cannabis
                                        business establishments for the purpose
ADULT-USE CANNABIS DISPENSING           of selling or dispensing cannabis,
ORGANIZATION:                           cannabis-infused products, cannabis
                                        seeds, paraphernalia or related
                                        supplies to purchasers or to qualified
                                        registered medical cannabis patients
                                        and caregivers, per the Act, as it may
                                        be amended from time to time, and
                                        regulations promulgated thereunder.
                                        A facility operated by an organization
                                        or business that is licensed by the
                                        Illinois Department of Agriculture to
ADULT-USE CANNABIS INFUSER ORGANIZATION directly incorporate cannabis or
OR INFUSER:                             cannabis concentrate into a product
                                        formulation to produce a cannabis-
                                        infused product, per the Act, as it may
                                        be amended from time to time, and
                                        regulations promulgated thereunder.
                                        A facility operated by an organization
                                        or business that is licensed by the
                                        Illinois Department of Agriculture to
                                        either extract constituent chemicals or
ADULT-USE CANNABIS PROCESSING           compounds to produce cannabis
ORGANIZATION OR PROCESSOR:              concentrate or incorporate cannabis or
                                        cannabis concentrate into a product
                                        formulation to produce a cannabis
                                        product, per the Act, as it may be
                                        amended from time to time, and
                                        regulations promulgated thereunder.
                                        An organization or business that is
                                        licensed by the Illinois Department of
                                        Agriculture to transport cannabis on
                                        behalf of a cannabis business
ADULT-USE CANNABIS TRANSPORTING         establishment or a community college
ORGANIZATION OR TRANSPORTER:            licensed under the Community College
                                        Cannabis Vocational Training Pilot
                                        Program, per the Act, as it may be
                                        amended from time to time, and
                                        regulations promulgated thereunder.
                                        (Ord. 1307-09, 11-19-2019)
 
4-17-2: PURPOSE AND APPLICABILITY:
It is the intent and purpose of this Chapter to provide regulations regarding
the cultivation, processing and dispensing of adult-use cannabis occurring
within the corporate limits of the Village of Manhattan. All adult-use cannabis
business establishment facilities shall strictly comply with all regulations
provided in the Act, as it may be amended from time to time, all regulations
promulgated thereunder, the provisions of this Chapter, and all other
applicable provisions of this Title. In the event of a conflict between the
Act, any state regulations, and the Village's ordinances and regulations, the
more restrictive of the state or local regulations shall apply to the extent
permitted by law. (Ord. 1307-09, 11-19-2019)
4-17-3: SPECIAL USE PERMIT REQUIRED:
It shall be unlawful for any person to open or operate any adult-use cannabis
business establishment without having first secured a special use permit for
said establishment in compliance with the provisions of this Chapter and all
other relevant provisions of this Title. No special use permit shall be granted
for any adult-use cannabis business establishment unless the applicant for said
permit provides adequate assurances to the Village that the establishment will
be established and operated in full compliance with all applicable laws. (Ord.
1307-09, 11-19-2019)
4-17-4: ADULT USE CANNABIS FACILITY STANDARDS:
   A.   In considering any application for a special use permit for an adult-
use cannabis business establishment, the Village Planning and Zoning Commission
and Village Board, as the case may be, shall consider all of the following
factors:
      1.   Impact of the proposed facility on existing or planned uses located
within the vicinity of the subject property;
      2.   Proposed structure in which the facility will be located, including
co-tenancy (if in a multi-tenant building), total square footage, security
installations/security plan and building code compliance;
      3.   Hours of operation and anticipated number of customers/employees;
      4.   Anticipated parking demand and available private parking supply;
      5.   Anticipated traffic generation in the context of adjacent roadway
capacity and access to such roadways;
      6.   Site design, including access points, internal site circulation, and
proposed security measures;
      7.   Proposed signage plan;
      8.   Compliance with all requirements provided in Sections
4-17-5  through Section
4-17-10  of this Chapter, as applicable;
      9.   Compatibility with surrounding uses; and
      10.   Other criteria determined to be necessary to assess compliance with
this Title.
   B.   Nothing in this Chapter is intended or shall be deemed as relieving any
applicant for a special use permit for an adult-use cannabis business
establishment of their obligation to comply with and meet all other
requirements and standards set out for special use permits in this Title. (Ord.
1307-09, 11-19-2019)
4-17-5: ADULT USE CANNABIS CRAFT GROWER:
In those zoning districts in which an adult-use cannabis craft grower may be
located, the proposed facility must comply with the following.
   A.   A facility may not be located within five hundred feet (500') of the
property line of a pre-existing public or private nursery school, preschool,
primary or secondary school, day care center, day care home, or residential
care home. Learning centers and vocational/trade centers shall not be
considered or deemed to be a public or private school for purposes of this
Section.
   B.   A facility may not be located within one thousand five hundred feet
(1,500') of any other adult-use cannabis craft grower facility or adult-use
cannabis cultivation center.
   C.   No facility may be located on any property used or zoned for
residential purposes.
   D.   A facility may not conduct any sales or distribution of cannabis other
than as authorized by the Act.
   E.   The adult-use cannabis craft grower shall be the sole use of any tenant
space in which it is located, except to the extent that it may be co-located
with other adult-use cannabis business enterprises as provided in Section
4-17-12  of this Chapter.
   F.   A facility may not conduct any sales or distribution of cannabis other
than as authorized by the Act.
   G.   On-site consumption of cannabis is prohibited.
   H.   For purposes of determining required parking, the facilities shall be
classified as "manufacturing uses or any establishments engaged in production,
processing, cleaning, servicing, testing or repair of materials, goods, or
products" per Section
4-10-1-7 , provided, however, that the Village may require that additional
parking be provided as a result of the analysis completed through Section
4-17-4  of this Chapter.
   I.   Petitioner shall file an affidavit with the Village affirming
compliance with all requirements of this Title and the Act, including all
regulations promulgated thereunder. (Ord. 1307-09, 11-19-2019)
4-17-6: ADULT USE CANNABIS CULTIVATION CENTER:
In those zoning districts in which an adult-use cannabis cultivation center may
be located, the proposed facility must comply with the following.
   A.   A facility may not be located within one thousand five hundred feet
(1,500') of the property line of a pre-existing public or private nursery
school, preschool, primary or secondary school, day care center, day care home,
or residential care home. Learning centers and vocational/trade centers shall
not be considered or deemed to be a public or private school for purposes of
this Section.
   B.   No facility may be located on any property used or zoned for
residential purposes or within one thousand five hundred feet (1,500') of the
property line of any property that is zoned or used for residential purposes.
   C.   A facility may not conduct any sales or distribution of cannabis other
than as authorized by the Act.
   D.   The adult-use cannabis craft grower shall be the sole use of any tenant
space in which it is located, except to the extent that it may be co-located
with other adult-use cannabis business enterprises as provided in Section
4-17-12  of this Chapter.
   E.   On-site consumption of cannabis is prohibited.
   F.   For purposes of determining required parking, the facilities shall be
classified as "manufacturing uses or any establishments engaged in production,
processing, cleaning, servicing, testing or repair of materials, goods, or
products" per Section
4-10-1-7 , provided, however, that the Village may require that additional
parking be provided as a result of the analysis completed through Section
4-17-4  of this Chapter.
   G.   Petitioner shall file an affidavit with the Village affirming
compliance with all requirements of this Title and the Act, including all
regulations promulgated thereunder. (Ord. 1307-09, 11-19-2019)
4-17-7: ADULT USE CANNABIS DISPENSING ORGANIZATION:
In those zoning districts in which an adult-use cannabis dispensing
organization may be located, the proposed facility must comply with the
following.
   A.   A facility may not be located within five hundred feet (500') of the
property line of a pre-existing public or private nursery school, preschool,
primary or secondary school, day care center, day care home, or residential
care home. Learning centers and vocational/trade centers shall not be
considered or deemed to be a public or private school for purposes of this
Section.
   B.   A facility may not be located within one thousand five hundred feet
(1,500') of any other adult-use cannabis dispensing organization.
   C.   No facility may be located on any property used or zoned for
residential purposes.
   D.   The adult-use cannabis dispensing organization shall be the sole use of
any tenant space in which it is located, except to the extent that it may be
co-located with other adult-use cannabis business enterprises as provided in
Section
4-17-12  of this Chapter. No dispensing organization shall also sell food for
consumption on the premises.
   E.   A facility may not conduct any sales or distribution of cannabis other
than as authorized by the Act.
   F.   On-site consumption of cannabis is prohibited.
   G.   For purposes of determining required parking, the facilities shall be
classified as "retail stores" per Section
4-10-1-7 , provided, however, that the Village may require that additional
parking be provided as a result of the analysis completed through Section
4-17-4  of this Chapter.
   H.   Petitioner shall file an affidavit with the Village affirming
compliance with all requirements of this Title and the Act, including all
regulations promulgated thereunder. (Ord. 1307-09, 11-19-2019)
4-17-8: ADULT USE CANNABIS INFUSER ORGANIZATION:
In those zoning districts in which an adult-use cannabis infuser organization
may be located, the proposed facility must comply with the following.
   A.   A facility may not be located within five hundred feet (500') of the
property line of a pre-existing public or private nursery school, preschool,
primary or secondary school, day care center, day care home, or residential
care home. Learning centers and vocational/trade centers shall not be
considered or deemed to be a public or private school for purposes of this
Section.
   B.   A facility may not be located on any property used or zoned for
residential purposes.
   C.   The adult-use cannabis infuser organization shall be the sole use of
any tenant space in which it is located, except to the extent that it may be
co-located with other adult-use cannabis business enterprises as provided in
Section
4-17-12  of this Chapter.
   D.   A facility may not conduct any sales or distribution of cannabis other
than as authorized by the Act.
   E.   On-site consumption of cannabis is prohibited.
   F.   For purposes of determining required parking, the facilities shall be
classified as "business or professional offices" per Section
4-10-1-7 , provided, however, that the Village may require that additional
parking be provided as a result of the analysis completed through Section
4-17-4  of this Chapter.
   G.   Petitioner shall file an affidavit with the Village affirming
compliance with all requirements of this Title and the Act, including all
regulations promulgated thereunder. (Ord. 1307-09, 11-19-2019)
4-17-9: ADULT USE CANNABIS PROCESSING ORGANIZATION:
In those zoning districts in which an adult-use cannabis processing
organization may be located, the proposed facility must comply with the
following.
   A.   A facility may not be located within five hundred feet (500') of the
property line of a pre-existing public or private nursery school, preschool,
primary or secondary school, day care center, day care home, or residential
care home. Learning centers and vocational/trade centers shall not be
considered or deemed to be a public or private school for purposes of this
Section.
   B.   A facility may not be located on any property used or zoned for
residential purposes.
   C.   The adult-use cannabis processing organization shall be the sole use of
any tenant space in which it is located, except to the extent that it may be
co-located with other adult-use cannabis business enterprises as provided in
Section
4-17-12  of this Chapter.
   D.   A facility may not conduct any sales or distribution of cannabis other
than as authorized by the Act.
   E.   On-site consumption of cannabis is prohibited.
   F.   For purposes of determining required parking, the facilities shall be
classified as "business or professional offices" per Section
4-10-1-7 , provided, however, that the Village may require that additional
parking be provided as a result of the analysis completed through Section
4-17-4  of this Chapter.
   G.   Petitioner shall file an affidavit with the Village affirming
compliance all requirements of this Chapter and the Act. (Ord. 1307-09, 11-19-
2019)
4-17-10: ADULT USE CANNABIS TRANSPORTING ORGANIZATION:
In those zoning districts in which an adult-use cannabis processing
organization may be located, the proposed facility must comply with the
following.
   A.   A facility may not be located within five hundred feet (500') of the
property line of a pre-existing public or private nursery school, preschool,
primary or secondary school, day care center, day care home, or residential
care home. Learning centers and vocational/trade centers shall not be
considered or deemed to be a public or private school for purposes of this
Section.
   B.   A facility may not be located on any property used or zoned for
residential purposes.
   C.   The adult-use cannabis transporting organization shall be the sole use
of any tenant space in which it is located, except to the extent that it may be
co-located with other adult-use cannabis business enterprises as provided in
Section
4-17-12  of this Chapter.
   D.   A facility may not conduct any sales or distribution of cannabis other
than as authorized by the Act.
   E.   On-site consumption of cannabis is prohibited.
   F.   For purposes of determining required parking, the facilities shall be
classified as "business or professional offices" per Section
4-10-1-7 , provided, however, that the Village may require that additional
parking be provided as a result of the analysis completed through Section
4-17-4  of this Chapter.
   G.   Petitioner shall file an affidavit with the Village affirming
compliance with all requirements of this Title and the Act, including all
regulations promulgated thereunder. (Ord. 1307-09, 11-19-2019)
4-17-11: ADDITIONAL REQUIREMENTS:
Petitioner shall install any and all building enhancements (including, but not
limited to, security cameras, lighting, or other improvements, as set forth in
the special use permit) as the Village may deem necessary to ensure the safety
of the adult-use business establishment's employees and customers, as well as
all other persons as may be found in the general vicinity of such
establishment. The improvements shall be determined based on the specific
characteristics of the floor plan for an adult-use cannabis business
establishment and the site on which it is located, consistent with the
requirements of the Act. (Ord. 1307-09, 11-19-2019)
4-17-12: CO-LOCATION OF CANNABIS ESTABLISHMENTS:
The Village may approve the co-location of an adult-use cannabis dispensing
organization with an adult-use cannabis craft grower center or an adult-use
cannabis infuser organization, or both, subject to the provisions of the Act.
In a co-location, any sole use requirements stated herein shall not apply to
prevent such co-location, but the co-located adult-use cannabis business
establishments shall be the sole uses of any tenant space they occupy. (Ord.
1307-09, 11-19-2019)
TITLE 5
SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS
CHAPTER 1
GENERAL PROVISIONS
SECTION:
5-1-1: Title
5-1-2: Intent And Purpose
5-1-3: Jurisdiction
5-1-4: Interpretation
5-1-5: Definitions
5-1-6: Effect On Existing Plats And Site Plans
5-1-7: Prohibition Of Subdivision
5-1-8: Prohibition Of Development
5-1-9: Offerings Or Dedications; Plan Of Future Development
5-1-10: Variations
5-1-11: Enforcement
5-1-12: Amendments
5-1-13: Resubdivision Of Land
5-1-14: Vacation Of Plats
5-1-15: Publication
5-1-1: TITLE:
The title of this title shall be SUBDIVISION AND DEVELOPMENT REGULATIONS FOR
THE VILLAGE OF MANHATTAN, WILL COUNTY, ILLINOIS. The provisions of chapters 1,
2, 3, 4, 5 and 7 of this title that existed prior to the effective date hereof
shall remain in full force and effect for all subdivisions final platted prior
to the effective date hereof and are on file at the village hall. (Ord. 946, 3-
20-2007)
5-1-2: INTENT AND PURPOSE:
This title is adopted for the following purposes:
   A.   Ensure sound, harmonious subdivision development and community growth
which will become a permanent community asset by establishing minimum standards
for subdivision design and construction.
   B.   Assure the development of land for the highest and best use with all
the necessary protection against deterioration and obsolescence which would
adversely affect the living environment or tax base.
   C.   Provide common grounds of understanding and a sound working
relationship between the village and the developer and to safeguard the
interests of the homeowner, the subdivider, the investor and the village.
   D.   Control the scattered and premature platting of lots beyond the
effective operating range of existing public utilities and improvements.
   E.   Cause the cost of design and installation of improvements in new,
platted subdivisions to be borne by the persons purchasing the lots rather than
be any direct or indirect burden upon existing property owners beyond the
limits of the subdivision who have already paid for the improvements servicing
their property.
   F.   Bring about compact development of both homes and public improvements
without the delay often experienced through future use of special assessment
methods.
   G.   Coordinate new subdivision design with the design of the village as a
whole to allow for the proper capacity of all types of improvements on the
basis of an orderly sequence of subdivisions as a part of neighborhoods and
neighborhoods as a part of the community.
   H.   Secure the rights of the public with respect to public lands and
waters.
   I.   Improve land records by establishing standards for surveys and plats.
   J.   Otherwise provide for the health, safety, comfort, and convenience of
the residents of the village and surrounding territory. (Ord. 946, 3-20-2007)
5-1-3: JURISDICTION:
These regulations shall be applicable to all subdivisions, resubdivision, and
development of residential or nonresidential territory within the corporate
limits of the village and unincorporated territory not more than one and one-
half (11/2) miles beyond the corporate limits and not included in any other
municipality. In the event of overlapping jurisdiction with other
municipalities within one and one-half (11/2) miles of the corporate limits of
the village, the extent of jurisdiction of the village shall be as determined
and agreed upon between the municipalities or as provided by statute. (Ord.
946, 3-20-2007)
5-1-4: INTERPRETATION:
   A.   In interpretation and application, the provisions of this title shall
be held to be the minimum requirements.
   B.   Where the conditions imposed by any provisions of this title with
respect to the use of land are either more restrictive or less restrictive than
comparable conditions imposed by any provisions of any other ordinance or any
law, resolution, rule or regulation of any kind, the regulations which are more
restrictive or which impose higher standards or requirements shall govern.
   C.   This title is not intended to abrogate the provisions of any easement,
covenant, or any other private agreement with respect to the use of land but no
such provision shall operate to lessen the restrictions or lower the standards
as provided in this title.
   D.   If any subchapter, section, division, sentence, clause, phrase or
portion of this title is, for any reason, held invalid or unconstitutional by
any court of competent jurisdiction, such portion shall be deemed a separate,
distinct and independent provision and such holding shall not affect the
validity of the remaining portions hereof.
   E.   Any proposed plat of subdivision or site plan otherwise in conformity
with the provisions of this title may be disapproved where the planning and
zoning commission, after full examination and review, makes a definite
determination that such proposed subdivision or development would be in
conflict with the comprehensive plan or detrimental to the best interest of the
public health, safety, or welfare.
   F.   Any subdivision or development of land which was not lawfully existing
at the time of the adoption of this title shall not be made lawful solely by
reason of the adoption of this title, and to the extent that subdivision of
land is in conflict in any manner with the requirements of this title, said
subdivision of land remains unlawful hereunder. (Ord. 946, 3-20-2007)
5-1-5: DEFINITIONS:
For the purpose of this title the following definitions shall apply unless the
context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning:
   ALLEY: A public or private right of way primarily designed to serve as
secondary access to the side or rear of those properties whose principal
frontage is on some other street.
   APPLICANT: The person, firm, corporation, partnership or other legal entity
seeking approval to subdivide or develop a parcel, including the owner of
record, contract purchasers, subdividers, developers and other persons having a
proprietary interest in the parcel and their successors.
   BLOCK: A tract of land bounded by streets or by a combination of streets and
public parks, cemeteries, railroad rights of way, bulkhead lines or shorelines
of waterways or the corporate limits of the village.
   BUILDING: Any structure built for the support, shelter, or enclosure of
persons, animals, chattels or movable property of any kind, and which is
permanently affixed to the land.
   BUILDING SETBACK LINE: The line indicating the minimum horizontal distance
between the property line and building, either at the front or side of the lot.
   COLLECTOR THOROUGHFARE: A street which carries traffic from minor streets to
the thoroughfare system, or between secondary thoroughfares, and is so
designated as a collector thoroughfare on the comprehensive plan.
   COMPREHENSIVE PLAN: The general comprehensive plan of the village, including
the official comprehensive plan map and the provisions of this title.
   CONCEPT PLAN: Plan filed with the planning and zoning commission prior to
the filing of a preliminary plat or preliminary site plan and which shall
contain such information as set forth in section
5-2-1 of this title.
   CORPORATE AUTHORITIES: The president and the trustees of the village.
   CUL-DE-SAC: Local street with only one outlet and having an appropriate
terminal for the convenient reversal of traffic movement.
   DEVELOPMENT: Any construction, building or improvement on a parcel of land
or substantial change in any existing structures, including planned unit
developments.
   DEVELOPMENT REVIEW SESSION (DRS): Initial development meeting held at the
time of concept review which may include village staff and various members of
affected taxing agencies.
   EASEMENT: A right or privilege in the real property of another.
   FINAL PLAT: A plat of subdivision meeting the requirements of section
5-2-3 of this title in the form proposed or approved for recording.
   FRONTAGE: Length of the property line of the lot, lots or tract of land
abutting a public street, road, highway or rural right of way.
   GRADE: The slope of a road, street or other public way as specified by
percentage.
   LOT: A portion of a subdivision or other parcel of land intended for
transfer of ownership or for building development.
   LOT LINE: A property boundary line of any subdivision lot or any parcel of
land held in separate ownership, except that where any portion of the lot
extends into the abutting street or alley, such portion of the lot line thereof
shall be deemed to be the street or alley line.
   MAJOR THOROUGHFARE: A street of considerable continuity which serves or is
intended to serve as the principal traffic artery and is so designated as a
major thoroughfare on the official comprehensive plan map, generally having
limited access. Owners or occupants of abutting property or lands and other
persons have no legal right of access to or from these thoroughfares, except at
such points and in such manner as may be determined by the public authority
having jurisdiction over such trafficway.
   MARGINAL ACCESS STREET: A street which is parallel and adjacent to a major
or collector thoroughfare which provides access to abutting properties and
protection from through traffic, and is generally referred to as a frontage
road.
   MINOR STREET: A street of limited continuity used primarily for access to
abutting properties and serving local needs of a neighborhood.
   OFFICIAL MAP: The official comprehensive plan map of the village as
designated by this title.
   OWNER: Any person, firm, corporation, partnership or other legal entity
vested with the legal incidents of ownership with respect to the land sought to
be subdivided or developed under this title.
   PARCEL: The tract of land which is the subject of an application under this
title.
   PARKWAY: An unpaved area along or within a public right of way reserved for
planting of grass, trees, shrubbery or otherwise ornamented to provide a park
like character.
   PEDESTRIANWAY OR CROSSWALK: A right of way across or within a block for use
by pedestrian traffic, whether designated as a pedestrianway, crosswalk, or
however otherwise designated and may include utilities where necessary.
   PLANNING AND ZONING COMMISSION: The planning and zoning commission of the
village.
   PLAT: A plan, map, drawing or chart representing a plan for subdivision of
land and depicting the information required by this title.
   PRELIMINARY PLAT: The plat representing the plan of development of a
subdivision and containing the information required under section
5-2-2 of this title, intended to provide the applicant with preliminary
approvals on which he can rely for planning purposes.
   PRIVATE STREET: Any street not dedicated or not to be dedicated for public
use.
   PUBLIC IMPROVEMENT COORDINATOR: The public improvement coordinator of the
village.
   PUBLIC IMPROVEMENTS: Any sanitary sewer, storm sewer, drainage ditch, water
main, roadway, parkway, sidewalk, pedestrianway, planting strip, off street
parking area, or other facility for which the village may ultimately assume the
ownership or responsibility for maintenance and operation.
   PUBLIC STREET: Any street which is dedicated or is to be dedicated for
public use.
   RESUBDIVISION: A change in a map of an approved or recorded subdivision plat
if such change affects any street layout on such map or area reserved thereon
for public use, or any lot line, or if it affects any map or plan legally
recorded prior to the adoption of any regulation controlling subdivisions.
   RIGHT OF WAY: A strip of land occupied or intended to be occupied by a
street, crosswalk, railroad line, electric transmission line, oil or gas
pipeline, water main, sanitary or storm sewer main, or for another special use.
The usage of the term right of way for land platting purposes in the village
shall mean that every right of way hereafter established and shown on a final
plat is to be separate and distinct from the lots or parcels adjoining such
right of way, and not included within the dimensions of areas of such lots or
parcels.
   ROADWAY: A paved portion of a street available for vehicular traffic.
   SECONDARY THOROUGHFARE: A street of considerable continuity which serves or
is intended to serve as a principal traffic artery between the various sections
of the village and is so designated as a secondary thoroughfare on the
comprehensive plan.
   SIDEWALK: That portion of a street or crosswalkway right of way paved or
otherwise surfaced and intended for pedestrian use only.
   SITE PLAN: A plan, map, drawing or chart on which the applicant's plan for
the development of land is presented and which he submits for approval in
accordance with the provisions of this title.
   STREET: A public or private right of way which affords a primary means of
vehicular access to abutting properties, whether designed as a street, avenue,
highway, road, boulevard, thoroughfare, or however otherwise designed, but
excepting driveways to buildings and alleys.
   SUBDIVIDE: The division of land into two (2) or more parcels or lots, and
includes resubdivision.
   SUBDIVISION: A. Any parcel of land, vacant or improved, which is divided or
is proposed to be divided into two (2) or more lots, parcels, sites, units,
plots or interest by any method, including planned unit developments; or
   B.   Any construction, building or improvement on a parcel of land or
substantial change in any existing structures, including planned unit
developments.
The following shall not be considered a subdivision and shall be exempt from
the requirements of this title:
   A.   The resubdivision of land not involving more than three (3) lots none
of which is substandard and not requiring new streets to be dedicated;
   B.   The sale or exchange of parcels of land between owners of adjoining and
contiguous land providing no substandard lot evolves from the transaction;
   C.   The conveyance of parcels of land or interests therein for use as
rights of way for railroads or other public utility facilities which does not
involve any new streets or easements of access;
   D.   The conveyance of land owned by a railroad or other public utility
which does not involve any new streets or easements of access;
   E.   The conveyance of land for highway or other public purposes or grants
or conveyances relating to the dedication of land for public use or instruments
relating to the vacation of land impressed with a public use;
   F.   Conveyances made to correct descriptions in prior conveyances.
   SUBDIVISION ADMINISTRATOR: The village administrator of the village.
   THOROUGHFARE: A street with a high degree of continuity, including major,
secondary and collector streets.
   VILLAGE ATTORNEY: The village attorney of the village.
   VILLAGE BOARD: The board of trustees of the village.
   VILLAGE CLERK: The village clerk of the village.
   VILLAGE ENGINEER: The village engineer of the village.
   ZONING ORDINANCE: The zoning ordinance of the village as amended from time
to time. (Ord. 946, 3-20-2007)
5-1-6: EFFECT ON EXISTING PLATS AND SITE PLANS:
Nothing in this title shall be deemed to require any change in the plats, site
plans, construction or designated use of any land or structure in the event
that all of the following apply:
   A.   Final plat or site plan approval for such subdivision or development
was lawfully issued prior to the effective date of this title, or the effective
date of any amendment thereof; and
   B.   Such approval has not by its own terms expired prior to such effective
date; and
   C.   Such approval was issued on the basis of an application showing
complete plans for proposed construction. (Ord. 946, 3-20-2007)
5-1-7: PROHIBITION OF SUBDIVISION:
   A.   No person shall subdivide or resubdivide any parcel of land to which
this title applies within the planning jurisdiction of the village until a
subdivision plat, after review and recommendation by the planning and zoning
commission, has received final plat approval by the corporate authorities as
required by this title.
   B.   No sale of any parcel of land creating a subdivision to which this
title applies shall be consummated until a subdivision plat, after review and
recommendation by the planning and zoning commission, has received final plat
approval by the corporate authorities as required by this title.
   C.   No building permit shall be issued for the construction of any
building, structure or improvement on any subdivided lot within the village to
which this title applies until a plat of subdivision has been recorded
following review and recommendation by the planning and zoning commission and
after having received final plat approval by the corporate authorities as
required by this title. In any such subdivision the building permits shall not
be issued prior to the time street name and traffic control signs have been
installed; the bituminous binder course for all roadways has been constructed;
and any cash contribution in lieu of land dedications provided in the final
plat approval have been received; and any other conditions specified for final
approval have been satisfied. No certificate of occupancy shall be granted for
the use of any building or structure on a parcel within the village and subject
to this title until sidewalks and streetlights have been installed; and the
required sanitary sewer and water facilities have been installed and made ready
for servicing the parcel.
   D.   No person shall offer for recording any plat of subdivision to which
this title applies until such plat, after review and recommendation by the
planning and zoning commission, has received final plat approval by the
corporate authorities as required by this title. (Ord. 946, 3-20-2007)
5-1-8: PROHIBITION OF DEVELOPMENT:
   A.   No person shall commence or cause to be commenced any development
within the corporate limits or within the planning jurisdiction of the village
until a site plan, after review and recommendation by the planning and zoning
commission, has received final site plan approval by the corporate authorities
as required by this title. This requirement of site plan approval does not
extend to any of the following:
      1.   Any development involving the construction of one single-family
dwelling or one multiple-family dwelling unit.
      2.   Any nonresidential development under single ownership or control
involving the construction of any new buildings or structures of a total floor
area less than five hundred (500) square feet.
   B.   No building permit shall be issued for the construction of any
building, structure or improvement on any parcel within the village to which
this title applies until a site plan, after review and recommendation by the
planning and zoning commission, has received final site plan approval by the
corporate authorities as required by this title. No certificate of occupancy
shall be granted for the use of any building or structure on any parcel of land
within the village until all conditions specified for site plan approval have
been satisfied.
   C.   No person, firm, business entity or corporation, proposing to develop a
subdivision within the jurisdiction of these regulations shall proceed with any
construction or development work on the site of proposed subdivision until the
village has approved and recorded the final plat for the proposed subdivision,
and engineering plans, all fees, charges and contributions have been paid by
the developer and letters of credit for public improvements have been posted,
all other required governmental permits have been issued and otherwise fully
complied with all requisite village ordinances and regulations. (Ord. 946, 3-
20-2007)
5-1-9: OFFERINGS OR DEDICATIONS; PLAN OF FUTURE DEVELOPMENT:
   A.   All offerings or dedications of land to the village for use as streets,
highways, alleys, schools, parks, playgrounds or other public uses shall be
referred to the planning and zoning commission for review and recommendation
prior to acceptance by the corporate authorities or by another municipal body.
Title with respect to all such offerings or dedications of land shall be
conveyed in fee simple to the village or as the corporate authorities may
direct.
   B.   Where a tract or parcel of land proposed for subdivision is a part of a
larger parcel of land to be subdivided at a later date, the applicant shall
submit to the planning and zoning commission, in addition to the preliminary
plat, a plan of future development for the remaining land. (Ord. 946, 3-20-
2007)
5-1-10: VARIATIONS:
   A.   Where the planning and zoning commission finds that extraordinary
hardship or practical difficulties may result from the strict compliance with
these regulations, it may recommend variances to these regulations so that
substantial justice may be done and the public interest secured, provided that
such variances shall not have the effect of nullifying the intent and purpose
of these regulations and further provided that the planning and zoning
commission shall not recommend variances unless it shall make findings based
upon the evidence presented to it in each specific case that:
      1.   The granting of the variance will not be detrimental to the public
safety, health or welfare or injurious to other property;
      2.   The conditions upon which the request for a variance is based are
unique to property for which the variance is sought and are not applicable
generally to other property;
      3.   Because of the particular physical surroundings, shape or
topographical conditions of the specific property involved, a particular
hardship to the owner would result as distinguished from a mere inconvenience,
if the strict letter of these regulations are carried out;
      4.   The variances will not in any manner vary the provisions of the
zoning ordinance, comprehensive plan, official map or any other village
ordinance.
   B.   In recommending variances, the planning and zoning commission shall
require such conditions as will, in its judgment, secure substantially the
objectives of the standards or requirements of these regulations.
   C.   A written request for any such variance shall be submitted by the
applicant at the time when the preliminary plat or site plan application is
filed for the consideration of the planning and zoning commission. The request
shall state fully the grounds and all of the facts relied upon by the
applicant.
   D.   The applicant shall pay any and all fees, costs and expenses of the
village and its duly authorized agent that are incurred by the village in the
processing of any and all applications pursuant to this title. (Ord. 946, 3-20-
2007)
5-1-11: ENFORCEMENT:
   A.   The village administrator is hereby appointed as the subdivision
administrator and shall be responsible for enforcing these subdivision
regulations. He/she shall bring any violation or lack of compliance herewith to
the attention of the corporate authorities. (Ord. 946, 3-20-2007)
5-1-12: AMENDMENTS:
   A.   Any amendments to this title shall be made by the corporate authorities
except per subsection B of this section.
   B.   Any amendments to subsections
5-6-3A and B and
 5-6A-3A and B of this title shall be made by the corporate authorities after
review by the planning and zoning commission. (Ord. 1203, 8-4-2015)
5-1-13: RESUBDIVISION OF LAND:
   A.   Procedure For Resubdivision: For any change in a map of an approved or
recorded subdivision plat, if such change affects any street layout shown on
such map, or area reserved thereon for public use, or any lot line, or if it
affects any map or plan legally reached prior to the adoption of any
regulations controlling subdivisions, such resubdivision shall be approved by
the plan commission and corporate authorities by the same procedure, rules and
regulations for a subdivision.
   B.   Procedure For Subdivision Where Future Resubdivision Is Indicated:
Whenever a parcel of land is subdivided and the subdivision plat shows one or
more lots containing more than one acre of land and there are indications that
such lots will eventually be resubdivided into smaller building sites, the plan
commission or corporate authorities may require that such parcel of land allow
for the future opening of streets and the ultimate extension of adjacent
streets. Easements provided for the future opening and extension of such
streets may be made by requirement of the plat. (Ord. 946, 3-20-2007)
5-1-14: VACATION OF PLATS:
   A.   Any plat or any part of any plat may be vacated by the owner of the
premises, at any time before the sale of any lot therein, by a written
instrument, to which a copy of such plat shall be attached, declaring the same
to be vacated.
   B.   Such an instrument shall be approved by the planning and zoning
commission and corporate authorities in like manner as plats of subdivisions.
The corporate authorities may reject any such instrument which abridges or
destroys any public rights in any of its public uses, improvements, streets or
alleys.
   C.   Such an instrument shall be executed, acknowledged or approved, and
recorded or filed, in like manner as plats of subdivisions; and being duly
recorded or filed shall operate to destroy the force and effect of the
recording of the plat so vacated, and to divest all public rights in the
streets, alleys, and public grounds, and all dedications laid out or described
in such plat.
   D.   When lots have been sold, the plat may be vacated in the manner herein
provided by all the owners in such plat joining in the execution of such
writing. (Ord. 946, 3-20-2007)
5-1-15: PUBLICATION:
   A.   This title is hereby published in pamphlet form as provided by law. The
village clerk is ordered to make copies of this title available to all
interested parties upon payment of such sums as the corporate authorities shall
determine to be adequate to reimburse the general fund of the village for the
cost of printing and distributing the same. (Ord. 946, 3-20-2007)
CHAPTER 2
PROCEDURE FOR APPROVAL
SECTION:
5-2-1: Preapplication Procedure
5-2-2: Preliminary Plat Or Preliminary Site Plan
5-2-3: Final Plat Or Final Site Plan
5-2-4: Standards For Review Of Plats And Site Plans
5-2-5: Final Site Plan Approval For Commercial And Industrial Lots
5-2-6: Fees
5-2-1: PREAPPLICATION PROCEDURE:
   A.   In order to discuss the general purpose of the subdivision site plan or
development in the context of established planning policies and practices of
the village and to ensure that required data is properly prepared and presented
before expending the time and money in preparation and review of a preliminary
plat or site plan, any person desiring to subdivide or develop land subject to
this title, before filing a preliminary plat or site plan, may file a concept
plan of the subdivision site plan or development with the village clerk and
attend a development review session (DRS). The concept plan shall contain such
information as suggested by village staff, the planning and zoning commission
and the village board in order to delineate the concept of the subdivision site
plan or development adequately, including, but not limited to, a plat of
survey, a topographical map, soil information, current aerial photographs and a
sketch of the proposed development showing a road system and general land use
categories. It shall also include information describing the subdivision site
plan proposal, such as the number of residential lots, typical lot width and
depth, lot sizes, business areas, school playground and park areas, other
public areas, proposed restrictive covenants and proposed street and utilities
improvements. After preparation of a concept plan and attendance at a DRS
meeting, the applicant may also request that he be placed on the agenda of a
regular plan committee meeting and village board meeting, at which time he
shall submit the information specified above and gather additional comments,
but such request shall be made not less than one week prior to the next
regularly scheduled meeting. (Ord. 946, 3-20-2007)
5-2-2: PRELIMINARY PLAT OR PRELIMINARY SITE PLAN:
   A.   Any applicant shall first file with the village clerk an application
and fifteen (15) copies of a preliminary plan or preliminary site plan not to
exceed twenty four inches by thirty six inches (24" x 36") in size. Additional
copies may be required as deemed necessary by the subdivision administrator. At
the time of concept plan review the planning and zoning commission may
authorize the simultaneous filing of an application for preliminary and final
plat or site plan approvals without compliance with separate procedures in
particular cases where the nature and scope of the subdivision site plan or
development proposed does not require separate review procedures. Preliminary
plats containing three (3) lots or less and which do not involve the opening of
any new streets may be exempted from the requirement of the filing of a
preliminary plat and may be submitted as a final plat.
   B.   Any applications for preliminary plat or preliminary site plan approval
shall be filed at least thirty (30) days prior to the regular monthly meeting
of the planning and zoning commission at which presentation will be made. The
planning and zoning commission shall determine whether the application and plat
or plan are in proper form and shall not consider the application as filed
until all documents are in accordance with the requirements as set forth in
this subdivision ordinance, and the planning and zoning commission has been
furnished with a statement by the village clerk that the filing fee has been
paid.
   C.   The following general information, where applicable, shall be shown on
the preliminary plat or preliminary site plan unless waived by the planning and
zoning commission:
      1.   The proposed name of the subdivision site plan (which shall not
duplicate or resemble the name of any existing subdivision site plan within a
radius of 5 miles).
      2.   Date of preparation, north point and scale of drawing which shall be
one inch equals one hundred feet (1" = 100').
      3.   An identification clearly stating that the map is a preliminary
subdivision site plan plat or a preliminary site plan.
      4.   Legal description of the parcel.
      5.   The name and address of the record owner or owners, the applicant,
and the Illinois registered land surveyor or the licensed professional engineer
who prepared the plat with the appropriate seal affixed.
      6.   A vicinity map showing the general location of the parcel within the
village and environs.
   D.   The following conditions, if found to exist on the parcel, shall be
shown on any preliminary plat or site plan unless waived by the planning and
zoning commission:
      1.   The location, width and names of all streets within or adjacent to
the parcel together with easements, public utility and railroad rights of way,
and other important features such as municipal boundary lines, section lines,
corners and monuments.
      2.   Contour lines of the parcel and all adjacent land within one hundred
feet (100') of the boundaries of the parcel showing intervals no greater than:
         a.   One foot (1') contour intervals for ground slopes less than 0.5
percent.
         b.   Two foot (2') contour intervals for ground slope greater than 0.5
percent but less than two percent (2%).
         c.   Five foot (5') contour intervals for ground slope exceeding five
percent (5%).
      3.   The location and direction of all watercourses and the location of
all areas subject to flooding, including:
         a.   The flow lines of streams and channels showing their normal
shorelines and floodway and 100-year floodplain limits.
         b.   Lakes, ponds, swamps, marshes and any detention basins showing
their normal shorelines, floodway and 100-year floodplain limits and lines of
inflow and outflow, if any.
         c.   Seeps, springs, flowings and wells.
      4.   Natural features such as rock outcroppings, wooded areas, wetlands,
and isolated preservable trees one foot (1') or more in diameter.
      5.   Present uses of the parcel including the location of all existing
structures, showing those that will be removed and those that will remain on
the parcel after the final plat is recorded or development completed.
      6.   The location and size of existing sanitary, storm and combined
sewers, water mains, culverts, drain tiles, drainpipes, catch basins, manholes,
hydrants and electric and gas lines within the parcel and in adjacent streets
or rights of way. If water mains, sewers or electric or gas lines are not on or
adjacent to the parcel, indicate the direction and distance to, and size of,
the nearest usable facilities.
      7.   Zoning classifications of the parcel and of lands adjacent.
      8.   Houses, barns, shacks and other significant improvements.
   E.   The following improvements, if proposed or required, shall be shown on
the preliminary plat or site plan, or in supporting documents, unless waived by
the planning and zoning commission:
      1.   Streets and rights of way, showing the location, widths, number,
names and approximate grades thereof. The preliminary plat shall show the
relationship between existing and proposed streets and also show proposed
walks, curbs and gutters and streetlights.
      2.   Easements showing width and purpose.
      3.   Lots showing approximate dimensions, minimum lot sizes and proposed
lot and block numbers.
      4.   Preliminary engineering plan showing size and location of sanitary
and storm sewers, water mains, culverts and electric and gas lines.
      5.   Sites to be dedicated for school, park, playground or other public
purposes, together with appropriate acreage of each.
      6.   Proposed building setback lines.
      7.   Proposed grading plan of the parcel at intervals of not more than
two feet (2') if the overall plan requires changes in the general topography.
      8.   The floor area and lot coverage of each building or structure and
the floor area ratio for each parcel which is the ratio of the square footage
of a building or structure to the square footage of the lot.
      9.   Legally established centerline elevations.
      10.   Proposed public improvements such as highways or other major
improvements as planned by public authorities for future construction on or
near the parcel.
   F.   The following supporting data shall be submitted in separate statements
or maps accompanying the preliminary plat or site plan, or, if practical, such
data may be shown on the preliminary plat or preliminary site plan, unless
waived by the plan commission:
      1.   Proof of ownership of the parcel and applicant's interest therein.
      2.   A topographic map extending for a minimum distance of one hundred
feet (100') on all sides of the parcel showing existing use and ownership of
adjacent lands, showing streets, rights of way and dedicated easements,
locations of existing structures and elevation of their foundations,
approximate direction and gradient of ground slope, including any embankments
or retaining walls, railroads, power lines, towers and other nearby residential
land uses or adverse influences.
      3.   An aerial map showing the parcel to be subdivided or developed. The
map shall include a scale and show a year in which the photograph was taken.
      4.   Existing or proposed annexation agreement which pertains to the
parcel.
      5.   Estimated cost of the development.
      6.   Estimated construction and development schedule.
      7.   Generalized landscaping plan.
      8.   Proposed building types.
      9.   Sites, if any, for multiple-family dwellings, shopping centers,
churches, industry or other nonpublic uses exclusive of single-family
dwellings.
      10.   Reserved.
      11.   a. Profile drawings of each stream, channel, pond and basin on the
parcel and on any adjoining land which may affect the layout or drainage of the
parcel for a minimum of five hundred feet (500') in each direction, up and down
stream, showing elevations of the following:
            (1)   The bed.
            (2)   Channel banks, if any.
            (3)   Size and elevation of sewer and drain outlets and culverts
into the stream, channel or basin.
            (4)   Flood of record elevation.
         b.   The applicant's engineer shall, in drawing his profiles, extend
or project the established flood of record elevation upstream or downstream for
a distance of five hundred feet (500').
      12.   A preliminary drainage plan, designed to handle safely the storm
water runoff, accompanied by maps or other descriptive material showing the
following:
         a.   The extent and area of each watershed tributary to the drainage
channels of the parcel.
         b.   Existing storm sewers and other storm drains to be built and
sizes.
         c.   Existing streams and floodwater runoff channels to be maintained,
enlarged, altered, or eliminated, and new channels to be constructed, their
locations, cross sections, and profiles.
         d.   Existing culverts and bridges, drainage areas, elevations and
adequacy of waterway openings and new culverts and bridges to be built.
         e.   Existing detention ponds and basins to be maintained, enlarged,
altered and new ponds or basins to be built with or without dams or flow
retention devices.
         f.   Parking lots shall be so designed so as to not store more than
six inches (6") of rainwater for detention purposes.
   G.   Upon the determination that the application and preliminary plat or
preliminary site plan are in proper form, the planning and zoning commission
shall place the matter on its agenda and shall serve notice upon the applicant
of the time and place of the meeting at which the matter will be discussed. The
village engineer shall also be notified and supplied with copies of the
application, preliminary plat or preliminary site plan and other documents.
   H.   The planning and zoning commission shall forward its written report to
the corporate authorities recommending approval or disapproval of the
preliminary plat or preliminary site plan within ninety (90) days from the date
of the application or the filing by the applicant of the last item of required
supporting data, whichever date is later, unless such time shall be extended by
the mutual consent of the applicant and the planning and zoning commission. If
the recommendation is to disapprove, the report shall set forth the reasons for
its disapproval and specify with particularity the aspects in which the
proposed plat or site plan fails to meet the standards of section
5-2-4 of this chapter. A copy of the report shall also be forwarded to the
applicant.
   I.   The corporate authorities by resolution shall approve or reject the
preliminary plat or preliminary site plan within thirty (30) days after its
next regularly scheduled meeting following the date of action of the planning
and zoning commission, unless such time is extended by the mutual consent of
the applicant and the corporate authorities. If it rejects the plat or site
plan, the resolution shall set forth the reasons for its disapproval and
specify with particularity the aspects in which the proposed plat or site plan
fails to meet the standards of section
5-2-4 of this chapter. A copy of the resolution shall be furnished to the
applicant.
   J.   Approval of the preliminary plat or plan by the corporate authorities
shall not qualify the plat or plan for recording, but shall be considered
permission to prepare the final plat or plan with detailed plans and
specifications for the proposed subdivision site plan or development. Such
preliminary approval shall be effective for no more than one year from the date
of approval unless, upon application by the applicant, the corporate
authorities grant an extension of time for an additional one year. Such
application shall not require an additional filing fee or the submission of
additional copies of the plat or site plan. The applicant may rely for planning
purposes on any aspect which has received preliminary plat approval during the
effective period.
   K.   An applicant shall simultaneously file with the state department of
transportation, relevant local highway authority or the county health
department, as appropriate, a copy of the application for preliminary approval
of any proposed plat filed with the village. The department or authority
receiving the application shall review the application based solely upon safety
or access control standards and provide written approval or disapproval to the
planning and zoning commission and to the corporate authorities not later than
ninety (90) days from the date the application is received. The ninety (90) day
period may be changed by mutual agreement. If disapproved, the department or
authority shall provide reasons for the disapproval related to safety or access
control standards and identify improvements that will remove the disapproval.
The corporate authorities may approve the plat once the improvements have been
incorporated into the application or in the event that the department or
authority fails to respond in writing to the village within the ninety (90) day
period or other period established by mutual agreement. (Ord. 946, 3-20-2007)
5-2-3: FINAL PLAT OR FINAL SITE PLAN:
   A.   Within one year after receiving preliminary subdivision site plan plat
or site plan approval by the corporate authorities, the applicant shall file
with the village clerk an application for the initial unit of development,
fifteen (15) copies of a final plat or final site plan not to exceed twenty
four inches by thirty six inches (24" x 36") in size, an electronic copy in a
format acceptable to the subdivision administrator, and one eleven inch by
seventeen inch (11" x 17") copy, in a quantity and form as required by the
planning and zoning commission and in accordance with this subdivision
ordinance. Any application for final plat or final site plan approval shall be
filed at least fifteen (15) days prior to the regular monthly meeting of the
planning and zoning commission in order to receive action at such meeting.
   B.   The following general information, where applicable, shall be shown on
the final plat or final site plan, unless waived by the planning and zoning
commission:
      1.   The date of preparation, north point and scale of drawing, which
shall be one inch equals one hundred feet (1" = 100'), or other scale as
approved by the subdivision administrator.
      2.   Legal description of the parcel.
      3.   The names and addresses of the record landowner, the applicant and
the Illinois registered surveyor or licensed professional engineer who prepared
the plat with the appropriate seal affixed.
      4.   Reference points of existing surveys identified, related to the plat
by distances and bearing, and reference to a field book or map as follows:
         a.   All stakes, monuments or other evidence found on the ground and
used to determine the boundaries of the parcel.
         b.   Adjoining corners of all adjoining parcels.
         c.   When the village has established the centerline of the street
adjacent to or within the proposed parcel, the location of such centerline and
monument found or reset shall be shown.
         d.   All other monuments found or established in making the survey of
the parcel or required to be installed by the provisions of this title or by an
act revising the law of plats adopted March 21, 1874, as amended, Illinois
Compiled Statutes chapter 765.
      5.   Lot and block lines with dimensions, bearings or deflection angles,
and radii, arcs, points of curvature and tangent bearings. Parcel boundaries
and street bearings shall be shown to the nearest ten (10) seconds with the
basis of the bearings. All distances shall be shown to the nearest 0.01 foot.
Lot area in square feet for each lot shall be designated.
      6.   The width of the portion of any streets being dedicated and the
width of any existing rights of way, all shown each side of the centerline. For
streets on a curvature, all curve data shall be based on the street centerline,
and in addition to the centerline dimensions, the radii and central angles
shall be indicated.
      7.   All easements shall be denoted by fine dotted lines, clearly
identified; and if already of record, the recorder's references to such
easement. The width of the easement, its length and bearing, and sufficient
ties to locate it definitely with respect to the plat must be shown. If an
easement is not precisely located of record, a description of such easement
shall be included. If the easement is being dedicated by the map, it shall be
properly referenced in the owner's certificate of identification.
      8.   Lot numbers beginning with the number one and numbered consecutively
within each block.
      9.   Block numbers or letters beginning with the number one or letter A
and continuing consecutively without omission or duplication throughout the
subdivision site plan. The figures shall be solid, of sufficient size and
thickness to stand out, and so placed as not to obliterate any figure. Block
figures of an addition to a subdivision site plan of the same name shall be a
continuation of the numbering in the original subdivision site plan.
      10.   Accurate outlines and legal descriptions of any areas to be
dedicated or reserved for public use, with the purpose indicated thereon, and
of any area to be reserved by deed covenant for common use of all property
owners.
      11.   Building setback lines, accurately shown in dimensions.
      12.   The name of each street shown on the plat.
      13.   Street numbers shall be obtained from the village and shown on
final plat.
      14.   The name of the subdivision plan.
      15.   Existing and proposed grading plan of development at the intervals
specified in subsection
 5-2-2D2 of this chapter if the overall plan requires changes in the general
topography and the regulatory limits of the 100-year flood frequency event,
when applicable.
      16.   Location of adjoining roads, watercourses and bodies of water,
marshes, rock outcroppings, wooded areas, and railroads within one hundred feet
(100') of the property.
      17.   Location and dimensions of on site pedestrian and vehicular
accessways, design of ingress and egress of vehicles to and from the site onto
public streets, and curb and sidewalk lines, including sidewalk ramps for the
handicapped where applicable.
      18.   Location of buildings and other structures.
      19.   Location and intensity of outdoor lighting system.
      20.   Use of property within one hundred feet (100') of the boundaries of
the site.
      21.   All off street parking, loading spaces and walkways, indicating
type of surfacing, size, angle of stalls, width of aisles and a specific
schedule showing the number of parking spaces provided.
      22.   Forms of certification as provided for in appendix A, attached to
the ordinance codified herein.
      23.   The plat shall have specific language that dedicates all public
improvements to the village with the language "Dedicated to the Public".
      24.   The name and mailing address of the village for return of the plat
by the county recorder.
   C.   The following supporting data, where applicable, shall be supplied in
separate statements or maps, or, if practical, may be shown on the final plat
or site plan, unless waived by the planning and zoning commission:
      1.   A copy of any restrictions or covenants to be created by record and
any charter or bylaws of any property owners' association to be created.
      2.   The following certificates, which may be combined where appropriate:
         a.   A certificate signed and acknowledged by all parties having any
legal or beneficial interest in the parcel consenting to the preparation and
recording of the said plat.
         b.   A certificate signed and acknowledged by all parties having any
interest in the land, dedicating all parcels of land intended for any public
use.
         c.   Certification by the county clerk showing that all taxes and
special assessments due on the parcel have been paid in full.
      3.   Plans and specifications for the required public improvements,
together with the written report of the village engineer required by subsection
5-2-4C3 of this chapter.
      4.   Existing soil conditions based upon soil borings prescribed by the
village engineer in light of the proposed use of the parcel.
      5.   Landscape plan showing location, type and approximate size of
plantings.
      6.   Architectural elevations for building types.
      7.   Development data showing number of floors, floor area, height and
location of each building and proposed general use for each building and the
floor area ratio for the entire development. If a multi-family residential
building, show the number, size and type of dwelling units.
      8.   A final drainage plan providing for the adequate disposition of
natural and storm water in accordance with the design criteria and standards of
this title, indicating location, sizes, types and grades of ditches, catch
basins and pipe and connections to existing drainage system. The drainage plan
shall depict the existing and proposed 100-year flood frequency boundaries,
when applicable.
      9.   An existing drain tile survey must be submitted to the village for
review and must be incorporated into the development plans.
      10.   A soil erosion control plan providing for the adequate control of
erosion and sedimentation, indicating the proposed temporary and permanent
control practices and measures which will be implemented during all phases of
clearing, grading and construction.
      11.   In all cases where private central sanitary sewer systems are to be
used, the applicant shall secure the necessary permits for installation and
operation of the system from the environmental protection agency of the state,
the county health department and the village. In all cases where private septic
systems are to be used, percolation tests shall also be made on each building
lot and a copy of the data and a recommendation of minimum lot sizes by the
county health department shall be submitted to the planning and zoning
commission and the subdivision administrator.
      12.   A schedule showing phasing of other proposed improvements.
   D.   The applicant shall supply the following forms of guarantee to the
village:
      1.   An improvement completion guarantee under which the applicant agrees
to install any required improvements at his own expense in accordance with the
plans and specifications within the time required as a condition of approval.
However, for property outside the corporate limits of the village, no such
agreement shall be required where the applicant has entered into a similar
agreement covering the parcel with the county authorities.
         a.   Acceptable Improvement Completion Guarantees:
            (1)   Letter Of Credit: An irrevocable commercial letter of credit
with any financial institution which must be approved by the village attorney
and subdivision administrator and which provides for administration of such
credit. The letter of credit shall be in an acceptable form as prescribed by
the corporate authorities. This is the village preferred method.
            (2)   Completion Bond: A completion bond to ensure the construction
of the improvements in a satisfactory manner and within the period specified by
the corporate authorities. The bond shall be payable to the village and be in a
form with surety and conditions as approved by the village attorney and
subdivision administrator.
         b.   Amount Of Guarantee: The amount of the completion guarantee shall
be based on the following:
            (1)   Total cost of the estimated construction, engineering,
surveying and fees for each specific phase of the required improvements plus
fifteen percent (15%) of such total for contingencies, and maintenance of
improvements and the abatement of construction nuisance and erosion control
during the period prior to acceptance of improvements, all as approved by the
subdivision administrator.
         c.   Guarantee Itemized Separately:
            (1)   Each improvement completion guarantee shall be separately
itemized by phases as follows:
               (A)   Step 0; mass grading improvements: Mass grading for public
right of way and detention ponds, detention pond stabilization, erosion
control, and detention pond "as built" drawings and storage volume
calculations;
               (B)   Step 1; underground improvements: Storm sewers, sanitary
sewers, water mains, and "as built" drawings of same;
               (C)   Step 2; basic roadway improvements: Curb and gutter,
roadway base course, roadway binder course, bike trails, street name and
traffic control signs, and streetlights;
               (D)   Step 3; finished roadway improvements: Final surface
course;
               (E)   Step 4; parkway improvements: Sidewalks, parkway trees,
and parkway restoration;
               (F)   Miscellaneous off site improvements: Off site roadway
improvements, off site storm sewer improvements, off site sanitary sewer
improvements, off site water main improvements, etc. A separate completion
guarantee will be required for each off site improvement.
            (2)   If the balance of work remaining uncompleted in any specific
step equals five percent (5%) or less, as determined by the public improvement
coordinator or village engineer, of the original amount of the completion
guarantee as specified in subsection D1b of this section, the village may
approve reductions in the guarantee to an amount equal to twenty percent (20%)
of the original amount of the completion guarantee. The village shall not under
any circumstances reduce a completion guarantee if the work remaining in that
step exceeds five percent (5%). The village shall not accept any portion of the
improvements in a step until the step has been one hundred percent (100%)
completed. The village shall approve one hundred percent (100%) reductions in
the guarantee only after all of the improvements in each specific step as
itemized have been completed and demonstrated by "as built" engineering plans
(only for steps 0 and 1) provided by the developer and signed and stamped by a
professional engineer registered in the state of Illinois (see section
5-7-2 of this title). The reduction shall be by written resolution or letter of
the corporate authorities. The resolution/letter completely eliminating the
guarantee shall also include acceptance of the public improvements of the
specific step simultaneously upon reduction of a guarantee for the specific
step of the improvements. A maintenance guarantee as then provided by this
title shall be submitted to the village (including all off site improvements
individually).
            (3)   All guarantees shall be for two and one-half (21/2) years (30
months) from the date of issuance of said guarantee.
            (4)   Step 0 improvements (mass grading improvements) will not be
accepted by the village (i.e., release of completion guarantee) until the
village has approved that the individual lots have been graded within
substantial compliance with the approved development plans. (Ord. 946, 3-20-
2007)
            (5)   Until such time that the step 3 improvements (final surface
course for roadways) have been formally accepted by the village, the applicant
shall be responsible for any damage to step 1, step 2 or step 3 improvements
caused by the village's snow removal operations. (Ord. 1004, 8-19-2008)
            (6)   Step 3 improvements (final surface course for roadways)
cannot be initiated until a minimum of twelve (12) months from the time the
road improvements for step 2 (curb and gutter, roadway base course, and roadway
binder course) have been completed or until such time that at least eighty
percent (80%) of the phase or unit is built out; whichever time period is
longer, but not to exceed thirty (30) months (scheduling of final surface
course to be coordinated with public improvement coordinator and village
engineer). In this interim time, bituminous binder course "fillets" will be
used to fill the gap between the top of the binder course and the gutter flag
per the village standard details. At such time that the surface course is ready
to be paved, the additional binder thickness at the edge of the pavement will
be removed by a conventional cold milling operation. Any structural pavement or
curb and gutter defects will be remedied and the entire binder course will be
primed with a bituminous material before the surface course is constructed.
      2.   A maintenance guarantee to be furnished upon final completion of
improvements for each step as prescribed under subsection D1c of this section
and prior to acceptance in a form as prescribed under subsection D1a of this
section effective for a period of two (2) years (24 months) after the final
acceptance of said improvements for the purpose of:
         a.   Guaranteeing against and securing the correction of any defect in
material or workmanship furnished for such improvements, latent in character,
and not discernible at the time of final inspection or acceptance by the
village.
         b.   Guaranteeing against and securing the correction of any damage to
improvements by reason of settling of the ground, base or foundation thereof.
Such maintenance guarantee shall also provide that as such defects develop, the
amount held thereunder may be applied by the village for any amounts incurred
to correct such defects, and that the balance of such deposit, if any, held at
the end of such two (2) year period shall be released by the village to the
depositor without interest. The amount of the maintenance guarantee shall be
not less than fifteen percent (15%) of the total initial amount of the
completion guarantee.
   E.   Upon the determination that the application and final plat or final
site plan are in proper form, the planning and zoning commission shall place
the matter on its agenda and shall serve notice upon the applicant of the time
and place of the meeting at which the matter will be discussed. The village
engineer shall also be notified and supplied with copies of the application,
final plat or final site plan and other documents.
   F.   The applicant may elect to have final approval of a geographic part or
parts of the plat that received preliminary approval, and may delay application
for approval of other parts until a later date or dates beyond one year with
the approval of the corporate authorities; provided, all facilities required to
serve the part or parts for which final approval is sought have been provided.
In such case only such part or parts of the plat as have received final
approval shall be recorded.
   G.   If the applicant so elects, he may delay furnishing the guarantees
required by subsection D of this section until notified that the final plat has
been approved by the corporate authorities in all other respects; provided that
the signature of the president and the clerk and the seal of the village not be
affixed to the plat until the required guarantees are furnished and approved.
   H.   The planning and zoning commission shall forward its written report to
the corporate authorities recommending approval or disapproval of the final
plat or final site plan within fifteen (15) days from the date of its regular
or special meeting next following the filing of the last required document or
other paper which shall be considered the date of filing the application for
final approval of the plat or site plan. The signatures of the chairman and
secretary of the planning and zoning commission shall be affixed to the final
plat or final site plan after approval by the corporate authorities. If the
recommendation is to disapprove, the report shall set forth the reasons for its
disapproval and specify with particularity the aspects in which the proposed
plat or site plan fails to meet the standards of section
 5-2-4 of this chapter. A copy of the report shall also be forwarded to the
applicant.
   I.   After receiving the final recommendation of the planning and zoning
commission, the corporate authorities, by resolution, shall approve or
disapprove the final plat or site plan within sixty (60) days from the date of
filing application for final approval of the plat or site plan unless the
applicant and the corporate authorities mutually agree to extend this sixty
(60) day period. If the final plat or final site plan is disapproved, the
resolution shall state the reasons for the disapproval, specifying with
particularity the aspects in which the final plat or final site plan fails to
meet the standards of section
5-2-4 of this chapter. A copy of the resolution shall be furnished to the
applicant.
   J.   A certified copy of the resolution approving or disapproving the final
plat or final site plan shall be filed in the office of the village clerk
attached to said final plat or final site plan. The final subdivision site plan
plat together with all covenants and restrictions shall be recorded by the
village clerk or village designee in the office of the recorder of deeds for
the county in which the property is located and returned to the village clerk
or village designee. All recording fees shall be prepaid by the applicant. The
village clerk shall notify the building commissioner of the recording of the
final plat or final site plan. (Ord. 946, 3-20-2007)
5-2-4: STANDARDS FOR REVIEW OF PLATS AND SITE PLANS:
   A.   The planning and zoning commission shall recommend approval and the
corporate authorities shall approve a preliminary or final plat or a
preliminary or final site plan unless it makes written findings specifying the
manner in which:
      1.   The design and layout of the subdivision site plan or development
does not conform to the provisions of this title.
      2.   The applicant has not made adequate provision to install
improvements required by the planning and zoning commission or corporate
authorities under authority of this title.
      3.   The final plat of subdivision or final site plan fails to comply
with an approved preliminary plat of subdivision site plan or preliminary site
plan.
      4.   The plat or site plan does not conform with this chapter, the
comprehensive plan, the official map, the flood control ordinance of the
village, village ordinances, or established planning policies of the village.
      5.   The provisions for vehicular loading, unloading, parking or
circulation on the parcel or onto adjacent public rights of way will create
hazards to safety or will cause significant burdens on transportation
facilities that could be avoided by modification of the plan.
      6.   The vehicular and pedestrian traffic circulation system creates
hazards to safety which could be avoided by modification of the plan.
      7.   The proposed plan unnecessarily and in specified particulars
destroys, damages, or detrimentally alters significant natural, topographic or
physical features of the site and development.
      8.   The proposed landscaping, screening or lighting fails to provide
adequate acoustical or visual privacy to incompatible adjacent uses which could
be avoided by modification of the plan.
      9.   The bulk and location of proposed buildings and structures will have
significant adverse impact on adjacent property and development of the parcel
is not feasible in a manner that will avoid these consequences.
      10.   The proposed plat or site plan makes inadequate provision for the
use and maintenance of open space and this failure may result in a burden on
the public or on the adjacent properties.
      11.   The proposed development will impose an undue burden upon off site
public services, including sanitary sewer, water and storm drainage, which
conclusion shall be based upon a written report of the village engineer
provided that there is no provision in the capital works program of the village
to correct the specific burden and that the applicant has not agreed to
alleviate that portion of the burden attributable to the proposed development.
      12.   The subdivision site plan or development is subject to periodic
flooding or contains poor drainage facilities and would make adequate drainage
of the lots and streets impossible.
   B.   If any of the foregoing standards are cited as justification for
disapproving a plat or site plan, the planning and zoning commission and the
corporate authorities shall specify the manner in which the final plat or final
site plan could be modified to avoid the specified deficiency or shall state
the reasons why the specified deficiency cannot be avoided consistent with
applicant's objectives.
   C.   Before submitting the final plat or final site plan for review, the
applicant shall submit engineering plans, details or specifications for all
proposed improvements regulated by chapters 3, 4, and 5 of this title for
approval of the village engineer.
      1.   Upon the approval of preliminary plat or site plan, the applicant
shall have prepared and certified by a licensed professional engineer drawings
for said improvements which shall be submitted in triplicate to the village
engineer at least fifteen (15) days prior to the presentation of final plat for
approval.
      2.   Engineering drawings for required improvements shall contain the
following data and information:
         a.   Plans, details, specifications and cost estimates for street
construction, including centerline profile and a grade line for each street
with a typical cross section of the roadway. The profiles of grade lines shall
be shown to a scale of one inch equals fifty feet (1" = 50') horizontal, and
one inch equals five feet (1" = 5') vertical. This information shall be shown
on standard plan and profile sheets.
         b.   Plans, details, specifications and cost estimates of proposed
storm drainage improvements, including surface drainage, storm sewers and
appurtenances and detention or retention basins.
         c.   Plans, details, specifications and cost estimates of proposed
water distribution systems and proposed water supply facilities, if any.
         d.   Plans, details, specifications and cost estimates of sewage
systems and of sewage treatment plants, if any.
         e.   Plans, details, specifications and cost estimates for proposed
sidewalks, or bikeways, if any.
         f.   Plans, details and specifications and cost estimates of the
proposed street lighting system.
         g.   When unusual conditions exist, the planning and zoning commission
may require additional specifications, plans and drawings as may be necessary
for an adequate review of the improvements to be installed.
      3.   The village engineer shall review all engineering drawings in order
to determine whether such drawings are consistent with the approved preliminary
plat or plan and comply with chapters 3, 4, and 5 of this title. Such drawings
shall be distributed to such other persons as may be necessary. If they are in
compliance with this title, and with the most recent design standards adopted
by the village, the village engineer shall forward a report to the planning and
zoning commission that they so conform and comply. If the plans, details or
specifications do not conform or comply, the village engineer shall notify the
applicant and the planning and zoning commission of the specific manner in
which they do not so conform or comply.
      4.   The planning and zoning commission shall not act upon the final plat
or final site plan until the engineering drawings have been reviewed by the
village engineer and a report of compliance or noncompliance has been received
by the planning and zoning commission. (Ord. 946, 3-20-2007)
5-2-5: FINAL SITE PLAN APPROVAL FOR COMMERCIAL AND INDUSTRIAL LOTS:
   A.   Intent; Applicability: The intent of this section is to establish
procedures and standards for the review and approval of site plans to ensure
full compliance with all local, state and federal ordinances and regulations
and to ensure that a proposed land use or activity is compatible with the
character of the surrounding area, the adjacent uses of land, the natural
environment, the capacities of public services and will protect the public
health, safety and welfare.
      1.   This section shall apply to the following:
         a.   The construction of any new, nonresidential building or
structure;
         b.   The expansion of any nonresidential building or structure;
         c.   The conversion, in whole or in part, of an existing building from
residential to nonresidential use;
         d.   The construction of any new residential structure containing
three (3) or more dwelling units;
         e.   The modification or expansion of an existing residential
structure which results in an increase in the number of dwelling units in the
structure to three (3) or more;
         f.   Any development in any district for which a special use permit is
required;
         g.   The construction or expansion of paved areas, including access
drives and parking lots, involving an area of more than one thousand (1,000)
square feet; or
         h.   The establishment of a new nonresidential use even if no
buildings or structures are proposed.
      2.   This chapter does not apply to the construction or modification of
single-family detached homes, two-family homes, agricultural buildings or
structures, or existing buildings or premises legally established prior to the
adoption of this title unless one or more of the factors described in this
subsection A is present.
      3.   No land, building, or structure shall be erected or used and no
building permit or sign permit shall be issued for a development within the
scope of this chapter unless and until a site plan has been approved in
accordance with this chapter. No land, building or structure shall be occupied
or used and no certificate of occupancy shall be issued until all requirements
and conditions of the site plan approval have been implemented and all
improvements completed in accordance with an approved site plan.
   B.   Classification Of Projects: Any development or construction which is
subject to the scope of this chapter shall be classified as either a minor or
major site plan. The determination of this classification shall be made by the
zoning officer or village administrator according to the following criteria:
      1.   Minor Site Plan Review: A project requiring minor site plan review
shall be any of the following:
         a.   An expansion of any nonresidential building or structure not
exceeding one thousand (1,000) square feet or ten percent (10%) of the existing
floor area, whichever is less.
         b.   A change in use of an existing building that does not comply with
current site design standards such as, but not limited to, landscaping,
lighting, parking, signs or drainage.
         c.   The construction or expansion of paved areas, including access
drives and parking lots, involving an area of more than one thousand (1,000)
square feet but not more than five thousand (5,000) square feet.
      2.   Major Site Plan Review: A project requiring major site plan review
shall be any project which is not classified as a minor site plan review.
   C.   Application And Review Procedures:
      1.   Application: Application for site plan approval may be made separate
from or in conjunction with an application for land subdivision. The village
board may approve a site plan prior to the platting, division, or consolidation
of land conditioned upon such platting, division or consolidation. Site plans
for which the proposed use requires a zoning map amendment shall only be acted
upon by the village after a map amendment has been approved according to the
procedures set forth in the zoning ordinance.
      2.   Preapplication Conference: Prior to submitting a site plan
application, the applicants or agent must schedule a preapplication conference
with the village staff. The purpose of this meeting is to familiarize the
applicant with the review procedures and submission requirements and to
familiarize the village staff with the nature of the project. No decisions
relative to the acceptability of the plan may be made at this meeting. At this
time the determination will be made, based on the presented information, as to
whether the project shall be considered a minor or major site plan. The
applicant should bring to this meeting any working drawings, plans, sketches,
surveys, reports or other such information that will aid the village staff in
accessing the project.
      3.   Site Plan Review Committee (SPRC): In conjunction with the formal
application process in subsection E of this section, the applicant must attend
a meeting of the site plan review committee (SPRC). This committee will consist
of a licensed architect, a village board member, and a village planning and
zoning commission member. The SPRC meets on an "as needed" basis.
         a.   The applicant will contact the village planner, to schedule a
meeting with the SPRC two (2) weeks prior to the requested meeting date. The
applicant shall also provide to the village four (4) copies of a three-
dimensional color rendering of the proposed building or structure two (2) weeks
prior to the initial SPRC meeting. This drawing shall depict all four (4) sides
of the proposed building or structure, including proposed screening of
mechanical equipment and dumpsters. Samples of building materials are strongly
encouraged to be submitted at this time as well.
         b.   The applicant and applicant's architect will then present the
building elevations of the proposed project to the SPRC for review and comment.
The SPRC may advise the applicant of any suggested changes or additions to the
proposed elevations at this time.
         c.   The applicant shall reappear before the SPRC with any suggested
changes in response to the initial meeting. At this time, the SPRC may submit a
recommendation to the village board and planning and zoning commission on the
proposed elevations. If the SPRC submits a negative recommendation, the project
must receive a two-thirds (2/3) majority vote from the village board for
approval. The applicant may request to appear before the SPRC as many times as
needed to receive a favorable recommendation. Village staff will submit copies
of the proposed layout and elevations to the village board and planning and
zoning commission simultaneously once the SPRC has made a recommendation.
   D.   Planning And Zoning Commission And Village Board Workshop Session:
After receiving a recommendation from the SPRC, the village will schedule a
workshop session with the planning and zoning commission and the village board
(in no particular order) for review of the proposed building elevations and
conceptual site layout. Fifteen (15) copies of the conceptual site layout and
color rendering of the building shall be provided to village staff one week
prior to each scheduled meeting.
   E.   Application Procedure:
      1.   Minor Site Plan: The applicant shall submit a formal application for
review and approval of a site plan to the village. The application shall
consist of the following:
The applicant shall submit all information requested by the village staff that
is deemed necessary to review the minor site plan:
         a.   A fully executed and signed copy of the application for site plan
review and application fee.
         b.   A fully executed professional fee agreement and deposit;
         c.   All information requested by the village staff that is deemed
necessary to review the minor site plan including drawings, sketches, and
calculations.
      2.   Major Site Plan: In conjunction with appearing before the site plan
review committee, the applicant shall submit a formal application for review
and approval of a site plan to the village. The application shall consist of
the following:
         a.   A fully executed and signed copy of the application for site plan
review and application fee.
         b.   Five (5) copies of the site plan and supporting documents as
described in subsection F2 of this section.
         c.   A fully executed professional fee agreement and deposit.
         d.   Upon receipt of the application the village planner shall review
the completeness of the application and upon determination that the application
is complete, forward a copy of the application to the village administrator,
village engineer, public works department, and any other department or agency
deemed necessary. If the application is incomplete, the village planner shall
notify the applicant in writing of this determination and specify what
materials or information are required to complete the application. No action
will be taken on the application until the application has been determined to
be complete.
   F.   Submission Requirements: The site plan application shall include at a
minimum the following:
      1.   Minor site plan: As determined and requested by village staff.
      2.   Major site plan: A drawing or drawings prepared at a scale of not
less than one inch to one hundred feet (1" = 100') which shall include:
         a.   General Information:
            (1)   Name, address and phone number of the developer.
            (2)   Name, address and phone number of the record owner if
different from developer.
            (3)   Name, address and phone number of the architect, engineer,
landscape architect, land planner, surveyor or consulting firm responsible for
preparing the plan(s).
            (4)   Seal and registration of any architect, engineer, landscape
architect or similar professional involved in the preparation of the plan(s).
            (5)   Date of plan preparation/revision.
            (6)   North arrow and scale.
            (7)   Legal description of the property.
            (8)   If applicable, a site data table indicating the gross
acreage, net acreage, site coverage percentage, building area(s), floor to area
ratio.
         b.   Existing Conditions:
            (1)   Zoning and use of the property.
            (2)   Zoning and use of all adjacent properties.
            (3)   The bearings and distance of all property lines and the
course of this information.
            (4)   Existing topography of the site shown at two foot (2')
intervals and extending a minimum of twenty five feet (25') beyond the property
lines of the site.
            (5)   Building setback lines.
            (6)   Location and extent of any water bodies, wetlands, streams
and floodplains on or adjacent to the site.
            (7)   Location and size of existing trees.
            (8)   Location of other notable natural features.
            (9)   Location and dimension of any existing easements.
            (10)   Copies of any applicable covenants or deed restrictions.
            (11)   Location, size, and ground floor elevation of all existing
buildings on the site.
            (12)   The location and dimension of any other structures or
improvements on the site.
            (13)   Location, names, and widths of existing streets and rights
of way within or adjacent to the site.
            (14)   Location and size of any existing storm sewer, water main,
sanitary sewer, culverts, drains, field tiles, on site disposal systems, wells,
power or telephone poles, electrical lines, telephone lines, and gas lines on
the subject site or of any such entities off site that will serve the subject
site.
            (15)   The location, front view and dimension of existing signs.
         c.   Proposed Development:
            (1)   Proposed use and zoning.
            (2)   A grading plan showing the proposed changes in the topography
of the site at two foot (2') intervals with spot grades provided at significant
points.
            (3)   The location and dimensions of all provisions for water
supply and sanitary sewer.
            (4)   A storm water detention/retention plan including storm water
runoff and detention calculation. The methods for computing such requirements
shall be those specified in the village's storm water management ordinance.
            (5)   The location, elevation, and size of all catch basins,
ditches, swales, detention basins and storm sewers.
            (6)   An erosion control plan, the requirements for which shall be
consistent with the village's storm water management ordinance.
            (7)   The location, dimensions, and foundation/floor elevations of
all proposed buildings or expansions on the site.
            (8)   The location and dimensions of proposed driveways, parking
areas, loading areas, and sidewalks.
            (9)   The location, dimensions, front view and materials of
proposed signs.
            (10)   The location and type of exterior lighting, including a
point by point photometric plan if required by the village.
            (11)   The location and nature of electrical, telephone, gas, cable
or other utility services to be installed at the site.
            (12)   Building plans showing at a minimum the floor plans and
elevations of all proposed principal and accessory buildings and a schedule of
the type and color of exterior surface materials. A three-dimensional color
rendering of the proposed building or structure must be provided.
            (13)   Landscape plans including a schedule of all plantings by
type and size as well as any berming, fencing, screening, or other hardscape
features proposed.
         d.   Other: Supporting reports, documents, exhibits, etc.
   G.   Review Procedures:
      1.   Minor Site Plan:
         a.   The village staff shall review the information requested and
either approve the minor site plan or prepare a report to the applicant
indicating any deficiencies in the site plan in meeting all applicable
requirements of this code. The applicant shall modify the site plan to correct
any deficiencies or apply for formal relief or variance for the deficiency if
such application is available.
         b.   Upon completion of revisions to the minor site plan that correct
the deficiencies identified by the village staff, the minor site plan shall be
placed on the next available board of trustees agenda for consideration. The
village board will approve or deny the site plan application based on the
approval criteria and standards. The village board may impose conditions upon
the site plan provided they relate to the approval criteria and standards and
are necessary to meet the intent of this chapter. If any formal relief or
variance is sought by the applicant it shall follow the adopted procedures for
such relief or variance.
      2.   Major Site Plan:
         a.   Written Review: Within twenty (20) days of the application being
determined to be complete, the village planner, village engineer, code
enforcement officer, public works department, and any other notified department
shall provide the village administrator or zoning officer a written review of
the application. These reviews shall evaluate the application's conformance
with the approval criteria and standards of this chapter and identify any areas
in which there are deficiencies in meeting the criteria and standards.
         b.   Staff Report: Village planner shall prepare a report to the
applicant indicating or enclosing the review comments and the applicant's
conformance with the review criteria. This report shall be provided to the
applicant within thirty five (35) days of the application being determined to
be complete. If the staff report does not identify any issues or deficiencies
with the plans, an agenda date will be assigned for the application to be
reviewed by the village plan commission. If, however, the staff report
identifies concerns or deficiencies, a staff workshop shall be scheduled prior
to scheduling a plan commission agenda date.
         c.   Staff Workshop: If the staff report identifies any concerns,
issues, or deficiencies with the site plan or any areas in which the staff does
not believe that the approval criteria are met, the village planner shall
schedule a staff workshop with the applicant. This workshop is intended to
provide the applicant with guidance on how the application could be modified to
comply with the review criteria and standards or address concerns raised in the
review process. The staff shall work with the applicant to resolve all issues.
         d.   Pending Application Intentions: Within ten (10) days of the staff
workshop, the applicant shall advise the village planner of his/her intention
with regard to the pending application. If the applicant desires to proceed
without revisions to the application, the village planner shall schedule a plan
commission agenda date for the application. If after the staff workshop the
applicant chooses to revise the site plan and/or submit additional materials,
fifteen (15) copies of these materials shall be submitted.
         e.   Review Of Revised Plan: Within five (5) days of receiving the
revised plans/materials, the village planner shall distribute copies to the
village departments for review. Each department shall provide a revised written
review to the village planner within ten (10) days of receiving the revised
plans/materials. Within ten (10) days of receipt of the revised reports, the
village planner shall provide the applicant with a revised staff report
indicating that all issues or deficiencies previously identified have been
addressed or indicating any remaining concerns or deficiencies in the plans.
         f.   Notice Of Intention: Within ten (10) days of receiving the
revised staff report the applicant shall notify the village planner in writing
of his/her intention with regard to the pending application. The applicant may
elect to: 1) proceed to have the application set for a plan commission agenda,
2) request another staff workshop or 3) provide revised plans or materials to
address the remaining concerns/deficiencies. If the applicant chooses to
conduct another staff workshop or submit additional revisions/information, the
procedures shall be the same as before.
         g.   Consideration By The Plan Commission: The application shall be
placed on the agenda of the village plan commission for its review and
recommendation. The plan commission shall be provided a copy of the staff
reports regarding the application. After review of the application, the plan
commission shall, within sixty (60) days, by majority vote of the members
present, make a recommendation to the village board regarding action on the
application based on its conformance with the approval criteria and standards.
Such recommendation shall be provided to the village board in writing within
thirty (30) days of the plan commission's decision.
         h.   Consideration By The Village Board Of Trustees:
            (1)   Following receipt of the recommendation of the plan
commission, the village board shall consider the application and its
conformance with the approval criteria and standards and take action on the
application within sixty (60) days of the plan commission's review.
            (2)   If the applicant submits a revised application or
supplemental submissions while the application is under consideration by the
plan commission or village board, the planning commission or village board
shall table the application to allow for review of the new information. The
application may be tabled by the plan commission or village board for a period
of time not exceeding the maximum original review periods established in this
chapter.
         i.   Conditions Of Approval: The village board may impose conditions
on the site plan. Any condition imposed must relate directly to the approval
criteria and standards and be necessary to meet the intent of this title.
   H.   Approval Criteria And Standards: The village staff, plan commission and
village board shall review the site plan application to ensure that it complies
with all of the criteria and standards below:
      1.   Site Configuration: Buildings and structures will meet or exceed
setback standards, height and other dimensional standards and be appropriately
placed in relation to natural features of the site.
      2.   Buildings: Buildings shall be designed, situated and constructed so
as to conform to any applicable design criteria of the village. All buildings
shall have a strong visual relationship and design compatibility between the
building, the site, and adjacent development. The exterior appearances and mass
of the building(s) shall complement the existing development and character
within the surrounding area.
      3.   Impact On Surrounding Land Uses And Zoning: The proposed site plan
will be harmonious with and not harmful or injurious to existing and planned
uses in the immediate area. The proposed improvements will be coordinated with
improvements serving the site and other properties in the area. The site plan
shall meet the intent of this title and the intent of the village zoning
ordinance.
      4.   Preservation Of Natural Features: The site plan shall demonstrate
judicious effort to preserve the integrity of the land, natural topography,
drainage, wetlands, watercourses, floodplains, and existing vegetation.
      5.   Public Services And Utilities: The site plans shall be served
adequately with sanitary sewer, public water, and storm sewer and such
utilities shall be provided in accordance with the recommendations of the
village engineer.
      6.   Signs: Proposed signs shall meet the requirements of all applicable
village regulations and shall be generally complementary with surrounding
properties and traffic operations. The size, location, design and lighting of
the signs shall be considered in relation to adjacent sites, glare, traffic
safety, and compatibility with adjoining properties.
      7.   Exterior Lighting: The site plan shall provide for exterior lighting
that meets the following standards:
         a.   At the expense of the developer, all roads, driveways, sidewalks,
parking lots and other common areas and facilities in unsubdivided and other
developments shall be sufficiently illuminated to ensure the security of
property and the safety of persons using such roads, driveways, sidewalks,
parking lots and other common areas and facilities. Without limiting the
generality of the foregoing standards, the following minimum standards shall
apply:
            (1)   For residential uses, lights shall be installed in parking
areas containing five (5) or more parking spaces and shall be illuminated
between dusk and dawn. For nonresidential uses, lights shall be installed in
all parking areas containing five (5) or more parking spaces and shall be
illuminated between dusk and dawn, whenever said premises are open for
operation. "Open for operation" shall be construed to mean any time that a
retail business is open for the sale of goods or services or a retail, office
or industrial facility actually has employees working within or upon said
premises, other than guards or watchmen. Lights shall not be more than fifteen
feet (15') in height in residential zoning districts, and not more than thirty
feet (30') in height in other zoning districts.
            (2)   Where lighted areas are required, lighting shall be provided
as follows:
 
                             Minimum* Maximum*
Residential zoning districts 1.0      2.0
Commercial zoning districts  1.0      3.0
Industrial zoning districts  2.5      5.0
*Average ground level foot-candles.
 
Average foot-candles at property line shall not exceed 0.5 foot-candles as
measured at the property line.
         b.   All lighting shall be constructed, positioned and maintained in
such a way so as not to reflect light either directly or indirectly onto
adjacent properties.
      8.   Parking And Loading: The number, location and dimensions of all
parking and loading spaces and the design of parking and loading areas shall
meet the requirements of all applicable village regulations. All parking lots/
areas are to have curb and gutter (B6.12). All commercial parking lots shall be
constructed with a minimum of ten inches (10") of aggregate base course type b,
two inches (2") of hot mix asphalt binder course, and one and one-half inches
(11/2") of hot mix asphalt surface course. It will be at the village engineer's
discretion as to whether "heavy duty" pavement will be necessary for any truck
traffic, and what that pavement cross section will consist of.
      9.   Landscaping And Screening: Landscaping and screening on the site
shall be provided in accordance with the following requirements:
         a.   Landscaping and screening shall be provided along property lines
between nonresidential uses and residential uses.
         b.   All yards and open spaces surrounding buildings, parking lots,
access drives and streets shall be landscaped with trees and shrubs, and shall
be maintained by the property owner.
         c.   Trees in front yards shall be planted at a ratio of at least one
21/2-inch caliper shade tree (as measured 12 inches above grade) for every
thirty feet (30') of street frontage. Strategic grouping of trees is
encouraged, as opposed to even spacing of trees.
         d.   Yard areas shall be landscaped at a ratio of at least one shrub
or tree for every ten feet (10') of the principal building's nearest exterior
wall. Strategic grouping is also encouraged.
         e.   For parking areas greater than thirty (30) spaces, a minimum of
twenty (20) square feet of interior landscaped area per space shall be
provided. In order to qualify as an interior landscaped area, said area shall
be located wholly within or projecting inward from the boundaries of the
parking area.
         f.   All trash enclosure areas and containers shall be fully screened
from streets and adjacent properties with a six foot (6') high sight obscuring
fence, wall or landscaped area placed around said facility. All trash
enclosures must be placed on a concrete pad sufficient to support said
enclosure to the satisfaction of the zoning administrator.
         g.   All permanent outdoor storage areas of goods, products,
materials, supplies, machinery equipment or overnight parking of commercial
vehicles shall not be allowed in the front yard. Where permitted, permanent
outdoor storage areas of goods, products, materials, supplies, machinery
equipment or overnight parking of commercial vehicles shall be enclosed to a
height of eight feet (8') above grade and screened to an opacity of not less
than seventy five percent (75%). These requirements can be achieved by using
any one or a combination of the following methods:
            (1)   The storage area can be screened with trees having a leafy
structure or with fences having structural components through which only twenty
five percent (25%) of the image is visible.
            (2)   Fences, berms and/or landscaping can be installed to a height
where only twenty five percent (25%) of the image is visible.
            (3)   Fences, berms and/or landscaping can be installed having a
width or design where only twenty five percent (25%) of the remaining
horizontal image is visible.
      10.   Vehicular Access And Circulation: The site plan shall provide for
the safe, convenient, uncongested and well defined access and circulation of
vehicles (B-40 vehicles with a turning radius of 60 feet). Access to the site
shall be designed to minimize traffic conflicts. All curb returns shall be a
minimum twenty five foot (25') radius (measured from back of curb). All streets
and driveways shall be designed to meet all applicable village regulations. All
vehicular aisle widths shall be a minimum of twenty six feet (26'), and shall
encompass the entire perimeter of all buildings. Furthermore, all gates
(powered or manual) to a site shall have padlocks or bypass opening devices
approved and used by the fire department. The clear opening through the gate
shall be a minimum of two feet (2') wider than the traveled way and shall open
inward.
      11.   Nonmotorized Transportation Access And Circulation: Safe,
convenient, and aesthetically pleasing pedestrian and bicycle circulation
routes shall be provided within and accessing the site. There shall not be any
utility structures built within the limits of any pedestrian or bicycle paths,
and there shall be a minimum two foot (2') clearance from any pedestrian or
bicycle paths to utility structures.
      12.   Drainage And Storm Water Management: The site plan shall provide
for site surface drainage and storm water management facilities that meet or
exceed the applicable standards of the village.
      13.   Driveways: Driveways in commercial areas shall be a minimum of one
hundred feet (100') from another driveway or intersection. Depending on the
intended use of the property, a traffic analysis may be required in order to
verify the placement of driveways, as well as the need for additional off site
roadway improvements (turning lanes/acceleration lanes, etc.).
      14.   Fire Department Connection: A five inch (5") Storz fire department
connection (FDC) with a 22.5 degree elbow toward the ground shall be provided
for the sprinkler/standpipe system for all buildings. The FDC shall be capable
of supplying the entire system, and shall be located and visible on a street
front or location approved by the Manhattan fire protection district. The FDC
shall be located between two feet (2') and three and one-half feet (31/2') from
the ground to the centerline on the FDC inlet. There shall be a minimum
clearance of five feet (5') on either side with no obstructions to the front of
the FDC. A remote FDC shall be required if the distance from the apparatus to
the FDC is greater than seventy five feet (75').
   I.   Amendments To Approved Plans:
      1.   Amendments: An applicant may request a change in an approved site
plan. A change in an approved site plan which results in a major change shall
require approval of the amendment by the village board of trustees after
recommendation on the matter by the village planning commission. All amendments
shall follow the procedures and conditions herein required for original
application submittal and review. A change considered only a minor change shall
require only the submission of a revised plan to the village administrator or
zoning officer.
      2.   Determination Of Major And Minor Changes: A determination of whether
a change in an approved site plan is a major or minor change shall be made by
the village administrator or zoning officer according to the guidelines below.
The applicant may appeal the determination of a major change to the village
planning commission in writing at least seven (7) days prior to the next
regular scheduled planning commission meeting. The planning commission will
vote to either uphold or reverse the determination. If the determination is
upheld then the amendment shall proceed only according to the procedures set
forth herein.
         a.   Guidelines For Major Change:
            (1)   A change in the original concept of the development;
            (2)   A change in the original use or character of the development;
            (3)   A change in the type of dwelling unit as identified on the
approved site plan;
            (4)   An increase in the number of dwelling units planned;
            (5)   Rearrangement of lots, blocks, or building tracts;
            (6)   A change in the character or function of any street;
            (7)   A reduction in the amount of land set aside for common open
space;
            (8)   An increase or decrease in any building area over five
percent (5%);
            (9)   An increase or decrease over five percent (5%) in any
building height;
            (10)   Significant variations in the design layout of the site
plan, such as, but not limited to, the deletion, relocation or addition of on
site improvements such as drives, parking lots, structures, berms, curbs,
landscaping, utilities.
         b.   Guidelines For Minor Changes:
            (1)   Any minor variations in layout that do not constitute a major
change;
            (2)   An increase or decrease in any building area less than five
percent (5%);
            (3)   An increase or decrease less than five percent (5%) in any
building height;
            (4)   Changes in the species of required trees, shrubs or ground
cover designated on the site plan. (Ord. 946, 3-20-2007)
5-2-6: FEES:
   A.   Land Development Review And Construction Observation Fees: The village
shall charge administration, review and construction observation service fees
as provided herein. These fees shall be based upon the fixed fee schedule set
forth below and shall be paid in advance by the owner, subdivider or developer
by means of United States currency, or certified check/money order payable to
the village treasurer and delivered to the village clerk. No plan, or plat, for
a proposed planned development or subdivision, preliminary or otherwise, shall
be considered without the receipt from the village treasurer indicating that
the requisite fees have been paid. Fees so paid are not refundable regardless
of whether the proposed subdivision or development is approved or disapproved.
      1.   Administrative Fees:
 
Development Size                Fee
0 to 5 acres                    $ 250.00 minimum
5.01 to 40 acres                50.00 per acre
Greater than 40.01 acres        2,000.00 plus $20.00 per acre over 40.01
                                acres
                                50 percent upon submittal of conceptual
The above fees shall be paid as plan
follows:                        50 percent upon submittal of preliminary
                                plan
 
      2.   Conceptual Plan Engineering Review Fees:
 
Development Size        Fee
0 to 2 acres            $ 300.00
2.01 to 4 acres         600.00
4.01 to 9 acres         900.00
Greater than 9.01 acres 1,500.00
 
The above fees shall be paid upon submittal of the conceptual plan, but shall
be credited toward engineering review fees upon submittal of the preliminary
plan, after such fees shall have been determined in accordance with subsection
A3 of this section.
      3.   Engineering Review Fees:
         a.   All single phased developments which contemplate, or which may
otherwise require, the construction of and/or dedication of public
improvements, shall be submitted to the village for review by the village
engineer and public improvement coordinator. The fee for such review shall be
determined based upon the cost of public improvements required by the village
and approved by the village engineer, as set forth in the following fee table:
 
Infrastructure Improvement Cost Fee
$ 50,000.00 or less             $ 1,500.00 minimum
50,000.01 to 100,000.00         1,500.00 plus 2.75 percent of amount over
                                $50,000.00
100,000.01 to 500,000.00        2,875.00 plus 2.5 percent of amount over
                                $100,000.00
500,000.01 and over             12,875.00 plus 1.5 percent of amount over
                                $500,000.00
 
The engineering review fees shall be paid upon submittal of the preliminary
plan. Should the actual infrastructure improvement costs be unavailable at the
time of submittal of the preliminary plan, the owner, subdivider or developer
shall submit, as a viable substitute, an engineer's opinion of probable
construction costs for the proposed public improvements. The village engineer
shall review the sufficiency of the tendered improvement costs and either: 1)
approve them as submitted, or 2) require that they be revised and resubmitted.
Improvement costs, actual or estimated, as approved by the village engineer,
shall be utilized as the basis for calculating the engineering review fees.
Such fees, if based upon estimated amounts, shall be eligible for adjustment
based upon actual costs in accordance with the infrastructure improvement costs
amount when finally determined. Any additional engineering review fees required
due to upward revisions in the infrastructure improvement costs shall be paid
prior to final plan approval. If the final infrastructure improvement costs
amount is less than the initial estimate as submitted by the owner, subdivider
or developer, the initial estimate shall be utilized unless the difference
between the initial estimate and the final infrastructure improvement costs
amount is greater than twenty five percent (25%), in which case the village
shall refund that amount of the difference in excess of twenty five percent
(25%).
"Infrastructure" shall be defined as all public improvements located in rights
of way or easements as defined by this title along with detention/compensatory
storage areas and any private improvements that are necessary to service access
to multiple units in the development, such as shared common driveways and
private roadways. Improvements beyond the right of way required to service an
individual lot will not be included.
         b.   Multiphased developments which contemplate or which may otherwise
require the construction and/or dedication of public improvements and which
would require phased engineering review of the final plan submittals shall be
submitted to the village for review by the village engineer. The engineering
review fees shall be paid as follows:
            (1)   Twenty percent (20%) of the engineering review fee, as
determined by applying the fee table set forth in subsection A3a of this
section to the infrastructure improvement costs for all phases of the
subdivision or development, shall be paid upon submittal of the preliminary
plan.
            (2)   Subsequently, as each phase of the multiphased development is
submitted for final plan approval, a percentage of the total engineering review
fee shall be due and paid prior to final plan approval for that phase. The
amount due for each phase shall be calculated by applying the percentage of
infrastructure improvements proposed for that phase (infrastructure improvement
cost for phase divided by infrastructure improvement costs for all phases) to
the engineering review fees remaining after deducting fees provided in
subsection A3b(1) of this section.
Example: Infrastructure improvement costs amount for public $1,000,000.00
improvements for entire (all phases) development
Total review fee                                            20,375.00
Calculated as follows:
Initial fee (20 percent)                                    4,075.00
Phase I final review fee $500,000.00 (50 percent)           8,150.00
Phase II final review fee $250,000.00                       4,075.00
Phase III final review fee $250,000.00                      4,075.00
                                                            $ 20,375.00
 
      4.   Construction Observation Fees: The public improvement coordinator
and the village engineer, or their representatives, shall observe the
construction of the public improvements or utilities for single and multiphased
developments that contemplate the construction and/or dedication of public
improvements. The fee for the construction observation services shall be
determined based upon the cost of public improvements required by the village
and approved by the village engineer, as set forth in the following fee table:
 
Infrastructure Improvement Cost Fee
$50,000.00 or less              $1,000.00 minimum
Over $50,000.00                 $1,000.00 plus 1.5 percent of amount over
                                $50,000.00
 
The above construction observation fees shall be paid prior to final plat
approval.
      5.   Development Not Including Public Improvements And Redevelopment
Projects: For developments and subdivisions that do not contemplate the
construction and/or dedication of public improvements, review and construction
observation fees shall be charged to the owner, subdivider or developer as
follows:
         a.   Administrative fees shall be charged in amounts and in the same
manner as set forth in subsection A1 of this section.
         b.   Engineering review and construction observation fees shall be
charged at the hourly rate specified by the village and in effect at the time
such fees are charged. When performed by a consultant acting as village
engineer the hourly fee for this work shall be as provided in the consultant
engineering contract between the village and the village engineer. When
performed by village personnel the hourly fee shall be as established by the
village.
         c.   A base fee shall be charged and will be used by the village to
cover the initial cost for this work. The base fee shall be in the amount of
three hundred dollars ($300.00) per gross acre, with a minimum fee of one
thousand dollars ($1,000.00), which amount shall be adjusted by the village
when the project is approved. The base fee shall be paid prior to approval of
the site or development plan.
         d.   Any deficiency in the engineering review or construction
observation fees shall be due and payable by the owner, subdivider or developer
within thirty (30) days of written notice of said deficiency by the village.
(Ord. 946, 3-20-2007)
   B.   Plat Fees: A fee shall be paid to the village clerk at the time of
submission of the preliminary and final plat. No plat shall be reviewed by the
planning and zoning commission without a receipt from the village clerk being
exhibited by the owner, subdivider or developer showing full payment of the
fee. Payment of the fee is in no way contingent on whether or not the plat of
subdivision or development submitted is approved or disapproved. The fee shall
be as follows:
Preliminary plat: Twenty five dollars ($25.00) per lot within each preliminary
subdivision or development plat submitted with a minimum fee of two hundred
fifty dollars ($250.00).
Final plat: Fifteen dollars ($15.00) for each lot within each final subdivision
or development plat submitted with a minimum fee of two hundred fifty dollars
($250.00).
In the event that a plat calls for development of residential property, either
as two-family or multiple-family, or as business or industrial property, then
the fee shall be determined as ten dollars ($10.00) per each dwelling unit or
ten dollars ($10.00) per acre for businesses or industrial property. (Ord.
1029, 6-2-2009)
CHAPTER 3
DESIGN STANDARDS
SECTION:
5-3-1: Conformance To Applicable Rules And Regulations
5-3-2: Streets And Alleys
5-3-3: Easements
5-3-4: Blocks
5-3-5: Lots
5-3-6: Building Setback Lines
5-3-7: Construction Entrances
5-3-1: CONFORMANCE TO APPLICABLE RULES AND REGULATIONS:
   A.   In addition to the design standards established herein, all subdivision
site plan plats shall comply with the laws, ordinances, rules and regulations
set forth by this section.
   B.   The provisions of Illinois Compiled Statutes chapter 65, as amended
from time to time.
   C.   The zoning ordinance and all other applicable ordinances of the
appropriate jurisdiction, including, but not limited to, the storm water
management ordinance, flood hazard prevention, and sediment and erosion control
regulations, all as amended from time to time.
   D.   The comprehensive plan and official map of the village or any portions
thereof.
   E.   The special requirements of this title and any rules of the village,
the environmental protection agency of the state and the county public health
department relating to lot size and lot elevation if the subdivision site plan
is not served by public water or by a public sewer and provision for one or
both of these services has not been made.
   F.   The rules of the state division of highways relating to safety of
access and the preservation of the public interest and investment in the
streets if the subdivision site plan or any lot contained therein abuts a state
truck highway or connecting street.
   G.   All design, dimensions, materials and methods of construction of
improvements not specifically established in this title shall conform to
applicable federal, state and village regulations which are located in the
office of the village clerk. (Ord. 946, 3-20-2007)
5-3-2: STREETS AND ALLEYS:
   A.   Streets shall be designed and located in relation to existing and
planned streets, to topographical conditions and natural terrain features such
as streams and existing tree growth, to public convenience and safety, and in
appropriate relation to the proposed uses of land to be served by such streets.
It is the intent that the street system, whether public or private, encourage
safe and efficient traffic flow (B-40 vehicle with a turning radius of 60
feet), as well as provide safe vehicular storage space for stopping and turning
movements so as to not conflict at intersecting streets or driveway entrances.
   B.   1. All streets shall be properly integrated with the existing and
proposed system of thoroughfares and dedicated rights of way as established on
the official map.
      2.   All thoroughfares shall be properly related to special traffic
generators such as industries, business districts, schools, churches and
shopping centers, to population densities and to the pattern of existing and
proposed land uses.
      3.   Minor streets shall be laid out to conform as much as possible to
the topography, to discourage use by through traffic, to permit efficient
drainage and utility systems, and to require the minimum number of streets
necessary to provide convenient, safe access to property.
      4.   The rigid rectangular gridiron street pattern need not necessarily
be adhered to and the use of curvilinear streets shall be encouraged where such
use will result in a more desirable layout. The use of cul-de-sacs and U-shaped
streets is not encouraged.
      5.   Proposed streets shall be extended to the boundary lines of the
parcel to be subdivided, unless prevented by topography or other physical
conditions, or unless in the opinion of the planning and zoning commission,
extension is not necessary or desirable for the coordination of the layout of
the subdivision site plan with the existing layout or the most advantageous
future development of adjacent parcels.
      6.   In business and industrial developments, the streets and other
accessways shall be planned in connection with the grouping of buildings,
location of rail facilities, and the provision of alleys, truck loading and
maneuvering areas so as to minimize conflict of movement between the various
types of traffic.
      7.   Dual access shall be provided in any subdivision site plan beginning
with the initial construction and shall be maintained in suitable condition for
passage of private and emergency vehicles.
   C.   Where a subdivision site plan borders on or contains a railroad or
highway, the planning and zoning commission may require a street approximately
parallel to and on each side of such railroad or highway, at a distance
suitable for the appropriate use of the intervening land, for park purposes in
residential districts or for commercial or industrial purposes in appropriate
districts. Such distances shall also be determined with due regard for the
requirements of approach grades and future grade separations.
   D.   Where a subdivision site plan abuts or contains an existing or proposed
highway or major thoroughfare, as shown on the comprehensive plan or official
map, the planning and zoning commission may require marginal access streets,
reverse frontage with screen planting contained in a nuances reservation, at
least ten feet (10') wide, along the rear property line; deep lots with rear
service alleys or such other treatment as may be necessary for adequate
protection of residential properties and to afford separation of through and
local traffic.
   E.   1. Street right of way widths shall be as specified in appendix B,
"Street Design Guidelines", attached to the ordinance codified herein.
      2.   Reserve strips controlling access to public utilities or streets
shall be prohibited.
      3.   When connecting street lines deflect from each other at any one
point by more than ten degrees (10°), they shall be connected by a curve with a
radius adequate to ensure clear sight distances.
   F.   Street grades shall provide proper relation between the street and the
first floor elevation of the houses or buildings to permit convenient and
economical access to and drainage of the lots. Driveway slopes shall be between
two percent (2%) and eight percent (8%).
   G.   Street gradients shall be as specified in appendix B,"Street Design
Guidelines", attached to the ordinance codified herein.
   H.   Tangents (minimum length 100 feet) shall be introduced between
horizontal reverse curves on all streets. Tangents (minimum length 50 feet
measured from the right of way of the intersecting road) shall be introduced at
the end of all curvilinear roads at intersections.
   I.   1. Streets shall be laid out so as to intersect as nearly as possible
at right angles and no new street shall intersect any existing street at less
than sixty degrees (60°). A proposed intersection of two (2) new streets at an
angle of less than seventy five degrees (75°) shall not be acceptable. Not more
than two (2) streets shall intersect at any one point unless specifically
approved by the village.
      2.   Street jogs with centerline offsets of less than one hundred fifty
feet (150') shall be avoided.
      3.   All street intersections should encourage safe traffic flow.
   J.   No street names shall be used which will duplicate or be confused with
the names of existing streets. Existing street names shall be projected
whenever possible. Street names shall be subject to the approval of the
village.
   K.   1. Alleys shall be provided in commercial, business and industrial
districts, except that the village may waive this requirement where other
definite and assured provisions are made for service access, such as off street
loading, unloading and parking, consistent with and adequate for the uses
proposed and in accordance with the provisions of the zoning ordinance.
      2.   The width of alleys shall not be less than twenty feet (20').
      3.   Alleys in residential areas shall not be permitted, except where
deemed necessary by the village.
      4.   Alley intersections and sharp changes in alley alignment shall be
avoided, but where necessary, corners may be cut off sufficiently to permit
safe vehicular movement.
      5.   Dead end alleys shall be avoided where possible, but if unavoidable
they shall be provided with adequate turnaround facilities at the dead end, as
determined by the planning and zoning commission. (Ord. 946, 3-20-2007)
5-3-3: EASEMENTS:
   A.   Easements shall be provided for drainage and utilities on all side yard
and rear yard lot lines. These drainage and utility easements shall be at least
five feet (5') wide on all side yard lot lines and ten feet (10') on all rear
yard lot lines.
   B.   Easements shall be designed to provide continuity from block to block.
No building shall be constructed upon any easement.
   C.   All 100-year overflow routes shall be contained within an easement
referred to as "surface overland flow easements" on the plat of subdivision.
Overland drainage easements shall be wider than twenty feet (20') if needed to
convey the 100-year overland drainage flow during emergency conditions while
maintaining a minimum one foot (1') freeboard from all structures.
   D.   Where a subdivision site plan is traversed by a watercourse,
drainageway, channel or stream, there shall be provided a storm water easement
or drainage right of way conforming substantially with the line of such
watercourse and shall include such further width or construction, or both, as
will be adequate for the purpose and as determined by the village. Parallel
streets or parkways may be required in connection therewith. (Ord. 946, 3-20-
2007)
5-3-4: BLOCKS:
   A.   The lengths, widths, and shapes of blocks shall be determined with due
regard to:
      1.   Provision of adequate building sites suitable to the special needs
of the types of uses contemplated.
      2.   Zoning requirements as to lot sizes and dimensions within the
corporate limits of the village.
      3.   Needs for convenient access, circulation, control and safety of
street traffic.
      4.   Limitations and opportunities of topography.
   B.   Block lengths shall not exceed one thousand two hundred feet (1,200'),
or be less than eight hundred feet (800'). Cul-de-sacs shall not exceed six
hundred feet (600') in length.
   C.   Pedestrian crosswalk easements not less than ten feet (10') wide shall
be required by the planning and zoning commission to provide for pedestrian
circulation or access to schools, playgrounds, shopping centers, transportation
and other community facilities.
   D.   Blocks or portions thereof intended for commercial or industrial use
shall be designed as such, and the plan shall show adequate off street areas to
provide parking, loading docks and other such facilities as may be required by
the zoning ordinance. (Ord. 946, 3-20-2007)
5-3-5: LOTS:
   A.   The lot size, width, depth, shape and orientation shall be appropriate
for the location of the subdivision site plan and for the type of development
and use contemplated. Lot dimensions shall conform to the requirements of the
zoning ordinance.
   B.   1. Residential lot sizes, regardless of jurisdictional boundary, shall
meet the minimum requirements herein established and shall comply with the
rules and regulations of the state department of public health and the county
health department.
      2.   Lots abutting a watercourse, drainageway, channel or stream shall
have a minimum width or depth as required to provide an adequate building site
and to afford the minimum usable area required in this title or the zoning
ordinance for front, rear and side yards.
      3.   Depths and widths of lots or properties reserved or laid out for
commercial, business or industrial purposes shall be adequate to provide for
the off street service and parking facilities required in the zoning ordinance.
   C.   All lots shall abut on a publicly dedicated street.
   D.   Double frontage and reverse frontage lots shall be avoided except where
essential to provide separation of residential development from highways or
thoroughfares or to overcome specific disadvantages of topography and
orientation. A planting screen easement of at least ten feet (10'), and across
which there shall be no right of vehicular access, shall be provided along the
rear lot lines of lots abutting such highways and major thoroughfares.
   E.   Side lot lines shall be substantially at right angles or radial to
street lines.
   F.   Where residential lots fronting on thoroughfares are permitted by the
planning and zoning commission, they should be platted with extra depth to
permit generous distances between the buildings and such trafficways. Where
lots front on thoroughfares, the normal building setback line shall be
increased by an additional twenty feet (20'). Business, commercial, or
industrial buildings in residential blocks shall be provided with setbacks at
least equal to the setback of the residential properties in that block and
shall comply with all applicable zoning requirements.
   G.   Lots shall be laid out so as to provide positive drainage away from all
buildings, and individual lot drainage shall be coordinated with the general
storm drainage pattern for the area. Drainage shall be designed so as to avoid
concentration of storm drainage water from each lot to adjacent lots.
   H.   Lots at right angles to each other shall be avoided wherever possible,
especially in residential areas.
   I.   Corner lots for residential use shall have extra width to permit
appropriate building setback from and orientation to both streets.
   J.   Lot lines shall follow municipal boundary lines whenever practicable,
rather than cross them. (Ord. 946, 3-20-2007)
5-3-6: BUILDING SETBACK LINES:
Building setback lines in residential areas of new subdivisions shall conform
to the front, side and rear yard provisions of the zoning ordinance. (Ord. 946,
3-20-2007)
5-3-7: CONSTRUCTION ENTRANCES:
   A.   All developments of property which are subject to this title shall,
whenever practicable, provide a construction entrance (per the Illinois "Urban
Drainage Manual") over the private property being developed for the use of all
vehicles and equipment used in connection with such development and the making
or delivery of materials and supplies thereto. The construction entrance shall
be continuously maintained by the developer in a dust free manner.
   B.   Every construction entrance herein required shall be depicted on the
final development plans. (Ord. 946, 3-20-2007)
CHAPTER 4
LAND IMPROVEMENTS REQUIRED
SECTION:
5-4-1: Indemnification And Insurance Requirements
5-4-2: Monuments And Markers
5-4-3: Street Improvements
5-4-4: Utilities
5-4-5: Public Utilities
5-4-6: Sidewalks
5-4-7: Landscaping
5-4-8: Driveways
5-4-9: Traffic Calming Devices
5-4-10: Final Plan Approval Requirements
5-4-1: INDEMNIFICATION AND INSURANCE REQUIREMENTS:
No subdivision development plan shall be approved by the planning and zoning
commission unless the applicant has included the following indemnification and
insurance requirements on the plan:
   A.   Indemnification And Insurance Requirements: The applicant and the
contractor shall indemnify the village of Manhattan ("municipality") and the
municipal engineer, their officials, officers, employees, and agents acting in
the scope and course of their employment and shall protect them from claims
arising out of or in connection with any operation of the applicant or
contractor including personal injury, death; or, for destruction of or damage
to property to the full extent allowed by the laws of the state of Illinois and
not beyond any extent which would render these provisions void or unforceable.
   B.   Additional Insureds: The applicant and contractor shall also protect
the municipality and the municipal engineer by including them as additional
insured on their comprehensive general liability insurance policy. The minimum
level of insurance shall be as specified in section 100 General Requirements
And Covenants of the "Standard Specifications For Road And Bridge Construction"
by the Illinois department of transportation. "Claims made" type policies are
unacceptable. Certificates of insurance shall be filed and approved by the
municipality and the municipal engineer, a minimum of five (5) days before
starting construction. Failure of the municipality and municipal engineer to
request said certificate of insurance shall in no way be considered a waiver of
this requirement.
   C.   Personal Liability: In carrying out any of their duties or in
exercising any power or authority granted to the municipal engineer by the
municipality, there shall be no personal liability upon the municipal engineer
or their authorized representative, it being understood that in such matters
they act as agents and representatives of the municipality. By beginning work,
the applicant and contractor covenant and agree that they each shall neither
commence nor prosecute any action or suit whatsoever against the municipal
engineer or municipality, their officials, officers, employees or agents in any
action or omission done or not done in the course of their duties. Further, by
beginning work, the applicant and contractor agree to pay all attorney fees and
all costs incurred by the municipality or municipal engineer, its officials,
officers, employees or agents because of any action or suit in violation of
this title.
   D.   Hold Harmless: The applicant and contractor doing work, shall hereby
defend, indemnify, keep, and save harmless the municipality and the municipal
engineer, and their respective legislative and board members, representatives,
agents, and employees in both individual and official capabilities against all
suits, claims, damages, losses, and expenses, including attorney fees, caused
by or growing out of, or incidental to, the performance of the work by the
applicant or the contractor to the full extent allowed by the laws of the state
of Illinois and not beyond any extent which would render these provisions void
or unenforceable.
   E.   Construction Observation: All materials and each part of detail of the
work portrayed on these plans may be subject at any time to observation by the
municipal engineer. Observation may be made at the site, or at the source of
material supply, whether that is at a mill, plant, ship, etc. The municipal
engineer shall be allowed access to all parts of the work and shall be
furnished with such information and assistance by the applicant and contractor
as needed to perform these observations. The contractor shall be held strictly
to the true intent of the plans in regard to quality of materials and
workmanship.
The municipal engineer is not responsible for safety on the work site nor does
the municipal engineer have any duty to review in any manner the adequacy of
the contractor's safety measures incident to the work portrayed on these plans.
The municipal engineer is not responsible for any construction means, methods,
techniques, sequences or procedures for the work portrayed on these plans.
The municipal engineer has no charge of the construction and has no right,
duty, or responsibility to stop work because of any contractor's failure to
follow proper safety precautions. The municipal engineer is not responsible for
the acts, errors or omissions of any applicant, engineer or contractor, or any
of their agents or employees or any other person performing any of the work
portrayed on these plans.
The contractor shall, upon written notice from the municipality, remove or
uncover such portions of the finished work, as it may direct, before the final
acceptance of the same. After examination, the contractor shall restore said
portion of the work to the standard required by these plans. The expense of
uncovering, removing and replacement shall be borne by the applicant and/or the
contractor; and, not the municipality nor the municipal engineer.
Any reference to "supervision" by the engineer in the Illinois department of
transportation, "Standard Specifications For Road And Bridge Construction", or
any other referenced documents shall be changed to "observation". (Ord. 946, 3-
20-2007)
5-4-2: MONUMENTS AND MARKERS:
   A.   Monuments shall be placed at all corners and angle points of the
outside boundary but no further than one-fourth (1/4) mile apart. The monuments
shall be of concrete, not less than six inches (6") in diameter and thirty six
inches (36") deep, with a center copper dowel three inches (3") long cast in
place. Iron rods nine-sixteenths inch (9/16") in diameter and not less than
thirty inches (30") long shall be set at all corners of lots not marked by
monuments.
   B.   Each lot shall have a marker board with the lot number on it (built on
a 4 inch by 4 inch post) placed in the center of the lot at the front property
line, and shall extend four feet (4') above finished grade. (Ord. 946, 3-20-
2007)
5-4-3: STREET IMPROVEMENTS:
   A.   Street improvements shall be provided in each new subdivision site plan
in accordance with the regulations set forth in this section and the tables of
minimum standards and typical section as set forth as appendices B and C,
respectively, attached to the ordinance codified herein. The regulations for
street improvements are as follows:
      1.   All streets in single-family residential zoning areas shall be
constructed in accordance with this title.
      2.   All streets in multi-family and commercial zoning areas shall be
constructed in accordance with collector thoroughfare standards.
      3.   For industrial and other special use areas as determined by the
planning and zoning commission and the village engineer.
      4.   All street construction, including those listed above, shall conform
to the requirements of the Illinois department of transportation "Standard
Specifications For Road And Bridge Construction", adopted January 1, 2007, and
amended from time to time.
   B.   It should be noted that all curb returns shall have a minimum radius of
twenty five feet (25') (measured from the back of curb).
   C.   It should be noted that no building permit will be issued until such
time that the roadway bituminous binder course has been installed. (Ord. 946,
3-20-2007)
5-4-4: UTILITIES:
   A.   Sanitary sewer systems shall be designed in accordance with the
requirements of the village and the state environmental protection agency. No
oxidation ponds, seepage lagoons or holding lagoons will be constructed except
upon specific approval of the village engineer. Sewers may be placed only in
public rights of way or in easements.
   B.   The drainage system within the development shall be designed to
anticipate and provide capacity for drainage from naturally tributary land.
Such design shall provide adequate capacity for transmitting such drainage from
the other tributary areas on the basis of the ultimate development of such
other tributary areas, but such drainage system need not make provision for the
retention of drainage from other tributary areas. Drainage, storm water
detention and compensatory storage calculations shall be submitted with the
plans as required by the village engineer. Where storm sewer discharges into an
open ditch or natural watercourse, a concrete headwall may be required
according to standards from the village engineer.
   C.   All residential, commercial, industrial and community facility
buildings or structures shall be served by an adequate water supply and
distribution system. The design of the system shall be in accordance with the
requirements of the state department of public health. (Ord. 946, 3-20-2007)
5-4-5: PUBLIC UTILITIES:
   A.   All utility lines for telephone, cable television and electric service
shall be placed entirely underground (minimum depth of 24 inches from finished
grade). Said conduits or cables shall be placed within easements or dedicated
public ways, in a manner which will not conflict with other underground
services. Further, all transformer boxes shall be located so as not to be
unsightly or hazardous to the public. The utility lines shall be parallel to
and not less than twelve inches (12") from the property lines. An X shall be
scribed into the curb at all road crossing locations. Corner markers as
required in section
5-4-2 of this chapter shall not be disturbed by the installation of utility
lines. (Ord. 946, 3-20-2007)
5-4-6: SIDEWALKS:
   A.   Concrete sidewalks shall be provided throughout the subdivision site
plan to serve the anticipated needs of its residents. Sidewalks shall be
located in accordance with proper land planning procedures and with due regard
for public safety and anticipated concentration of pedestrian traffic.
   B.   All sidewalks shall be five feet (5') wide and typically be installed
one foot (1') from the property line (within the right of way). Where
practicable, all sidewalks shall be located so that a parkway separates the
curbs from the sidewalk.
   C.   Notwithstanding the fact that installation of sidewalks is required to
be completed within two (2) years of final plat approval, the corporate
authorities may, upon application, grant extensions for up to six (6) months
for such sidewalk completion. No more than four (4) such extensions may be
granted. No extension shall be granted unless or until the applicant's
(developer's) subdivision security bond or letter of credit has been extended
to remain valid during the term of any such extension. Nothing herein contained
shall be deemed a waiver of the applicant's (developer's) responsibility to
complete the sidewalks, and provided further that if the applicant (developer)
transfers ownership of any lot the sidewalk of which has not been accepted by
the village, the applicant (developer) and the owner of the lot shall be
jointly and severally responsible for the completion and maintenance of the
sidewalk.
   D.   There shall not be any utility structures built within the limits of
any pedestrian or bicycle paths, and there shall be a minimum two foot (2')
clearance from any pedestrian or bicycle paths to utility structures.
   E.   Although the use of a carriage walk is strongly discouraged, should the
village agree to its use, the width of the sidewalk shall be seven feet (7').
(Ord. 946, 3-20-2007)
5-4-7: LANDSCAPING:
   A.   In the event that topsoil is removed, prior to, during or after
construction, it shall be replaced to a depth not less than four inches (4") in
all lawns and planting areas. Said topsoil shall be provided and spread by the
general contractor or subcontractor.
   B.   All unpaved areas within the street right of way shall be seeded or
restored with natural plantings approved by the village. Before the release of
the two (2) year maintenance bond can be recommended by the public improvement
coordinator and village engineer, all unpaved areas between the edge of the
road pavement and the right of way line must support an adequate mat of grass.
Provisions shall be made to assure the growth of all landscaping.
   C.   Notwithstanding any other provision specified herein, parkway trees are
to be planted in the parkway in accordance with the village tree code with at
least two (2) street trees per lot and four (4) street trees on a corner lot.
   D.   Protective screen planting may be required to secure a reasonably
effective physical barrier between residential properties and adjoining uses to
minimize adverse conditions of sight and sound. The screen planting plan shall
be prepared by a landscape architect and shall meet the approval of the
planning and zoning commission.
   E.   All storm water basins shall be designed to enhance water quality,
control erosion and sedimentation, and discourage nuisance waterfowl. All storm
water basins shall be landscaped as designated in the village storm water
management ordinance. (Ord. 946, 3-20-2007)
5-4-8: DRIVEWAYS:
Except where improved alleys are existing, prior to the issuance of an
occupancy permit, every subdivided lot shall have a driveway paved with an
asphalt and/or concrete surface minimally extending from an adjacent public
street to the front setback line of the principal structure located on the lot.
Driveway slopes shall be between two percent (2%) and eight percent (8%). (Ord.
946, 3-20-2007)
5-4-9: TRAFFIC CALMING DEVICES:
The village may, at its discretion, require the use of roundabouts or other
traffic calming devices in the design of roadways within a subdivision. (Ord.
946, 3-20-2007)
5-4-10: FINAL PLAN APPROVAL REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   Upon receiving approval of the development plans by the village
engineer, the developer's engineer shall submit to the village engineer five
(5) signed and sealed full size twenty four inch by thirty six inch (24" x 36")
sets and four (4) signed and sealed reduced size eleven inch by seventeen inch
(11" x 17") sets of the final plans, as well as one copy of the final plans and
one copy of the plat of subdivision in electronic format as described below:
      1.   Media Type: Files may be submitted on the following media types,
which are IBM and Microsoft compatible:
         31/2 inch diskette
         CD-ROM
         DVD
      2.   File Types: All submissions must be in a drawing file format
compatible with AutoCAD. If the drawing file is in a micro station format
(*.dgn) then a text file must accompany the drawing. This text file must
reference the micro station layer number and give a corresponding definition
for that layer. ESRI shape files or personal geodatabases are also acceptable.
      3.   General Drawing Requirements:
         a.   The drawing must be drafted at full scale and will contain all
existing and proposed objects that are contained in the construction plans.
         b.   All files shall be included for submittals. Check that cross
referenced or attached files are also submitted.
         c.   All utility structures will be drawn as a block with an insertion
point. All utility structures shall have a unique block name for the different
types of structures.
         d.   Layers will be descriptive and numerous enough as to separate
utility types as well as determining proposed from existing.
         e.   All utilities, which include a direction of flow, will be drafted
in the direction of that flow.
         f.   All pipes will be drafted such that a single line is drawn and
snapped from the center of structure to the center of next structure. Break
pipes at structures.
         g.   All pipes connected to other pipes without a structure shall also
be snapped.
         h.   All pipe sizes are to be included as text labels or in a schedule
somewhere on the drawing.
      4.   Specific Utility Requirements:
         a.   Storm Sewer: Include the following structures as blocks in
addition to the storm pipe:
            Catch basin
            Cleanout
            Flared end section
            Inlet
            Manhole
         b.   Sanitary Sewer: Include the following structures as blocks in
addition to the sanitary pipe:
            Air release valve
            Grease trap
            Lift stations
            Manhole
            Include and differentiate gravity and forced sewer pipes.
         c.   Water System: Include the following structures as blocks in
addition to the water pipe:
            Hydrant
            Meter vaults
            Reducer
            Valve
            Wells
            Include and differentiate distribution, service and private pipes.
         d.   Parcels: Include any plat of survey or plat of subdivision in one
of the accepted drawing file formats.
         e.   Lights: Include the following structures as blocks in addition to
the electrical wire runs:
            Control box
            Light pole
(Ord. 946, 3-20-2007)
CHAPTER 5
ENGINEERING SPECIFICATIONS
SECTION:
5-5-1: Standards
5-5-2: Sewers
5-5-3: Water Supply
5-5-4: Trench Backfill
5-5-5: Street Improvements
5-5-6: Alleys
5-5-7: Sidewalks
5-5-8: Street Lighting Improvements
5-5-9: Street Signs
5-5-1: STANDARDS:
   A.   The applicant shall install storm and sanitary sewers, a water supply
system, detention basins, street grading and pavement, alleys, pedestrianways,
public utilities, and street lighting in accordance with applicable ordinances
and standards of construction of the village.
   B.   No subdivision of land shall be approved by the corporate authorities
without receiving a statement signed by the village engineer certifying that
the improvements described in the applicant's plans and specifications,
together with any agreements, are in substantial compliance with ordinances of
the village and that they comply with the following standards in this chapter.
(Ord. 946, 3-20-2007)
5-5-2: SEWERS:
   A.   Sanitary sewers and sanitary sewer services shall be installed to serve
all properties in the subdivision. Sanitary sewerage facilities shall connect
with public sanitary sewerage systems. Such improvements shall be installed in
accordance with the minimum standards and specifications as contained in
appendix D, attached to the ordinance codified herein or as approved by the
village board after recommendation by the planning and zoning commission.
   B.   Storm sewers shall be installed to serve all properties in the
subdivision. Sump pump discharge conveyance pipes, either separate or in
combination with storm sewers, shall be installed unless it can be empirically
demonstrated that site specific soils exhibit an infiltration rate greater than
or equal to 3.2x10-3 cubic feet per second per square foot. Generally within
rear yard drainage easements, sump pump discharge conveyance systems shall
consist of an inlet provided at alternating lot corners with capped service
tees for each adjacent lot and installed so as not to interfere with other
public utilities. Such improvements shall be installed in accordance with the
minimum standards and specifications as contained in appendix E, attached to
the ordinance codified herein or as approved by the village board after
recommendation by the planning and zoning commission. (Ord. 946, 3-20-2007)
5-5-3: WATER SUPPLY:
   A.   Water distribution facilities, including piping, fittings, hydrants,
valves, valve vaults, water services and all other appurtenances adequate for
fire and domestic needs shall be installed to serve all properties within the
subdivision. Such improvements shall be installed in accordance with the
minimum standards and specifications as contained in appendix F, attached to
the ordinance codified herein or as approved by the village board after
recommendation by the planning and zoning commission. At no time shall anyone
other than village authorized personnel operate valves or hydrants. (Ord. 946,
3-20-2007)
5-5-4: TRENCH BACKFILL:
   A.   All trenches caused by the construction of sewers, sewer services,
water mains, water services, and in excavation around catch basins, manholes,
inlets and other appurtenances which occur within two feet (2') of the limits
of existing or proposed pavements, sidewalks and curb and gutters shall be
backfilled and properly compacted with trench backfill material. When in the
opinion of the village engineer proper compaction of the trench cannot be
obtained, a flowable fill shall be utilized.
   B.   Trench backfill shall be compacted in place to ninety five percent
(95%) of maximum density at optimum moisture as determined by the standard
Proctor test, and as specified in the appendices attached to the ordinance
codified herein, for the specific type of improvement. (Ord. 946, 3-20-2007)
5-5-5: STREET IMPROVEMENTS:
   A.   The full width of the right of way shall be graded to the required
section.
   B.   All unsuitable subbase material shall be removed and shall be replaced
with stable, compacted material in conformance with generally accepted
engineering practices. Soil test reports are to be submitted to the village
engineer at the time of plan submittal. Subgrade stability improvements may be
required for soils with an IBR less than 6 and at the discretion of the village
engineer. Lime stabilization may be utilized upon receipt of approval by the
public improvement coordinator and village engineer, and must be in accordance
with IDOT sections 302 and 310.
   C.   Vertical curves shall be used whenever a change in centerline gradient
occurs, except where the algebraic difference in gradients is one and one-half
percent (11/2%) or less. The length of vertical curves shall be established on
the basis of design, speed and stopping distance in accordance with standards
obtainable from the village engineer.
   D.   All pavement thicknesses, including surface, base courses and subbase
courses, shall be designed in accordance with the Illinois department of
transportation standards. The minimum thicknesses for class IV streets (as
designated in IDOT's "Bureau Of Design And Environmental Manual") shall be as
specified in appendix C, attached to the ordinance codified herein. Proof roll
of the subbase and base course shall be conducted and densities of the subbase,
base course, binder course and surface course of all streets shall be field
verified during construction with nuclear methods by a developer employed
testing service.
   E.   Class III streets (as designated in IDOT's "Bureau Of Design And
Environmental Manual") require design data to be submitted to the village
engineer at the time of plan submittal and shall always meet or exceed the
minimum requirements in appendix C, attached to the ordinance codified herein.
However, alternate materials may be considered by the planning and zoning
commission, if recommended by the village engineer, if structurally equal.
   F.   Curbs and gutters shall be constructed on all streets and shall be
combination (integral) concrete. Curbs may be constructed integrally with the
Portland cement concrete pavement. All curbs and gutters shall be installed in
accordance with the minimum standards and specifications as contained in
appendix G, attached to the ordinance codified herein or as approved by the
village board after recommendation by the planning and zoning commission. (Ord.
946, 3-20-2007)
5-5-6: ALLEYS:
   A.   Alley pavement shall conform with the specifications of section
5-5-5 of this chapter. (Ord. 946, 3-20-2007)
5-5-7: SIDEWALKS:
   A.   Sidewalks shall be constructed of Portland cement concrete (class SI)
to a minimum thickness of five inches (5"), except at driveway locations where
the thickness shall be a minimum thickness of six inches (6"). An aggregate
base with a minimum thickness of four inches (4") shall be provided under all
sidewalks and shall be compacted as approved by the public improvement
coordinator. Concrete for such sidewalks shall conform to the Illinois
department of transportation "Standard Specifications For Road And Bridge
Construction".
   B.   All sidewalk is to be constructed with two inch by six inch (2" x 6")
forms. (Ord. 946, 3-20-2007)
5-5-8: STREET LIGHTING IMPROVEMENTS:
   A.   Street lighting improvements shall be installed to serve all properties
within the subdivision. Such improvements shall be installed in accordance with
the minimum standards and specifications as contained in appendix H, attached
to the ordinance codified herein or as approved by the village board after
recommendation by the planning and zoning commission. (Ord. 946, 3-20-2007)
5-5-9: STREET SIGNS:
   A.   The developer will pay for all street name and regulatory signs and
install same in accordance with the "Manual On Uniform Traffic Control Devices"
and consistent with the traffic control plan. The cost of all signage is to be
included in the letter of credit posted for the step 2 improvements. All signs
are to be installed within one week of the construction of the roadway
bituminous binder. The signs shall meet the following requirements:
      1.   Signs supports shall be Unistrut Telespar perforated signposts one
and three-fourths inch by one and three-fourths inch (13/4" x 13/4"), 14 gauge
thirteen feet (13') long upright and two inch by two inch (2" x 2") gauge three
feet (3') long or approved equal.
      2.   A sign map is required for the development to be approved by the
village board and police department before signs are to be installed.
      3.   Stop sign: Thirty inch (30") diamond grade VIP stop sign, local
streets (reflective).
      4.   Stop sign: Thirty six inch (36") diamond grade VIP stop sign,
collector/arterial streets (reflective).
      5.   Speed limit sign: Twenty four inch by thirty inch (24" x 30")
diamond grade VIP, twenty five (25) miles per hour on local streets.
      6.   Speed limit sign: Twenty four inch by thirty six inch (24" x 36")
diamond grade VIP, collector/arterial.
      7.   Residential street name signs green with four inch (4") white
letters; six inch (6") double extruded blade (letters to be reflective) high
intensity sheeting (18 inch minimum blade).
      8.   Collector streets and greater six inch (6") white letters; eight
inch (8") double extruded blade (letters to be reflective) high intensity
sheeting (18 inch minimum blade). (Ord. 946, 3-20-2007)
CHAPTER 6
SCHOOL SITES
SECTION:
5-6-1: Dedication Of School Sites; Fees In Lieu Thereof
5-6-2: Criteria For Requiring School Site Dedication
5-6-3: Criteria For Requiring A Contribution In Lieu Of School Sites
5-6-4: Density Formula
5-6-5: Reservation Of Additional Land
5-6-6: Combination With Adjoining Development
5-6-7: Topography And Soils
5-6-8: Improvement Required For Land Dedications
5-6-9: Title Insurance, Survey, Assessment Plats
5-6-10: Annexation Agreements
5-6-11: Payment
5-6-12: Indemnification; Hold Harmless; Release
5-6-13: Funds
5-6-14: Periodic Review
5-6-15: School Construction Impact Fee
5-6-1: DEDICATION OF SCHOOL SITES; FEES IN LIEU THEREOF:
As a condition of approval of a final plat of subdivision or of a final plat of
planned unit development, each subdivider, developer, builder or owner will be
required to:
   A.   Dedicate land for school sites to serve the immediate and future needs
of the residents of the development;
   B.   Make cash contributions in lieu of actual land dedication; or
   C.   A combination of both, at the option of the village upon recommendation
of the school districts affected in accordance with the following criteria and
formula set forth in this chapter. (Ord. 669, 3-3-1998, eff. 5-1-1998)
5-6-2: CRITERIA FOR REQUIRING SCHOOL SITE DEDICATION:
   A.   Requirement And Population Ratio: The ultimate number of students to be
generated by a subdivision or planned unit development shall bear directly upon
the amount of land required to be dedicated for school sites. The land
dedication requirement shall be determined by obtaining a ratio of: 1)
estimated children to be served in each school classification over the 2)
maximum recommended number of students to be served in each school
classification as stated herein, and then applying such ratio to the 3) minimum
recommended number of acres for a school site of each such school
classification as stated herein. The product thereof shall be the acres of land
deemed needed to have sufficient land for school sites to serve the estimated
increase of children in each such school classification. (Ord. 669, 3-3-1998,
eff. 5-1-1998)
   B.   School Classification And Size Of School Site: School classifications
and size of school sites within or serving the village shall be determined in
accordance with the following criteria:
 
School Classification By  Maximum Number Of Students Minimum Number Of Acres Of
Grades                    For Each Such School       Land For Each School Site
                          Classification             Of Such Classification
Elementary schools,
grades kindergarten       600 students               17 acres
through 5th (K - 5)
Junior high schools,
grades 6th through 8th (6 900 students               34 acres
- 8)
High schools, grades 9th  1,500 students             45 acres
through 12th (9 - 12)
 
(Ord. 801, 3-2-2004)
   C.   Location: The location of the site to be dedicated shall be determined
by the village board of trustees upon recommendation of the board of education
of the school district having or to have jurisdiction of the school to be
erected on the site taking into account the comprehensive school plan and/or
the standards adopted by the affected school district as a guideline in
locating sites. The village board of trustees shall not select the site without
allowing opportunity for the board of education of the school district affected
to make a recommendation with respect thereto. (Ord. 669, 3-3-1998, eff. 5-1-
1998)
5-6-3: CRITERIA FOR REQUIRING A CONTRIBUTION IN LIEU OF SCHOOL SITES:
   A.   Requirement, Use Of Contributions: Where the development is "small" as
used herein, and the resulting size of the land contribution is too small to be
practical or when the available land is inappropriate for a school site, and it
is determined by the village after recommendation by the affected school
district not to require the dedication of land, the village shall require the
subdivider, developer, builder or owner to pay a cash contribution in lieu of
the land dedication required. In considering whether a development is "small"
as used herein, the village may consider whether the total number of the
proposed dwelling units will produce less than the maximum number of students
for one school of each school classification in accordance with this chapter.
The cash contributions in lieu of school sites shall be paid to the village
prior to the issuance of building permits. The village shall turn over any and
all dollars actually collected for such fees to the appropriate school district
semiannually. (Ord. 1203, 8-4-2015)
Such contributions shall be used solely for the acquisition of land for a
school site to serve the immediate or future needs of children from that
subdivision or development or for the improvement to any existing school sites
and buildings which serve such needs. Improvement under this section shall be
liberally construed and shall include, but shall not be limited to, the
development of parking lots; sidewalks; traffic signals; arterial streets;
collector streets; internal roadways; connection with sewer, water and
electrical lines; playgrounds; recreation grounds; and athletic fields.
Improvement shall also include the purchase of any material, goods or equipment
necessary to said development and construction. Improvement shall further
include the construction of buildings; additions to existing school buildings;
remodeled or renovated noninstructional spaces in classrooms and the purchase
of prefabricated classroom units to be used at a school site, and bond payments
related to these eligible expenditures. Annual operational expenditures are not
an eligible expenditure of these contributions. (Ord. 801, 3-2-2004)
   B.   Fair Market Value: The cash contributions in lieu of land shall be
based on the "fair market value" of the acres of land in the area improved as
specified herein, that otherwise would have been dedicated as school sites. It
has been determined that the present "fair market value" of such improved land
in and surrounding the village is thirty five thousand dollars ($35,000.00) per
acre, and such figure shall be used in making calculations for school
contributions unless the subdivider, developer, builder or owner of a planned
unit development files a written objection thereto. In the event of any such
objection, the subdivider, developer, builder or owner of the planned unit
development shall submit an appraisal showing the "fair market value" of such
improved land in the area of his subdivision or planned unit development or
other evidence thereof and final determination of said "fair market value" per
acre of such improved land shall be made by the village board based upon such
information submitted by the subdivider, developer, builder or owner of the
planned unit development and from other sources which may be submitted to the
village board by the school districts or others.
CASH CONTRIBUTION PER UNIT BASED UPON    $35,000.00 PER ACRE
             Cash Contribution
Type Of Unit Elementary   Junior High  Total        High School
             Grades K - 5 Grades 6 - 8 Grades K - 8 Grades 9 - 12
                         Cash Contribution
Type Of Unit             Elementary   Junior High  Total        High School
                         Grades K - 5 Grades 6 - 8 Grades K - 8 Grades 9 - 12
Detached single- family:                                      
 2 bedroom              $407.50      $182.48      $589.98      $233.10
 3 bedroom              481.89       202.31       684.20       141.75
 4 bedroom              578.07       282.97       861.04       227.85
 5 bedroom              623.68       334.54       958.22       261.45
Attached single- family:                                      
 1 bedroom              0.00         0.00         0.00         0.00
 2 bedroom              84.28        33.06        117.34       30.45
 3 bedroom              136.83       50.25        187.08       71.40
 4 bedroom              268.71       140.16       408.87       110.25
 
   Formula:
      Contribution: pyf x paf x lv
   pyf = estimated student population per dwelling
   paf = minimum number of acres divided by maximum number of children
   (K - 5 17/600 = 0.02833), (6 - 8 34/900 = 0.03778) and (9 - 12 45/1,500 =
0.03)
   lv = $35,000.00 (estimated value of fully developed acre of land)
Based on 2000 Ehlers And Associates population generated figures
(Ord. 1203, 8-4-2015)
   C.   Criteria For Requiring Land Dedication And A Contribution: There will
be situations in subdivisions or planned unit developments when a combination
of land dedication and a contribution in lieu of land are both necessary. These
occasions will arise when:
      1.   Only a portion of the land to be developed is proposed as the
location for a school site. That portion of the land within the subdivision or
planned unit development falling within the school location shall be dedicated
as a site as aforesaid, and a cash contribution in lieu thereof shall be
required for any additional land that would have been required to be dedicated.
      2.   A major part of the school site has already been acquired and only a
small portion of land is needed from the development to complete the site. The
remaining portions shall be required by dedication, and a cash contribution in
lieu thereof shall also be required to fulfill the obligations of that
development. (Ord. 669, 3-3-1998, eff. 5-1-1998)
5-6-4: DENSITY FORMULA:
The table of estimated ultimate population density is generally indicative of
current and short range projected trends in family size for newly constructed
residential units as determined by Ehlers And Associates and shall be used in
calculating the amount of required dedication of acres of land or the cash
contributions in lieu thereof unless a written objection is filed thereto by
the subdivider, developer, builder or owner of the subdivision or planned unit
development. (Ord. 669, 3-3-1998, eff. 5-1-1998; amd. Ord. 901, 4-18-2006)
TABLE OF ESTIMATED ULTIMATE POPULATION PER DWELLING UNIT
(School Donation)
                  Elementary Junior   Total    High
        Preschool Grades K - High     Grades K School                Total Per
Type Of 0 - 4     5          Grades 6 - 8      Grades 9 - Adults     Dwelling
Unit    Years     5 - 10     - 8      5 - 13   12         18 Years + Unit
                  Years      11 - 13  Years    14 - 17
                             Years             Years
                      Elementary Junior   Total    High
            Preschool Grades K - High     Grades K School   Adults   Total Per
Type Of     0 - 4     5          Grades 6 - 8      Grades 9 18 Years Dwelling
Unit        Years     5 - 10     - 8      5 - 13   - 12     +        Unit
                      Years      11 - 13  Years    14 - 17
                                 Years             Years
Detached
single-                                                         
family:
2 bedroom   0.120     0.411      0.138    0.549    0.222    1.856    2.746
3 bedroom   0.268     0.486      0.153    0.639    0.135    1.913    2.955
4 bedroom   0.385     0.583      0.214    0.797    0.217    2.095    3.494
5 bedroom   0.403     0.629      0.253    0.882    0.249    2.409    3.943
                                                               
Attached
single-                                                         
family:
2 bedroom   0.097     0.085      0.025    0.110    0.029    1.380    1.616
3 bedroom   0.146     0.138      0.038    0.175    0.068    1.585    1.974
4 bedroom   0.183     0.271      0.106    0.377    0.105    2.102    2.767
5 bedroom   0.000     0.000      0.000    0.000    0.000    0.000    0.000
                                                               
Apartments:                                                     
Efficiency  0.000     0.000      0.000    0.000    0.000    1.400    1.400
1 bedroom   0.018     0.053      0.019    0.072    0.019    1.678    1.787
2 bedroom   0.029     0.053      0.022    0.075    0.024    1.699    1.828
3 bedroom   0.025     0.084      0.068    0.152    0.064    2.050    2.291
 
(Res. 642, 8-4-2015, eff. 11-1-2015)
In the event a subdivider, developer, builder or owner of a subdivision or
planned unit development or school district files a written objection to the
table of estimated ultimate population listed herein, they shall submit their
own demographic study showing the estimated additional population to be
generated from the subdivision or planned unit development, and in that event
final determination of the density formula to be used in such calculations
shall be made by the village board. (Ord. 669, 3-3-1998, eff. 5-1-1998)
5-6-5: RESERVATION OF ADDITIONAL LAND:
Nothing herein contained shall limit the authority of the village to require
the designation and reservation of school sites or other public lands as a
condition to approval of any plat of subdivision or planned unit development
where such land is to be acquired by condemnation within one year from final
plat approval as set forth under division 12, article 11 of the Illinois
municipal code. (Ord. 669, 3-3-1998, eff. 5-1-1998)
5-6-6: COMBINATION WITH ADJOINING DEVELOPMENT:
Where the subdivision or planned unit development is less than forty (40)
acres, a school site which is to be dedicated should, where possible, be
combined with dedications from adjoining subdivisions or planned unit
developments in order to produce usable school sites without hardship on a
particular subdivider, developer, builder or owner of a planned unit
development. (Ord. 669, 3-3-1998, eff. 5-1-1998)
5-6-7: TOPOGRAPHY AND SOILS:
   A.   Regulations: School sites must possess suitable topography and soil
sites for the use to which they are dedicated. The subdivider shall provide the
school district with current soil analysis tests from a minimum of one soil
boring per acre to a minimum depth of fifteen feet (15'). At the request of the
school district, the required number of soil borings may be concentrated in an
area in anticipation of assessing soil conditions for a proposed building pad.
The subdivider shall also provide the school district with a phase I
environmental study which shall consist of a site assessment and environmental
audit which covers the ownership and known uses of the property described and
any improvements and facilities (including equipment) thereon for the past one
hundred (100) years and addresses the current uses of the property and its
compliance with environmental laws including, without limitations, all
appropriate inquiries into the previous ownership and uses of the land
consistent with good commercial and prudent engineering practices in an effort
to minimize liability for hazardous materials. Any hazardous materials or
underground storage tanks found on the site shall be removed by the subdivider
prior to dedication.
   B.   Frontage: School sites shall have, at a minimum, adequate frontage
along a publicly dedicated street to allow convenient access. Generally, thirty
feet (30') of frontage will be provided for every acre of land that is
dedicated; provided, however, that the minimum acceptable frontage for any site
will be one hundred fifty feet (150'). (Ord. 901, 4-18-2006)
5-6-8: IMPROVEMENT REQUIRED FOR LAND DEDICATIONS:
School sites to be dedicated by a subdivider shall include the following land
improvements prior to dedication:
   A.   Grading: Each dedicated site shall be graded to drain storm and surface
water at a minimum of two percent (2%) for open areas; and slopes on berms,
when berms are required, shall not exceed four to one (4:1). Grading shall
include, but not be limited to: berms for separation and screening from
adjoining properties; placement of six inches (6") of topsoil and fine grading.
The school district shall provide the subdivider with engineering plans for
such grading and berming and all work performed pursuant to this subsection
shall be in accordance with such plans.
   B.   Utilities And Other Improvements: Each dedicated site shall be provided
with the following utilities to the property line and other improvements at no
cost to the school district:
      1.   Sanitary sewer adjacent to the site shall be a minimum of eight
inches (8") in diameter or such greater size as may be required by the village.
If the sanitary sewer service is located across the right of way from the site,
the subdivider shall provide a capped service line to the property of the same
size as the line located across the right of way.
      2.   Water lines adjacent to the site shall be a minimum of ten inches
(10") in diameter. If the water line is across the right of way from the site,
the subdivider shall provide a capped service line to the property of the same
size as the line located across the right of way.
      3.   Storm sewers shall be provided at appropriate locations to properly
drain the site, in accordance with the engineering plans provided by the school
district and approved by the village.
      4.   Other utilities, such as electric, gas and telephone shall be
provided adjacent to or at the property line.
      5.   The subdivider shall seed the entire site with a blend approved by
the school district. Seeding shall include placement, watering as necessary and
mowing until such time as a full stand of turf is established and accepted by
the school district, but not less than one full growing season.
      6.   The subdivider shall install all public walks, curbs, pavement,
sewers and utilities along all site frontages as required by this title. The
subdivider shall also provide a curb cut for maintenance access to the site.
      7.   The storage of overburden on a site is prohibited, although
temporary storage may be granted in some cases by the school district. The
terms of such temporary storage shall be determined by the school district.
      8.   Where a subdivider dedicates an entire school site, the subdivider
shall be responsible for the design, layout and construction of storm water,
sanitary sewer and water facilities to the property line of adjacent
properties.
      9.   To ensure the timely installation of said improvements the village
may require the posting of a bond or an irrevocable letter of credit in a form
and from a financial institution which are both acceptable to the village. This
bond or letter of credit shall be in accordance with all requirements of the
village's ordinances. (Ord. 901, 4-18-2006)
5-6-9: TITLE INSURANCE, SURVEY, ASSESSMENT PLATS:
Each deed conveying land to the village shall be accompanied by the following:
   A.   A written commitment issued by a title insurer licensed to do business
in Illinois to insure that grantor has good merchantable title to such real
estate in an amount subject only to then current general real estate taxes as
of the date of transfer; covenants, conditions and restrictions which do not
prohibit the use of the subject real estate for school, park or village use;
utility easements located within twenty feet (20') of the boundary lines of the
subject real estate, drainage ditches, feeders, laterals and underground pipe
or other conduit.
   B.   A current boundary line survey, certified to the grantee by a licensed
Illinois land surveyor to be in compliance with the Illinois land survey
standards.
   C.   Except in instances where the real estate to be conveyed is a lot in a
recorded subdivision, an assessment plat and tax division petition in form
acceptable to the appropriate county authorities so that the land to be
conveyed can be assigned its own permanent real estate index number for
exemption purposes. (Ord. 669, 3-3-1998, eff. 5-1-1998)
5-6-10: ANNEXATION AGREEMENTS:
The dedications of land or cash contributions in lieu thereof, or combination
of both, as required by this chapter shall also, as a matter of policy of the
village, be required as a condition to the annexation of any land to the
village and provisions therefor shall be incorporated in any annexation
agreement governing such land. Additionally, the village shall notify the
appropriate school districts when a party submits a proposed annexation
agreement to the village so that the school districts may discuss dedication
issues with said party. (Ord. 669, 3-3-1998, eff. 5-1-1998)
5-6-11: PAYMENT:
   A.   Time Of Payment: All required donations shall be conveyed to the
village in fee simple for subsequent conveyance to the appropriate taxing body.
The dedication of land shall be made at the time of final plat approval by the
village board of trustees for the proposed subdivision or development. Cash
contributions shall be made at the time of the issuance of a building permit.
   B.   Method Of Payment: The cash contributions required hereunder shall be
made by certified check or money order payable to the village and shall be
deposited with the village. The village clerk shall keep a record of these
receipts. (Ord. 669, 3-3-1998, eff. 5-1-1998)
5-6-12: INDEMNIFICATION; HOLD HARMLESS; RELEASE:
The village shall not collect funds under this chapter for any taxing body
which does not, prior to the effective date hereof, enter into an
intergovernmental agreement with the village which provides that such taxing
body will hold harmless, indemnify and release the village upon such terms and
conditions as are acceptable to the village. (Ord. 669, 3-3-1998, eff. 5-1-
1998)
5-6-13: FUNDS:
   A.   Accounting Of Funds: Each district receiving funds under this chapter
shall annually make a written report to the village detailing the amount of
funds received and how such funds were expended. This report shall be provided
to the village prior to January 15 of each year. The village shall not disperse
future funds to a district until the written report detailing the amount of
funds expended for the previous calendar year has been accepted by the village.
   B.   Expenditure Of Funds: All fees collected under this chapter shall only
be expended toward the purchase of capital improvements, including, but not
limited to, property acquisition, construction of structures, additions and
improvements to existing structures or facilities and bond payments related to
these eligible expenditures. Annual operational expenditure is not an eligible
expenditure of these contributions. (Ord. 669, 3-3-1998, eff. 5-1-1998)
5-6-14: PERIODIC REVIEW:
The village shall review this chapter every three (3) years to determine
whether the land value and demographic information herein set forth is
consistent with the current values. Additionally, three (3) years after the
effective date hereof, any or all affected school districts may submit a
demographic study based upon local information and data for the village's
consideration. The village may, at its sole option, adopt such a local study to
be used for calculations under this chapter. (Ord. 669, 3-3-1998, eff. 5-1-
1998)
5-6-15: SCHOOL CONSTRUCTION IMPACT FEE:
   A.   General: As a condition of final approval of any subdivision or planned
unit development, or the approval of a permit for the construction of a new
dwelling unit, each developer, subdivider or builder (hereinafter "developer")
shall pay a school construction impact fee as hereinafter set forth to be used
exclusively for the construction and improvement of school buildings and
related infrastructure necessitated by, and specifically and uniquely
attributable to, such development or subdivision.
   B.   Amount: The amount of the fee shall be established annually or from
time to time by a resolution of the village president and board of trustees.
(Ord. 1082, 7-5-2011)
CHAPTER 6A
PARK AND RECREATIONAL SITES
SECTION:
5-6A-1: Dedication Of Park Sites; Fees In Lieu Thereof
5-6A-2: Criteria For Requiring Park Site Dedication
5-6A-3: Criteria For Requiring A Contribution In Lieu Of Park Sites
5-6A-4: Density Formula
5-6A-5: Reservation Of Additional Land
5-6A-6: Combination With Adjoining Development
5-6A-7: Topography And Soils
5-6A-8: Improvement Required For Land Dedications
5-6A-9: Title Insurance, Survey, Assessment Plats
5-6A-10: Annexation Agreements
5-6A-11: Payment
5-6A-12: Indemnification; Hold Harmless; Release
5-6A-13: Funds
5-6A-14: Periodic Review
5-6A-1: DEDICATION OF PARK SITES; FEES IN LIEU THEREOF:
As a condition of approval of a final plat of subdivision or of a final plat of
planned unit development, each subdivider, developer, builder or owner will be
required to:
   A.   Dedicate land for park sites to serve the immediate and future needs of
the residents of the development;
   B.   Make cash contributions in lieu of actual land dedication; or
   C.   A combination of both, at the option of the village upon recommendation
of the park districts affected in accordance with the following criteria and
formula set forth in this chapter. (Ord. 668, 3-3-1998, eff. 5-1-1998)
5-6A-2: CRITERIA FOR REQUIRING PARK SITE DEDICATION:
   A.   Requirement And Population Ratio: The ultimate density of a proposed
development shall bear directly upon the amount of land required for
dedication. The total requirement shall be 9.81 acres of land per one thousand
(1,000) of ultimate population. Population figures are obtained from the table
of estimated ultimate population per dwelling unit found in section
5-6-4 of this title. (Ord. 801, 3-2-2004)
   B.   Location: The location of the site to be dedicated shall be determined
by the village board of trustees upon recommendation of the plan commission and
the board of commissioners of the park district having, or to have jurisdiction
of the park to be erected on the site taking into account the suitability of
the site for park and recreational purposes and its relationship to population
concentrations. A central location which will serve equally the entire
development is most desirable. In large developments these sites can be located
throughout the development according to established standards for distances as
established by the comprehensive plan of the park district then in effect. The
village board of trustees shall not select the site without allowing
opportunity for the board of commissioners of the park district affected to
make a recommendation with respect thereto. The village acknowledges that the
park district cannot be compelled to accept any land dedication which the park
district does not want to accept. In the event the park district refuses to
accept a parcel of land which has been selected to be set aside pursuant to the
provisions hereof, the village may require cash contributions in lieu of the
dedication of said parcel of land or may at the sole option of the village
require dedication or conveyance of the parcel to the village or to such other
person or organization as the village board of trustees determines to be best
suited to meet the recreational needs of the residents.
   C.   Credit For Private Open Spaces; Recreation Areas: When subdividers,
developers, builders or owners provide private recreation areas and facilities,
it may have the effect of reducing the demand for local public recreation
services. However, such private areas and facilities are difficult or
impossible to develop and maintain. Ownership usually is surrendered to the
adjacent owners or to a homeowners' association, who may not have the personnel
or the financial resources for maintenance and improvement. There may,
nevertheless, be instances in which the public is better served by providing
for private recreation areas and facilities in lieu of public ones. Credit for
private recreation areas and facilities may be allowed only where a
determination has been made by the village board of trustees that private
recreational areas in lieu of, or in conjunction with publicly dedicated
recreational areas, will by reason of type of development, better serve the
interests of the public than total land dedication. (Ord. 668, 3-3-1998, eff.
5-1-1998)
5-6A-3: CRITERIA FOR REQUIRING A CONTRIBUTION IN LIEU OF PARK SITES:
   A.   Requirement, Use Of Contributions: Where the development is "small" as
used herein and the resulting size of the land contributed is too small to be
practical or when the available land is inappropriate for a park site, and it
is determined by the village after recommendation by the affected park district
not to require the dedication of land, the village shall require the
subdivider, developer, builder or owner to pay a cash contribution in lieu of
the land dedication required. In considering whether a development is "small"
as used herein, the village may consider whether the total number of the
proposed dwelling units will produce less than the maximum number of residents
for one park in accordance with this chapter. The cash contributions in lieu of
park sites shall be paid to the village prior to the issuance of building
permits. The village shall turn over any and all dollars actually collected for
such fees to the appropriate park districts semiannually. Such contributions
shall be used solely for the acquisition of land for a park site to serve the
immediate or future needs of the residents from that subdivision or development
or for the improvement to any existing park sites and buildings which serve
such needs. Improvement under this section shall be liberally construed and
shall include, but shall not be limited to, the development of parking lots;
sidewalks; traffic signals; arterial streets; collector streets; internal
roadways; connections with sewer, water and electrical lines; playgrounds;
recreation grounds; and athletic fields. Improvement shall also include the
purchase of any material, goods or equipment necessary to said development and
construction. Improvement shall further include the construction of buildings,
additions to existing park buildings or facilities and bond payments related to
these eligible expenditures. Annual operational expenditures are not an
eligible expenditure of these contributions.
   B.   Fair Market Value: The cash contributions in lieu of land shall be
based on the "fair market value" of the acres of land in the area improved as
specified herein, that otherwise would have been dedicated as park sites. It
has been determined that the present "fair market value" of such improved land
in and surrounding the village is thirty five thousand dollars ($35,000.00) per
acre, and such figure shall be used in making calculation for park
contributions unless the subdivider, developer, builder or owner of a planned
unit development files a written objection thereto. In the event of any such
objection, the subdivider, developer, builder or owner of the planned unit
development shall submit an appraisal showing the "fair market value" of such
improved land in the area of his subdivision or planned unit development or
other evidence thereof and final determination of said "fair market value" per
acre of such improved land shall be made by the village board based upon such
information submitted by the subdivider, developer, builder or owner of the
planned unit development and from other sources which may be submitted to the
village board by the park district or others.
PARK DISTRICT CASH CONTRIBUTION PER UNIT
Type Of Unit Cash Contribution
Type Of Unit            Cash Contribution
Detached single-family:  
 2 bedroom             $ 942.84
 3 bedroom             1,014.60
 4 bedroom             1,199.66
 5 bedroom             1,353.83
Attached single-family:  
 2 bedroom             554.85
 3 bedroom             677.77
 4 bedroom             950.05
 
Formula:
   Contribution: pyf x paf x lv
pyf = estimated total population per dwelling
paf = minimum # of acres (9.81) divided by 1,000 (population per 9.81 acres)
(9.81/1,000 = 0.00981)
lv = $35,000.00 (estimated value of fully developed acre of land)
Based on 2000 Ehlers And Associates population generated figures
In cases where the village requires a combination of site dedication and cash
contribution, the amount of the required cash contribution as herein set forth
shall be reduced by the percentage of land required to be, but not dedicated.
For example, if the projected impact of a development requires nine and eighty
one one-hundredths (9.81) acres of land to be dedicated and it is determined to
instead require dedication of one-half (1/2) the amount of required land (i.e.,
4.905 acres) and to require a cash contribution in lieu of the balance of land,
then the dollar amount required by this section shall be reduced by one-half
(1/2). (Ord. 1203, 8-4-2015)
   C.   Criteria For Requiring Land Dedication And A Contribution: There will
be situations in subdivisions or planned unit developments when a combination
of land dedication and a contribution in lieu of land are both necessary. These
occasions will arise when:
      1.   Only a portion of the land to be developed is proposed as the
location for a park site. That portion of the land within the subdivision or
planned unit development falling within the park location shall be dedicated as
a site as aforesaid, and a cash contribution in lieu thereof shall be required
for any additional land that would have been required to be dedicated.
      2.   A major part of the park site has already been acquired and only a
small portion of land is needed from the development to complete the site. The
remaining portions shall be required by dedication and a cash contribution in
lieu thereof shall also be required to fulfill the obligations of that
development. (Ord. 668, 3-3-1998, eff. 5-1-1998)
5-6A-4: DENSITY FORMULA:
The table of estimated ultimate population density found in section
5-6-4 of this title is generally indicative of current and short range
projected trends in family size for newly constructed residential units as
determined by Ehlers And Associates and shall be used in calculating the amount
of required dedication of acres of land or the cash contributions in lieu
thereof unless a written objection is filed thereto by the subdivider,
developer, builder or owner of the planned unit development. In the event a
subdivider, developer, builder or owner of a subdivision or planned unit
development files a written objection to the table of estimated ultimate
population listed herein, he shall submit his own demographic study showing the
estimated additional population to be generated from the subdivision or planned
unit development, and, in that event, final determination of the density
formula to be used in such calculation shall be made by the village board based
upon such demographic information submitted by the subdivider, developer,
builder or owner of the subdivision or planned unit development, from other
sources which may be submitted to the village board from the park districts or
others, and upon consideration of such information which most accurately and
fairly represents current demographic trends. (Ord. 668, 3-3-1998, eff. 5-1-
1998; amd. Ord. 901, 4-18-2006)
5-6A-5: RESERVATION OF ADDITIONAL LAND:
Nothing herein contained shall limit the authority of the village to require
the designation and reservation of park sites, or other public lands as a
condition to approval of any plat of subdivision or planned unit development
where such land is to be acquired by condemnation within one year from final
plat approval as set forth under division 12, article 11 of the Illinois
municipal code. (Ord. 668, 3-3-1998, eff. 5-1-1998)
5-6A-6: COMBINATION WITH ADJOINING DEVELOPMENT:
Where the subdivision or planned unit development is less than forty (40)
acres, a park site which is to be dedicated should, where possible, be combined
with dedications from adjoining subdivisions or planned unit developments in
order to produce usable park sites without hardship on a particular subdivider,
developer, builder or owner of a planned unit development. (Ord. 668, 3-3-1998,
eff. 5-1-1998)
5-6A-7: TOPOGRAPHY AND SOILS:
   A.   Regulations: Park sites must possess suitable topography and soil sites
for the use to which they are dedicated. The subdivider shall provide the park
district with current soil analysis tests from a minimum of one soil boring per
acre to a minimum depth of fifteen feet (15'). The subdivider shall also
provide the park district with a phase I environmental study which shall
consist of a site assessment and environmental audit which covers the ownership
and known uses of the property described and any improvements and facilities
(including equipment) thereon for the past one hundred (100) years and
addresses the current uses of the property and its compliance with
environmental laws including, without limitations, all appropriate inquiries
into the previous ownership and uses of the land consistent with good
commercial and prudent engineering practices in an effort to minimize liability
for hazardous materials. Any hazardous materials or underground storage tanks
found on the site shall be removed by the subdivider prior to dedication.
   B.   Dimensions: Park sites should be generally rectangular in shape with
dimensions generally proportioned to the ratio of a depth of three (3) to a
width of two (2). This criteria shall not apply to park sites contemplated for
extraordinary types of facilities such as, but not limited to, trails and
shoreline frontages.
   C.   Frontage: Park sites shall have, at a minimum, adequate frontage along
a publicly dedicated street to allow convenient access and, if necessary,
parking facilities that will not adversely affect adjoining residential
property. Generally, thirty feet (30') of frontage will be provided for every
acre of land that is dedicated; provided, however, that the minimum acceptable
frontage for any site will be one hundred fifty feet (150'). (Ord. 901, 4-18-
2006)
5-6A-8: IMPROVEMENT REQUIRED FOR LAND DEDICATIONS:
Park sites to be dedicated by a subdivider shall include the following land
improvements prior to dedication:
   A.   Each dedicated site shall be graded to drain storm and surface water at
a minimum of two percent (2%) for open areas; and slopes on berms, when berms
are required, shall not exceed four to one (4:1). Grading shall include, but
not be limited to: berms for separation and screening from adjoining
properties; placement of six inches (6") of topsoil and fine grading. The park
district shall provide the subdivider with engineering plans for such grading
and berming and all work performed pursuant to this subsection shall be in
accordance with such plans.
   B.   Sanitary sewer adjacent to the site shall be a minimum of eight inches
(8") in diameter or such greater size as may be required by the village. If the
sanitary sewer service is located across the right of way from the site, the
subdivider shall provide a capped service line to the property of the same size
as the line located across the right of way.
   C.   Water lines adjacent to the site shall be a minimum of ten inches (10")
in diameter. If the water line is across the right of way from the site, the
subdivider shall provide a capped service line to the property of the same size
as the line located across the right of way.
   D.   Storm sewers shall be provided at appropriate locations to properly
drain the site, in accordance with the engineering plans provided by the park
district and approved by the village.
   E.   Other utilities, such as electric, gas and telephone shall be provided
adjacent to or at the property line.
   F.   The subdivider shall seed the entire site with a blend approved by the
park district. Seeding shall include placement, watering and fertilizing as
necessary and mowing until such time as a full stand of turf is established and
accepted by the park, but not less than one full growing season.
   G.   The subdivider shall install all public walks, curbs, pavement, sewers
and utilities along all site frontages as required by this title. The
subdivider shall also provide a curb cut for maintenance access to the site.
   H.   The subdivider shall install fully improved off street parking
facilities in accordance with the requirements of the village's zoning
regulations for all park sites exceeding two (2) acres. Such parking facilities
shall be installed at a ratio of ten (10) spaces per each one acre of dedicated
site.
   I.   The storage of overburden on a site is prohibited, although temporary
storage may be granted in some cases by the park district. The terms of such
temporary storage shall be determined by the park district.
   J.   Where a subdivider dedicates an entire site, the subdivider shall be
responsible for the design, layout and construction of storm water, sanitary
sewer and water facilities to the property line of adjacent undeveloped areas.
   K.   To ensure the timely installation of said improvements the village may
require the posting of a bond or an irrevocable letter of credit in a form and
from a financial institution which are both acceptable to the village. This
bond or letter of credit shall be in accordance with all requirements of the
village's ordinances. (Ord. 901, 4-18-2006)
5-6A-9: TITLE INSURANCE, SURVEY, ASSESSMENT PLATS:
Each deed conveying land to the village shall be accompanied by the following:
   A.   A written commitment issued by a title insurer licensed to do business
in Illinois to insure that grantor has good merchantable title to such real
estate in an amount subject only to then current general real estate taxes as
of the date of transfer; covenants, conditions and restrictions which do not
prohibit the use of the subject real estate for school, park or village use;
utility easements located within twenty feet (20') of the boundary lines of the
subject real estate, drainage ditches, feeders, laterals and underground pipe
or other conduit.
   B.   A current boundary line survey, certified to the grantee by a licensed
Illinois land surveyor to be in compliance with the Illinois land survey
standards.
   C.   Except in instances where the real estate to be conveyed is a lot in a
recorded subdivision, an assessment plat and tax division petition in form
acceptable to the appropriate county authorities so that the land to be
conveyed can be assigned its own permanent real estate index number for
exemption purposes. (Ord. 668, 3-3-1998, eff. 5-1-1998)
5-6A-10: ANNEXATION AGREEMENTS:
The dedications of land or cash contributions in lieu thereof or combination of
both as required by this chapter shall also as a matter of policy of the
village be required as a condition to the annexation of any land to the village
and provisions therefor shall be incorporated in any annexation agreement
governing such land. Additionally, the village shall notify the appropriate
park districts when a party submits a proposed annexation agreement to the
village so that the park districts may discuss dedication issues with said
party. (Ord. 668, 3-3-1998, eff. 5-1-1998)
5-6A-11: PAYMENT:
   A.   Time Of Payment: All required donations shall be conveyed to the
village in fee simple for subsequent conveyance to the appropriate taxing body.
The dedication of land shall be made at the time of final plat approval by the
village board of trustees for the proposed subdivision or development. Cash
contributions shall be made at the time of the issuance of a building permit.
   B.   Method Of Payment: The cash contributions required hereunder shall be
made by certified check or money order payable to the village and shall be
deposited with the village. The village clerk shall keep a record of these
receipts. (Ord. 668, 3-3-1998, eff. 5-1-1998)
5-6A-12: INDEMNIFICATION; HOLD HARMLESS; RELEASE:
The village shall not collect funds under this chapter for any taxing body
which does not, prior to the effective date hereof, enter into an
intergovernmental agreement with the village which provides that such taxing
body will hold harmless, indemnify and release the village upon such terms and
conditions as are acceptable to the village. (Ord. 668, 3-3-1998, eff. 5-1-
1998)
5-6A-13: FUNDS:
   A.   Accounting Of Funds: Each district receiving funds under this chapter
shall annually make a written report to the village detailing the amount of
funds received and how such funds were expended. This report shall be provided
to the village prior to January 15 of each year. The village shall not disburse
funds to a district until the written report detailing the amount of funds
expended for the previous calendar year has been accepted by the village.
   B.   Expenditure Of Funds: All fees collected under this chapter shall only
be expended toward the purchase of capital improvements, including, but not
limited to, property acquisition, construction of structures, additions and
improvements to existing structures or facilities and bond payments related to
these eligible expenditures. Annual operational expenditures are not an
eligible expenditure of these contributions. (Ord. 668, 3-3-1998, eff. 5-1-
1998)
5-6A-14: PERIODIC REVIEW:
The village shall review this chapter every three (3) years to determine
whether the land value and demographic information herein set forth is
consistent with the current values. Additionally, three (3) years after the
effective date hereof, any or all affected park districts may submit a
demographic study based upon local information and data for the village's
consideration. The village may, at its sole option, adopt such a local study to
be used for calculations under this chapter. (Ord. 668, 3-3-1998, eff. 5-1-
1998)
CHAPTER 7
INFRASTRUCTURE IMPROVEMENTS
SECTION:
5-7-1: Construction Observation
5-7-2: Record Drawing ("As Builts") Requirements
5-7-1: CONSTRUCTION OBSERVATION:
   A.   All infrastructure improvements required for the development shall be
observed during the course of construction by the public improvement
coordinator or the village engineer. All reasonable fees (including reasonable
attorney fees, engineering fees and/or staff cost) associated with such
activity, including the reviewing of the plans and specifications for such
improvements shall be paid for by the applicant. The applicant may be required
to post a deposit with the village to cover the anticipated costs of such
services before they are undertaken. In the event that these fees are not paid
in a timely manner, the village may, at its sole discretion, draw down on any
subdivision improvement/maintenance security which may be available.
   B.   The applicant shall give at least forty eight (48) hours' written
notification to the public improvement coordinator prior to the performance of
any of the following:
      1.   The construction of any roadway or street.
      2.   The surfacing of any roadway or street.
      3.   The installation of any curbing or gutters.
      4.   The grading or backfilling of any open trench or excavation in which
any utility facilities, including, but not limited to, water lines, sewer
lines, and electrical cables have been installed.
      5.   The construction of any sidewalk.
      6.   The filling, pressure testing, chlorination, or water sampling of
any water main.
   C.   Within the forty eight (48) hour notice period, the public improvement
coordinator or village engineer may conduct on site observation to determine
that the proposed work complies with the engineering drawing. If, in the
opinion of the public improvement coordinator or village engineer, the proposed
work does not comply with such final drawings, the public improvement
coordinator or village engineer shall have the authority to order that all such
proposed work be terminated until such time as necessary steps are taken to
correct any defects or deficiencies. Upon the correction of such deficiencies,
the applicant shall again notify the public improvement coordinator.
   D.   There shall be no development work on Sundays. Development work is
allowed on Saturdays, but any necessary village inspections/testing observation
must be preapproved and coordinated with the public improvement coordinator.
Development work hours shall be seven o'clock (7:00) A.M. through dusk for
Mondays through Fridays, and eight o'clock (8:00) A.M. through dusk for
Saturdays. (Ord. 946, 3-20-2007)
5-7-2: RECORD DRAWING ("AS BUILTS") REQUIREMENTS:
Record drawings ("as builts") are required to provide a means of schematic
verification that the intent of the approved engineering design has been met,
thereby substantiating that the health, safety, and welfare aspects of the
engineering design have been adequately provided by the construction of the
project. Secondly, record drawings serve as a reference tool for future
location and maintenance operations. The following requirements will be applied
to each set of record drawings developed for the village of Manhattan:
   A.   General Record Drawing Requirements:
      1.   The first sheet of the set will have a vicinity map in the upper
right hand corner.
      2.   Record drawings shall be submitted as revisions shown on the
original engineering plans and as AutoCAD (version 2004) files. Record drawings
will have the original data lined through and the record data to the drawing.
At no time will the original data be accepted as the record data.
      3.   All record drawings for major projects are required to be twenty
four inch by thirty six inch (24" x 36") and shall bear the name, address, and
telephone number of the firm preparing the drawings and the date the record
data is added to the original drawings via the revision block.
      4.   Surveyor's/engineer's statement (with embossed or wet seal and with
original signature on each sheet) shall verify that the record drawings reflect
the true conditions in the field.
      5.   "Record Drawing" shall be labeled on each sheet in one inch (1")
high letters.
      6.   Street names shall be shown on all streets.
      7.   If the utility system is to be private (not to be dedicated to local
authority), then indicate such on each sheet.
      8.   The location and elevation of the bench marks referenced will be
shown on the drawing (and should be the same bench mark datum as the original
approved design plans). If the referenced bench marks are not within the
project limits, then complete descriptions of locations must be provided.
      9.   Show all easements within the project limits on the record drawings.
   B.   Detention Pond Record Drawing Requirements:
      1.   Topographic map of the detention area.
      2.   Spot elevations on top of bank to confirm minimum design bank
elevations as well as spot elevations on any overflow weir.
      3.   Observed water elevation at date of the record drawing for wet
bottom basins.
      4.   Location of top of bank and existing water edges at time and date of
taking elevations.
      5.   Spot elevations on the bottom of dry bottom basins, or, if requested
by the public improvement coordinator or village engineer, for wet bottom
basins.
      6.   A stage/storage table showing the design and as-constructed pond
volumes and release rates.
      7.   A signed/sealed statement by a professional engineer that the
detention pond(s) provides the required detention storage and does not exceed
the allowable outflow rate(s) per the approved construction plans and hydrology
study. If significantly different than the approved drawings (as determined by
the village engineer), the engineer must submit a revised hydrology study using
the as-constructed conditions in order to document this statement.
   C.   Water System Record Drawing Requirements:
      1.   Locate all valves, services (B-boxes), and fire hydrants in two (2)
directions (station and offset).
         a.   Locations shall be perpendicular to the right of way and parallel
to the water main.
            (1)   Lot lines may be used to locate water services.
            (2)   Permanent structures that are properly located may also be
used.
            (3)   Radial ties are not acceptable.
         b.   All horizontal distances shall be shown to the nearest foot. All
vertical distances shall be shown to the nearest tenth of a foot.
      2.   Show all materials, sizes, and types of valves, pipes, and special
fittings (crosses, tees, reducers, etc., not elbows).
      3.   Elevations shall be given for the top of all structure frames/lids
and for the top of all pipes entering/exiting each structure.
      4.   Special detail drawings will be required where installations are not
shown on approved engineering drawings for whatever reason or where required
for clarity.
      5.   Show location and elevation for pipes where bury depths are greater
than six feet (6').
      6.   Details for water services deviating from typical installation
details of the approved engineering plans shall be noted on the record drawings
(i.e., instances where the core stop location is not evident).
   D.   Sanitary Sewer System Record Drawing Requirements:
      1.   Locate all wyes, cleanouts and manholes in two (2) directions in the
same manner as subsection B of this section.
      2.   Horizontal dimensions shall be to the nearest foot. Vertical
elevations shall be to the nearest hundredth of a foot.
      3.   Identify the length, size, material, and slope of all pipe (i.e.,
300 feet of 8 inch PVC SDR 35 at 0.4 percent).
      4.   Elevations shall be given for the top of all manhole covers and for
the inverts of all pipes entering/exiting each manhole.
      5.   Service laterals are to be identified with location of end of
service/plug (station and offset measured upstream).
      6.   Details for drop manholes deviating from the details on the approved
engineering plans shall be indicated on the record drawings.
   E.   Force Mains Record Drawing Requirements:
      1.   Locate all valves and manholes in two (2) directions in the same
manner as subsection B of this section.
      2.   Show all materials, sizes, and types of valves, pipes, and special
fittings (crosses, tees, etc., not elbows).
      3.   Elevations shall be given for the top of all structure frames/lids
and for the top of all pipes entering/exiting each structure.
      4.   Special detail drawings will be required where installations are not
shown on approved engineering drawings for whatever reason or where required
for clarity.
   F.   Lift Station Record Drawing Requirements:
      1.   Wet well and valve vault size and location shall be indicated along
with wet well high and low water levels.
      2.   Elevations for top, bottom, inverts, adjacent ground and type and
size of lines and fittings for all lines entering or leaving the wet well and
valve vault shall be indicated.
      3.   Any amended schedules which show pump, motor and electrical data
shall be indicated.
   G.   Storm Sewer System Record Drawing Requirements:
      1.   Elevations shall be given for the top of all storm sewer structure
frames/lids and for the inverts of all pipes entering/exiting each structure.
      2.   Any on site field tiles which remain on site must be identified on
record drawings.
      3.   Identify the length, size, material, and slope of all pipe (i.e.,
300 feet of 12 inch RCCP at 1.0 percent).
      4.   Horizontal dimensions shall be to the nearest foot. Vertical
elevations shall be to the nearest hundredth of a foot.
      5.   Provide elevations and cross sectional information, as well as
slope, on all ditches, canals, etc.
   H.   Street Lighting Record Drawing Requirements:
      1.   Provide horizontal ties for light foundations and control cabinets
as referenced to the approved plan stationing or coordinates.
      2.   Service cables and service transformers shall be depicted in
schematic form.
   I.   Electronic File Record Drawing Requirements:
      1.   Include AutoCAD compatible version of all record information as
described in section
5-4-10 of this title. (Ord. 946, 3-20-2007)
CHAPTER 8
CONTRIBUTIONS
SECTION:
5-8-1: Village
5-8-2: Library Districts
5-8-3: Fire Protection Districts
5-8-1: VILLAGE:
   A.   Village Fee Established: As a condition to the issuance of a building
permit for any residential dwelling unit, the building permit applicant shall
pay to the village a fee. Such fee shall be collected by the village, for the
benefit of the village, in whose jurisdiction the property is situated. (Ord.
665, 3-3-1998, eff. 5-1-1998)
   B.   Amount Of Fee: The amount of the fee shall be established annually or
from time to time by a resolution of the village president and board of
trustees. (Ord. 941, 3-6-2007, eff. 5-1-2007)
   C.   Method Of Payment: The cash contributions required hereunder shall be
made by certified check or money order payable to the village and shall be
deposited with the village. The village clerk shall keep a record of these
receipts.
   D.   Funds:
      1.   Accounting: The village shall annually make a written report
detailing the amount of funds received and how such funds were expended. This
report shall be provided prior to January 15 of each year.
      2.   Expenditure: All fees collected under this section shall only be
expended toward the purchase of capital improvements, including, but not
limited to, property acquisition, construction of structures, additions and
improvements to existing structures, and bond payments related to these
eligible expenditures. Annual operational expenditures are not an eligible
expenditure of these contributions.
   E.   Periodic Review: The village shall review this section every three (3)
years to determine whether the cash contribution herein set forth is consistent
with current criteria. (Ord. 665, 3-3-1998, eff. 5-1-1998)
5-8-2: LIBRARY DISTRICTS:
   A.   Fee Established: As a condition to the issuance of a building permit
for any residential dwelling unit, the building permit applicant shall pay to
the village a library district fee. Such fee shall be collected by the village
for the benefit of the library district in whose jurisdiction the property is
situated. The actual amount of fees collected shall be disbursed to the
applicable district annually at the end of the village's fiscal year. (Ord.
797, 12-16-2003)
   B.   Amount: The amount of the fee shall be established annually or from
time to time by a resolution of the village president and board of trustees.
(Ord. 941, 3-6-2007, eff. 5-1-2007)
   C.   Method Of Payment: The cash contributions required hereunder shall be
made by certified check or money order payable to the village and shall be
deposited with the village. The village clerk shall keep a record of these
receipts.
   D.   Indemnification; Hold Harmless; Release: The village shall not collect
funds under this section for any taxing body which does not, prior to the
effective date hereof, enter into an intergovernmental agreement with the
village which provides that such taxing body will hold harmless, indemnify and
release the village upon such terms and conditions as are acceptable to the
village.
   E.   Funds:
      1.   Accounting: Each district receiving funds under this section shall
annually make a written report to the village detailing the amount of funds
received and how such funds were expended. This report shall be provided to the
village prior to January 15 of each year. The village shall not disperse future
funds to a district until the written report detailing the amount of funds
expended for the previous calendar year has been accepted by the village.
      2.   Expenditure: All fees collected under this section shall only be
expended toward the purchase of capital improvements, including, but not
limited to, property acquisition, construction of structures, additions and
improvements to existing structures, and bond payments related to these
eligible expenditures. Annual operational expenditures are not an eligible
expenditure of these contributions.
   F.   Periodic Review: The village shall review this section every three (3)
years to determine whether the cash contribution herein set forth is consistent
with current criteria. (Ord. 666, 3-3-1998, eff. 5-1-1998)
5-8-3: FIRE PROTECTION DISTRICTS:
   A.   Fee Established: As a condition to the issuance of a building permit
for any residential dwelling unit, the building permit applicant shall pay to
the village a fire protection district fee. Such fee shall be collected by the
village for the benefit of the fire protection district in whose jurisdiction
the property is situated. The actual amount of fees collected shall be
disbursed to the applicable district annually at the end of the village's
fiscal year. (Ord. 797, 12-16-2003)
   B.   Amount: The amount of the fee shall be established annually or from
time to time by a resolution of the village president and board of trustees.
(Ord. 941, 3-6-2007, eff. 5-1-2007)
   C.   Method Of Payment: The cash contributions required hereunder shall be
made by certified check or money order payable to the village and shall be
deposited with the village. The village clerk shall keep a record of these
receipts.
   D.   Indemnification; Hold Harmless; Release: The village shall not collect
funds under this section for any taxing body which does not, prior to the
effective date hereof, enter into an intergovernmental agreement with the
village which provides that such taxing body will hold harmless, indemnify and
release the village upon such terms and conditions as are acceptable to the
village.
   E.   Funds:
      1.   Accounting: Each district receiving funds under this section shall
annually make a written report to the village detailing the amount of funds
received and how such funds were expended. This report shall be provided to the
village prior to January 15 of each year. The village shall not disperse future
funds to a district until the written report detailing the amount of funds
expended for the previous calendar year has been accepted by the village.
      2.   Expenditure: All fees collected under this section shall only be
expended toward the purchase of capital improvements, including, but not
limited to, property acquisition, construction of structure, additions and
improvements to existing structures, purchase of fire apparatus and purchase of
ambulance or other rescue equipment, and bond payments related to these
eligible expenditures. Annual operational expenditures are not an eligible
expenditure of these contributions.
   F.   Periodic Review: The village shall review this section every three (3)
years to determine whether the cash contribution herein set forth is consistent
with current criteria. (Ord. 667, 3-3-1998, eff. 5-1-1998)
CHAPTER 9
POSTING OF ADDRESSES
SECTION:
5-9-1: Posting; Placement
5-9-2: Certificate Of Occupancy
5-9-3: Penalties
5-9-1: POSTING; PLACEMENT:
All houses, businesses, commercial establishments and all other buildings
occupied or used by people shall have the address of the building posted so as
to be visible from the public right of way in front of the building.
Notwithstanding the above, addresses shall be posted with letters or numbers
that are a minimum of three and one-half inches (31/2") in height. Letters
shall be in English and numbers shall be Arabic in style. (Ord. 696, 6-1-1999)
5-9-2: CERTIFICATE OF OCCUPANCY:
The chief building commissioner, or his designee, shall not grant a certificate
of occupancy for a house, business, commercial establishment or other buildings
to be occupied by people until such time as an address has been posted in
accordance with the provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 696, 6-1-1999)
5-9-3: PENALTIES:
Any person convicted of a violation of any section or provision of this chapter
shall be punished by a fine as established in section
1-4-1 of this code for any one offense. Each day such violation is committed or
permitted to continue shall constitute a separate offense and shall be
punishable as such hereunder. (Ord. 791, 8-5-2003; amd. Ord. 1061, 4-20-2010)
CHAPTER 10
VIOLATIONS; PENALTY
SECTION:
5-10-1: Violations
5-10-2: Penalty
5-10-1: VIOLATIONS:
   A.   The owner or occupant of any land, building, structure or any part
thereof, or any architect, builder, contractor, agent or other person who
commits, participates in, assists in or maintains any violation of this title,
may each be found guilty of a separate offense and suffer the penalties herein
provided.
   B.   Nothing herein contained shall be construed to prevent the village from
taking such lawful action as is necessary or appropriate to prevent any
violation. (Ord. 946, 3-20-2007)
5-10-2: PENALTY:
Any person, firm, corporation, partnership or other legal entity who violates,
disobeys, omits, neglects or refuses to comply with or resists the enforcement
of this title shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and shall upon conviction be
fined as established in section
1-4-1 of this code for each offense. Each day a violation is permitted to exist
shall constitute a separate offense. (Ord. 946, 3-20-2007; amd. Ord. 1061, 4-
20-2010)
TITLE 6
FLOOD CONTROL AND ENVIRONMENTAL REGULATIONS
CHAPTER 1
DEVELOPMENT IN SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD AREAS
SECTION:
6-1-1: Purpose
6-1-2: Definitions
6-1-3: How To Use This Chapter
6-1-4: Duties Of The Enforcement Official(s)
6-1-5: Base Flood Elevation
6-1-6: Occupation And Use Of Flood Fringe Areas
6-1-7: Occupation And Use Of Identified Floodways
6-1-8: Occupation And Use Of Special Flood Hazard Areas Where Floodways Are Not
Identified
6-1-9: Permitting Requirements Applicable To All Floodplain Areas
6-1-10: Other Development Requirements
6-1-11: Variances
6-1-12: Disclaimer Of Liability
6-1-13: Penalty
6-1-14: Abrogation And Greater Restrictions
6-1-15: Separability
6-1-1: PURPOSE:
This chapter is enacted pursuant to the police powers granted to this Village
by 65 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/1-1-10, 5/11-12-12, 5/11-30-8 and 5/11-31-2.
The purpose of this chapter is to maintain this Village's eligibility in the
National Flood Insurance Program, to minimize potential losses due to periodic
flooding including loss of life, loss of property, health and safety hazards,
disruption of commerce and governmental services, extraordinary public
expenditures for flood protection and relief, and impairment of the tax base,
all of which adversely affect the public health, safety and general welfare;
and to preserve and enhance the quality of surface waters, conserve economic
and natural values and provide for the wise utilization of water and related
land resources. This chapter is adopted in order to accomplish the following
specific purposes:
   A.   To meet the requirement of 615 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/18g, "An
Act in Relation to the Regulation of the Rivers, Lakes and Streams of the State
of Illinois", approved June 10, 1911, as amended;
   B.   To assure that new development does not increase the flood or drainage
hazards to others, or creating unstable conditions susceptible to erosion;
   C.   To protect new building and major improvements to buildings from flood
damage;
   D.   To protect human life and health from the hazards of flooding;
   E.   To lessen the burden on the taxpayer for flood control projects,
repairs to flood-damaged public facilities and utilities, and flood rescue and
relief operations; and
   F.   To make Federally subsidized flood insurance available for property in
the Village by fulfilling the requirements of the National Flood Insurance
Program;
   G.   To comply with the rules and regulations of the National Flood
Insurance Program codified as 44 CFR 59 - 79, as amended;
   H.   To protect, conserve, and promote the orderly development of land and
water resources;
   I.   To preserve the natural hydrologic and hydraulic functions of
watercourses and floodplains and to protect water quality and aquatic habitats;
   J.   To preserve the natural characteristics of stream corridors in order to
moderate flood and stormwater impacts, improve water quality, reduce soil
erosion, protect aquatic and riparian habitat, provide recreational
opportunities, provide aesthetic benefits and enhance community and economic
development. (Ord. 613, 4-5-1995)
6-1-2: DEFINITIONS:
For the purposes of this chapter, the following definitions are adopted:
   ACT: "An Act in Relation to the Regulation of the Rivers, Lakes and Streams
of the State of Illinois", 615 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/5 et seq.
   APPLICANT: Any person, firm, corporation or agency which submits an
application.
   APPROPRIATE USE: Only uses of the regulatory floodway that are permissible
and will be considered for permit issuance. The only uses that will be allowed
are as specified in subsection
6-1-7D of this chapter.
   BASE FLOOD: The flood having a one percent (1%) probability of being equaled
or exceeded in any given year. The base flood is also known as the 100-year
frequency flood event. Application of the "base flood elevation" at any
location is as defined in section
6-1-5 of this chapter.
   BUILDING: A structure that is principally above ground and is enclosed by
walls and a roof. The term includes a gas or liquid storage tank, a
manufactured home, mobile home or a prefabricated building. This term also
includes recreational vehicles and travel trailers to be installed on a site
for more than one hundred eighty (180) days.
   CHANNEL: Any river, stream, creek, brook, branch, natural or artificial
depression, ponded area, flowage, slough, ditch, conduit, culvert, gully,
ravine, wash, or natural or man-made drainageway, which has a definite bed and
banks or shoreline, in or into which surface or groundwater flows, either
perennially or intermittently.
   CHANNEL MODIFICATION: Alteration of a channel by changing the physical
dimensions or materials of its bed or banks. Channel modification includes
damming, rip-rapping or other armoring, widening, deepening, straightening,
relocating, lining and significant removal of bottom or woody vegetation.
Channel modification does not include the clearing of dead or dying vegetation,
debris, or trash from the channel. Channelization is a severe form of channel
modification typically involving relocation of the existing channel (e.g.,
straightening).
   COMPENSATORY STORAGE: An artificially excavated, hydraulically equivalent
volume of storage within the SFHA used to balance the loss of natural flood
storage capacity when artificial fill or structures are placed within the
floodplain. The uncompensated loss of natural floodplain storage can increase
off-site floodwater elevations and flows.
   CONDITIONAL APPROVAL OF A REGULATORY FLOODWAY MAP CHANGE: Preconstruction
approval by IDNR/OWR and FEMA of a proposed change to the floodway map. This
preconstruction approval, pursuant to this section, gives assurances to the
property owner that once an appropriate use is constructed according to
permitted plans, the floodway map can be changed, as previously agreed, upon
review and acceptance of as-built plans.
   CONDITIONAL LETTER OF MAP REVISION (CLOMR): A letter which indicates that
the Federal Emergency Management Agency will revise base flood elevations,
flood insurance rate zones, flood boundaries or floodway as shown on an
effective Flood Hazard Boundary Map or Flood Insurance Rate Map, once the as-
built plans are submitted and approved.
   CONTROL STRUCTURE: A structure designed to control the rate of flow that
passes through the structure, given a specific upstream and downstream water
surface elevation.
   DAM: All obstructions, wall embankments or barriers, together with their
abutments and appurtenant works, if any, constructed for the purpose of storing
or diverting water or creating a pool. Underground water storage tanks are not
included.
   DEVELOPMENT: Any man-made change to real estate, including:
   A.   Construction, reconstruction, repair, or placement of a building or any
addition to a building;
   B.   Installing a manufactured home on a site, preparing a site for a
manufactured home, or installing a travel trailer on a site for more than one
hundred eighty (180) days;
   C.   Drilling, mining, installing utilities, construction of roads, bridges,
or similar projects;
   D.   Demolition of a structure or redevelopment of a site;
   E.   Clearing of land as an adjunct of construction;
   F.   Construction or erection of levees, walls, fences, dams, or culverts;
channel modification; filling, dredging, grading, excavating, paving, or other
nonagricultural alterations of the ground surface; storage of materials;
deposit of solid or liquid waste;
   G.   Any other activity of man that might change the direction, height, or
velocity of flood or surface water, including extensive vegetation removal;
Development does not include maintenance of existing buildings and facilities
such as reroofing or resurfacing of roads when there is no increase in
elevation, or gardening, plowing, and similar agricultural practices that do
not involve filling, grading, or construction of levees.
   ELEVATION CERTIFICATES: A form published by the Federal Emergency Management
Agency that is used to certify the elevation to which a building has been
elevated.
   EROSION: The general process whereby soils are moved by flowing water or
wave action.
   EXEMPT ORGANIZATIONS: Organizations which are exempt from this chapter per
the Illinois Compiled Statutes including State, Federal or local units of
government.
   FEMA: Federal Emergency Management Agency and its regulations at 44 CFR 59 -
79 effective as of October 1, 1986. This incorporation does not include any
later editions or amendments.
   FLOOD: A general and temporary condition of partial or complete inundation
of normally dry land areas from overflow of inland or tidal waves, or the
unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters from any source.
   FLOOD FREQUENCY: A period of years, based on a statistical analysis, during
which a flood of a stated magnitude may be expected to be equaled or exceeded.
   FLOOD FRINGE: That portion of the floodplain outside of the regulatory
floodway.
   FLOOD INSURANCE RATE MAP (FIRM): A map prepared by the Federal Emergency
Management Agency that depicts the special flood hazard area (SFHA) within a
community. This map includes insurance rate zones and floodplains and may or
may not depict floodways.
   FLOOD PROTECTION ELEVATION (FPE): The elevation of the base flood or 100-
year frequency flood plus one foot (1') of freeboard at any given location in
the SFHA.
   FLOODPLAIN: That land typically adjacent to a body of water with ground
surface elevations at or below the base flood of the 100-year frequency flood
elevation. Floodplains may also include detached special flood hazard areas,
ponding areas, etc. The floodplain is also known as the special flood hazard
area (SFHA). The floodplains are those lands within the jurisdiction of the
Village that are subject to inundation by the base flood or 100-year frequency
flood. The SFHAs of the Village are generally identified as such on the Flood
Insurance Rate Map of the Village prepared by FEMA and dated February 15, 2019.
The SFHAs of those parts of unincorporated Will County that are within the
extraterritorial jurisdiction of the Village or that may be annexed into the
Village are generally identified as such on the Flood Insurance Rate Map
prepared for Will County by FEMA and dated February 15, 2019.
   FLOODPROOFING: Any combination of structural and nonstructural additions,
changes or adjustments to structures which reduce or eliminate flood damage to
real estate or improved real property, water and sanitary facilities,
structures and their contents.
   FLOODPROOFING CERTIFICATE: A form published by the Federal Emergency
Management Agency that is used to certify that a building has been designed and
constructed to be structurally dry floodproofed to the flood protection
elevation.
   FREEBOARD: An increment of elevation added to the base flood elevation to
provide a factor of safety for uncertainties in calculations, unknown localized
conditions, wave actions and unpredictable effects such as those caused by ice
or debris jams.
   HYDROLOGIC AND HYDRAULIC CALCULATIONS: Engineering analysis which determines
expected flood flows and flood elevations based on land characteristics and
rainfall events.
   IDNR/OWR: The Illinois Department of Natural Resources, Office of Water
Resources (the IDNR/OWR may also be referred to as the "division" from time to
time).
   LETTER OF MAP AMENDMENT (LOMA): Official determination by FEMA that a
specific structure is not in a 100-year flood zone; amends the effective Flood
Hazard Boundary Map or FIRM.
   LETTER OF MAP REVISION (LOMR): Letter that revises base flood or 100-year
frequency flood elevations, flood insurance rate zones, flood boundaries or
floodways as shown on an effective FHBM or FIRM.
   MANUFACTURED HOME: A structure, transportable in one or more sections, which
is built on a permanent chassis and is designated for use with or without a
permanent foundation when connected to the required utilities. The term
"manufactured homes" also includes park trailers, travel trailers and other
similar vehicles placed on site for more than one hundred eighty (180)
consecutive days.
   MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION: A parcel (or contiguous parcels) of
land divided into two (2) or more manufactured home lots for rent or sale.
   MITIGATION: Mitigation includes those measures necessary to minimize the
negative effects which floodplain development activities might have on the
public health, safety and welfare. Examples of mitigation include compensatory
storage, soil erosion and sedimentation control, and channel restoration.
   NAVD: North American Vertical Datum of 1988. NAVD 88 supersedes the National
Geodetic Vertical Datum of 1929 (i.e., the NGVD 1929).
   NATURAL: When used in reference to "channels" means those channels formed by
the existing surface topography of the earth prior to changes made by man. A
natural stream tends to follow a meandering path; its floodplain is not
constrained by levees; the area near the bank has not been cleared, mowed or
cultivated; the stream flows over soil and geologic materials typical of the
area with no substantial alteration of the course or cross section of the
stream caused by filling or excavating. A modified channel may regain some
natural characteristics over time as the channel meanders and vegetation is
reestablished. Similarly, a modified channel may be restored to more natural
conditions by man through regrading and revegetation.
   ORDINARY HIGH WATER MARK (OHWM): The point on the bank or shore up to which
the presence and action of surface water is so continuous so as to leave a
distinctive mark such as by erosion, destruction or prevention of terrestrial
vegetation, predominance of aquatic vegetation or other easily recognized
characteristics.
   PUBLIC FLOOD CONTROL PROJECT: A flood control project which will be operated
and maintained by a public agency to reduce flood damages to existing buildings
and structures which includes a hydrologic and hydraulic study of the existing
and proposed conditions of the watershed. Nothing in this definition shall
preclude the design, engineering, construction or financing, in whole or in
part, of a flood control project by persons or parties who are not public
agencies.
   PUBLICLY NAVIGABLE WATERS: All streams and lakes capable of being navigated
by watercraft.
   REGISTERED LAND SURVEYOR: A land surveyor registered in the State of
Illinois, under the Illinois Land Surveyors Act 1 .
   REGISTERED PROFESSIONAL ENGINEER: An engineer registered in the State of
Illinois, under the Illinois Professional Engineering Act 2 .
   REGULATORY FLOODWAY: The channel, including on-stream lakes, and that
portion of the floodplain adjacent to a stream or watercourse as designated by
IDNR/OWR, which is needed to store and convey the existing and anticipated
future 100-year frequency flood discharge with no more than a one-tenth foot
(0.1') increase in stage due to the loss of flood conveyance or storage, and no
more than a ten percent (10%) increase in velocities. The regulatory floodways
of the Village are designated on the Flood Boundary and Floodway Map prepared
by FEMA and dated February 15, 2019. The regulatory floodways for those parts
of unincorporated Will County that are within the extraterritorial jurisdiction
of the Village that may be annexed in the Village are designated on the Flood
Boundary and Floodway Map prepared for Will County by FEMA and dated February
15, 2019. To locate the regulatory floodway boundary on any site, the
regulatory floodway boundary should be scaled off the regulatory floodway map
and located on a site plan, using reference marks common to both maps. Where
interpretation is needed to determine the exact location of the regulatory
floodway boundary, the division should be contacted for the interpretation.
   REPAIR, REMODELING OR MAINTENANCE: Development activities which do not
result in any increases in the outside dimensions of a building or any changes
to the dimensions of a structure.
   RETENTION/DETENTION FACILITY: A retention facility stores stormwater runoff
without a gravity release. A detention facility provides for storage of
stormwater runoff and controlled release of this runoff during and after a
flood or storm.
   RIVERINE SFHA: Any SFHA subject to flooding from a river, creek,
intermittent stream, ditch, on-stream lake system or any other identified
channel. This term does not include areas subject to flooding from lakes,
ponding areas, areas of sheet flow, or other areas not subject to overbank
flooding.
   RUNOFF: The water derived from melting snow or rain falling on the land
surface, flowing over the surface of the ground or collected in channels or
conduits.
   SEDIMENTATION: The processes that deposit soils, debris, and other materials
either on other ground surfaces or in bodies of water or watercourses.
   SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD AREA (SFHA): Any base flood area subject to flooding
from a river, creek, intermittent stream, ditch, or any other identified
channel or ponding and shown on a Flood Hazard Boundary Map or Flood Insurance
Rate Map as Zone A, AO, A1-30, AE, A99, AH, VO, V30, VE, V, M, or E.
   STRUCTURE: The results of a man-made change to the land constructed on or
below the ground, including the construction, reconstruction or placement of a
building or any addition to a building; installing a manufactured home on a
site; preparing a site for a manufactured home or installing a travel trailer
on a site for more than one hundred eighty (180) days.
   SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVEMENT: Any repair, reconstruction or improvement of a
structure, the cost of which equals or exceeds fifty percent (50%) of the
market value of the structure either: a) before the improvement or repair is
started, or b) if the structure has been damaged from any source, and is being
restored, before the damage occurred. For the purposes of this definition
"substantial improvement" is considered to occur when the first alteration of
any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of the building commences,
whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the
structure. The term does not, however, include either: a) any project for
improvement of a structure to comply with existing State or local Health,
Sanitary, or Safety Code specifications which are solely necessary to assure
safe living conditions, or b) any alteration of a structure listed on the
National Register of Historic Places or a State Inventory of Historic Places.
   TRANSITION SECTION: Reaches of the stream or floodway where water flows from
a narrow cross section to a wide cross section or vice versa. (Ord. 613, 4-5-
1995; amd. Ord. 620, 8-15-1995; Ord. 1289-19, 2-5-2019)
 
Notes
1 1. 225 ILCS 330/1.
2 2. 225 ILCS 325/2.
6-1-3: HOW TO USE THIS CHAPTER:
The Village Engineer shall be responsible for fulfilling all of the duties
listed in section
6-1-4 of this chapter.
To fulfill those duties, the Village Engineer first should use the criteria
listed in section 6-1-5, "Base Flood Elevation", of this chapter to determine
whether the development site is located within a floodplain. Once it has been
determined that a site is located within a floodplain, the Village Engineer
must determine whether the development site is within a flood fringe, a
regulatory floodway, or within an SFHA or floodplain on which no floodway has
been identified. If the site is within a flood fringe, the Village shall
require that the minimum requirements of section
6-1-6 of this chapter be met. If the site is within a floodway, the Village
Engineer shall require that the minimum requirements of section
6-1-7 of this chapter be met. If the site is located within an SFHA or
floodplain for which no detailed study has been completed and approved, the
Village Engineer shall require that the minimum requirements of section
6-1-8 of this chapter be met.
In addition, the general requirements of section
6-1-9 of this chapter shall be met for all developments meeting the
requirements of section
6-1-6,
6-1-7, or
6-1-8 of this chapter. The Village Engineer shall assure that all subdivision
proposals shall meet the requirements of section
 6-1-10 of this chapter.
If a variance is to be granted for a proposal, the Village Engineer shall
review the requirements of section
6-1-11 of this chapter to make sure they are met. In addition, the Village
Engineer shall complete all notification requirements.
In order to assure that property owners obtain permits as required in this
chapter, the Village Engineer may take any and all actions as outlined in
section
6-1-13 of this chapter. (Ord. 613, 4-5-1995)
6-1-4: DUTIES OF THE ENFORCEMENT OFFICIAL(S):
The Village Engineer shall be responsible for the general administration and
enforcement of this chapter which shall include the following:
   A.   Determining The Floodplain Designation: Check all new development sites
to determine whether they are in a special flood hazard area (SFHA). If they
are in an SFHA, determine whether they are in a floodway, flood fringe or in a
floodplain on which a detailed study has not been conducted which drains more
than one square mile.
   B.   Professional Engineer Review: If the development site is within a
floodway or in a floodplain on which a detailed study has not been conducted
which drains more than one square mile, then the permit shall be referred to a
registered professional engineer (PE) under the employ or contract of the
Village for review to ensure that the development meets the requirements of
section
6-1-7 of this chapter. In the case of an appropriate use, the PE shall state in
writing that the development meets the requirements of section
6-1-7 of this chapter. (Ord. 613, 4-5-1995)
   C.   Dam Safety Requirements: Permits for dams may be required from IDNR/
OWR. Contact IDNR/OWR to determine if a permit is required. If a permit is
required, a permit application must be made to IDNR/OWR prior to the
construction or major modification of jurisdictional dams, as defined in
section
 6-1-2 of this chapter. Regulated dams may include weirs, restrictive culverts
or impoundment structures. (Ord. 1289-19, 2-5-2019)
   D.   Other Permit Requirements: Ensure that any and all required Federal,
State and local permits are received prior to the issuance of a floodplain
development permit.
   E.   Plan Review And Permit Issuance: Ensure that all development activities
within the SFHAs of the jurisdiction of the Village meet the requirements of
this chapter and issue a floodplain development permit in accordance with the
provisions of this chapter and other regulations of this community when the
development meets the conditions of this chapter.
   F.   Inspection Review: Inspect all development projects before, during and
after construction to assure proper elevation of the structure and to ensure
they comply with the provisions of this chapter.
   G.   Elevation And Floodproofing Certificates: Maintain in the permit files
an elevation certificate certifying the elevation of the lowest floor
(including basement) of a residential or nonresidential building or the
elevation to which a nonresidential building has been floodproofed, using a
floodproofing certificate, for all buildings subject to section
 6-1-9 of this chapter for public inspection and provide copies of same.
   H.   Records For Public Inspection: Maintain for public inspection and
furnish upon request base flood data, SFHA and regulatory floodway maps, copies
of Federal or State permit documents, variance documentation, conditional
letter of map revision, letter of map revision, letter of map amendment and "as
built" elevation and floodproofing or elevation and floodproofing certificates
for all buildings constructed subject to this chapter. (Ord. 613, 4-5-1995)
   I.   State Permits: Ensure that construction authorization has been granted
by IDNR/OWR, for all development projects subject to sections
6-1-7 and
6-1-8 of this chapter, unless enforcement responsibility has been delegated to
the Village Engineer. Upon acceptance of this chapter by IDNR/OWR and FEMA,
responsibility is hereby delegated to the Village as per 17 Illinois
Administrative Code, part 3708 for construction in the regulatory floodway and
floodplain when floodways have not been defined in sections
6-1-7 and
6-1-8 of this chapter. However, the following review approvals are not
delegated to the Village and shall require review or permits from IDNR/OWR:
(Ord. 1289-19, 2-5-2019)
      1.   Organizations which are exempt from this chapter, as per the
Illinois Compiled Statutes; (Ord. 613, 4-5-1995)
      2.   IDNR/OWR projects, "dams" or impoundment "structures" as defined in
section
6-1-2 of this chapter and all other State, Federal or local unit of government
projects, including projects of the Village and County, except for those
projects meeting the requirements of subsection
6-1-7H of this chapter; (Ord. 1289-19, 2-5-2019)
      3.   An engineer's determination that an existing bridge or culvert
crossing is not a source of flood damage and the analysis indicating the
proposed flood profile, per subsection
6-1-7E5 of this chapter;
      4.   An engineer's analysis of the flood profile due to subsection
6-1-7E4 of this chapter;
      5.   Alternative transition sections and hydraulically equivalent
compensatory storage as indicated in subsections
6-1-7E1, E2 and E8 of this chapter;
      6.   Permit issuance of structures within or over publicly navigable
rivers, lakes and streams;
      7.   Any changes in the base flood elevation or floodway locations; and,
      8.   Base flood elevation determinations where none now exist. (Ord. 613,
4-5-1995)
   J.   Cooperation With Other Agencies: Cooperate with State and Federal
floodplain management agencies to improve base flood or 100-year frequency
flood and floodway data and to improve the administration of this chapter.
Submit data to IDNR/OWR and FEMA for proposed revisions of a regulatory map.
Submit reports as required for the National Flood Insurance Program. Notify
FEMA of any proposed amendments to this chapter.
   K.   Promulgate Regulations: Promulgate rules and regulations as necessary
to administer and enforce the provisions of this chapter, subject however to
the review and approval of IDNR/OWR and FEMA for any chapter changes. (Ord.
1289-19, 2-5-2019)
6-1-5: BASE FLOOD ELEVATION:
This chapter's protection standard is based on the Flood Insurance Study for
Will County, Illinois, prepared by the FEMA, dated February 15, 2019. If a base
flood elevation or 100-year frequency flood elevation is not available for a
particular site, then the protection standard shall be according to the best
existing data available from Federal, State or other sources. When a party
disagrees with the best available data, he/she may finance the detailed
engineering study needed to replace existing data with better data and submit
it to IDNR/OWR and FEMA.
   A.   The base flood or 100-year frequency flood elevation for the SFHA of
Wilson Creek shall be as delineated on the 100-year flood profiles in the Flood
Insurance Study of Will County prepared by FEMA and dated February 15, 2019,
and such amendments to such study and maps as may be prepared from time to
time.
   B.   The base flood or 100-year frequency flood elevation for the SFHAs of
those parts of unincorporated Will County that are within the extraterritorial
jurisdiction of the Village or that may be annexed into the Village shall be as
delineated on the 100-year flood profiles in the Flood Insurance Study of Will
County prepared by FEMA and dated February 15, 2019, and such amendments or
revisions to such study and maps as may be prepared from time to time. (Ord.
1289-19, 2-5-2019)
   C.   The base flood or 100-year frequency flood elevation for each SFHA
delineated as an AH Zone or AO Zone shall be that elevation (or depth)
delineated on the Flood Insurance Rate Map of the Village. (Ord. 620, 8-15-
1995)
   D.   The base flood or 100-year frequency flood elevation for each of the
remaining SFHAs delineated as an A Zone on the Flood Insurance Rate Map of the
Village shall be according to the best existing data available in the Illinois
State Water Survey Floodplain Information Repository. When no base flood or
100-year frequency flood elevation exists, the base flood or 100-year frequency
flood elevation for a riverine SFHA shall be determined from a backwater model,
such as HEC-II, WSP-2, or a dynamic model such as HIP. The flood flows used in
the hydraulic models shall be obtained from a hydrologic model, such as HEC-I,
TR-20, or HIP, or by techniques presented in various publications prepared by
the United States Geological Survey for estimating peak flood discharges. Flood
flows should be based on anticipated future land use conditions in the
watershed as determined from adopted local and regional land use plans. Along
any watercourses draining more than one square mile, the above analyses shall
be submitted to IDNR/OWR for approval, once approved it must be submitted to
the Illinois State Water Survey Floodplain Information Repository for filing.
For a non-riverine SFHA, the base flood elevation shall be the historic flood
of record plus three feet (3'), unless calculated by a detailed engineering
study and approved by the Illinois State Water Survey. (Ord. 1289-19, 2-5-2019)
6-1-6: OCCUPATION AND USE OF FLOOD FRINGE AREAS:
Development in and/or filling of the flood fringe will be permitted if
protection is provided against the base flood or 100-year frequency flood by
proper elevation, and compensatory storage and other provisions of this chapter
are met. No use will be permitted which adversely affects the capacity of
drainage facilities or systems. Developments located within the flood fringe
shall meet the requirements of this section, along with the requirements of
section 6-1-9 of this chapter. (Ord. 1289-19, 2-5-2019)
   A.   Development Permit: No person, firm, corporation, or governmental body
not exempted by State law shall commence any development in the SFHA without
first obtaining a development permit from the Village Engineer. (Ord. 613, 4-5-
1995)
   B.   Application Contents: Application for a development permit shall be
made on a form provided by the Village Engineer. The application shall be
accompanied by drawings of the site, drawn to scale, showing property line
dimensions and legal description for the property and sealed by a licensed
engineer, architect or land surveyor; existing grade elevations in MSL 1988,
adj. datum or NAVD and all changes in grade resulting from excavation or
filling; the location and dimensions of all buildings and additions to
buildings. For all proposed buildings, the elevation of the lowest floor
(including basement) and lowest adjacent grade shall be shown on the submitted
plans and the development will be subject to the requirements of section
6-1-9 of this chapter. (Ord. 1289-19, 2-5-2019)
   C.   Comparison; Documentation: Upon receipt of a development permit
application, the Village Engineer shall compare the elevation of the site to
the base flood or 100-year frequency flood elevation. Any development located
on land that can be shown to have been higher than the base flood elevation as
of the site's first Flood Insurance Rate Map identification is not in the SFHA
and, therefore, not subject to the requirements of this chapter. The Village
Engineer shall maintain documentation of the existing ground elevation at the
development site and certification that this ground elevation existed prior to
the date of the site's first Flood Insurance Rate Map identification.
   D.   Soil Erosion And Sedimentation Control Plan: A soil erosion and
sedimentation control plan for disturbed areas shall be submitted. This plan
shall include a description of the sequence of grading activities and the
temporary sediment and erosion control measures to be implemented to mitigate
their effects. This plan shall also include a description of final
stabilization and revegetation measures, and the identification of a
responsible party to ensure post- construction maintenance.
   E.   Copies Of Permits: The Village Engineer shall be responsible for
obtaining from the applicant, copies of all other local, State and Federal
permits, approvals or permit- not-required letters that may be required for
this type of activity. The Village Engineer shall not issue a permit unless all
other local, State and Federal permits have been obtained.
   F.   Preventing Increased Drainages: No development in the flood fringe
shall create a threat to public health and safety.
   G.   Removal From Floodplain: If fill is being used to elevate the site
above the base flood or 100-year frequency flood elevation, the applicant shall
submit sufficient data and obtain a letter of map revision (LOMR) from FEMA for
the purpose of removing the site from the floodplain.
   H.   Compensatory Storage: Whenever any portion of a floodplain is
authorized for use, the volume of space which will be occupied by the
authorized fill or structure below the base flood or 100-year frequency flood
elevation shall be compensated for and balanced by a hydraulically equivalent
volume of excavation taken from below the base flood or 100-year frequency
flood elevation. The excavation volume shall be at least equal to one and five-
tenths (1.5) times the volume of storage lost due to the fill or structure. In
the case of streams and watercourses, such excavation shall be made opposite or
adjacent to the areas so filled or occupied. All floodplain storage lost below
the existing 10-year flood elevation shall be replaced below the proposed 10-
year flood elevation. All floodplain storage lost above the existing 10-year
flood elevation shall be replaced above the proposed 10-year flood elevation.
All such excavations shall be constructed to drain freely and openly to the
watercourse. (Ord. 613, 4-5-1995)
6-1-7: OCCUPATION AND USE OF IDENTIFIED FLOODWAYS:
This section applies to proposed development, redevelopment, site modification
or building modification within a regulatory floodway. The regulatory floodways
of the Village shall be as delineated on the regulatory floodway maps
designated by IDNR/OWR according and referenced in section
6-1-2 of this chapter. Only those uses and structures will be permitted which
meet the criteria in this section. All floodway modifications shall be the
minimum necessary to accomplish the purpose of the project. The development
shall also meet the requirements of section
6-1-9 of this chapter. (Ord. 1289-19, 2-5-2019)
   A.   Development Permit: No person, firm, corporation or governmental body
not exempted by State law shall commence any development in a floodway without
first obtaining a development permit from the Village Engineer.
   B.   Application Contents: Application for a development permit shall be
made on a form provided by the Village Engineer. The application shall include
the following information:
      1.   Name and address of applicant;
      2.   Site location (including legal description) of the property, drawn
to scale, on the Regulatory Floodway Map, indicating whether it is proposed to
be in an incorporated or unincorporated area;
      3.   Name of stream or body of water affected;
      4.   Description of proposed activity;
      5.   Statement of purpose of proposed activity;
      6.   Anticipated dates of initiation and completion of activity;
      7.   Name and mailing address of the owner of the subject property if
different from the applicant;
      8.   Signature of applicant or the applicant's agent;
      9.   If the applicant is a corporation, the president or other authorized
officer shall sign the application form;
      10.   If the applicant is a partnership, each partner shall sign the
application form; and
      11.   If the applicant is a land trust, the trust officer shall sign the
name of the trustee by him (her) as trust officer. A disclosure affidavit shall
be filed with the application, identifying each beneficiary of the trust by
name and address and defining the respective interests therein.
      12.   Plans of the proposed activity shall be provided which include as a
minimum:
         a.   A vicinity map showing the site of the activity, name of the
waterway, boundary lines, names of roads in the vicinity of the site, graphic
or numerical scale, and north arrow; (Ord. 613, 4-5-1995)
         b.   A plan view of the project and engineering study reach showing
existing and proposed conditions including principal dimensions of the
structure or work, elevations in mean sea level (1988 adjustment) datum or
NAVD, adjacent property lines and ownership, drainage and flood control
easements, location of any channels and any existing or future access roads,
distance between proposed activity and navigation channel (when the proposed
construction is near a commercially navigable body of water), regulatory
floodway limit, floodplain limit, specifications and dimensions of any proposed
channel modifications, location and orientation of cross-sections, north arrow,
and a graphic or numerical scale; (Ord. 1289-19, 2-5-2019)
         c.   Cross-section views of the project and engineering study reach
showing existing and proposed conditions including principal dimensions of the
work as shown in plan view, existing and proposed elevations, normal water
elevation, 10-year frequency flood elevation, 100-year frequency flood
elevation, and graphite or numerical scales (horizontal and vertical);
         d.   A soil erosion and sedimentation control plan for disturbed
areas. This plan shall include a description of the sequence of grading
activities and the temporary sediment and erosion control measures to be
implemented to mitigate their effects. This plan shall also include a
description of final stabilization and revegetation measures, and the
identification of a responsible party to ensure post- construction maintenance.
         e.   A copy of the Regulatory Floodway Map, marked to reflect any
proposed change in the regulatory floodway location.
      13.   Any and all other local, State and Federal permits or approval
letters that may be required for this type of development.
      14.   Engineering calculations and supporting data shall be submitted
showing that the proposed work will meet the permit criteria of this section.
(Ord. 613, 4-5-1995)
      15.   If the regulatory floodway delineation, base flood or 100-year
frequency flood elevation will change due to the proposed project, the
application will not be considered complete until IDNR/OWR has indicated
conditional approval of the Regulatory Floodway Map change. No structures may
be built until a letter of map revision has been approved by FEMA. (Ord. 1289-
19, 2-5-2019)
      16.   The application for a structure shall be accompanied by drawings of
the site, drawn to scale showing property line dimensions and existing ground
elevations and all changes in grade resulting from any proposed excavation or
filling, and floodplain and floodway limits; sealed by a registered
professional engineer, licensed architect or registered land surveyor; the
location and dimensions of all buildings and additions to building; and the
elevation of the lowest floor (including basement) of all proposed buildings
subject to the requirements of section
6-1-9 of this chapter.
      17.   If the proposed project involves a channel modification, the
applicant shall submit the following information:
         a.   A discussion of the purpose of and need for the proposed work;
         b.   A discussion of the feasibility of using alternative locations or
methods to accomplish the purpose of the proposed work;
         c.   An analysis of the extent and permanence of the impacts the
project would have on the physical and biological conditions of the body of
water affected;
         d.   An analysis of the extent and permanence of the impacts each
feasible alternative identified in subsection E4a of this section would have on
the physical and biological conditions of the body of water affected;
         e.   An analysis of the impacts of the proposed project, considering
cumulative effects on the physical and biological conditions of the body of
water affected.
   C.   Copies Of Permits; Review Applications: The Village Engineer shall be
responsible for obtaining from the applicant copies of all other local, State,
and Federal permits and approvals that may be required for this type of
activity. The Village Engineer shall not issue the development permit unless
all required Federal and State permits have been obtained. A registered
professional engineer, under the employ or contract of the Village shall review
and approve applications reviewed under this section. (Ord. 613, 4-5-1995)
   D.   Preventing Increased Damages And A List Of Appropriate Uses: The only
development in a floodway which will be allowed are appropriate uses, which
will not cause a rise in the base flood elevation, and which will not create a
damaging or potentially damaging increase in flood heights or velocity or be a
threat to public health and safety and welfare or impair the natural hydrologic
and hydraulic functions of the floodway or channel, or permanently impair
existing water quality or aquatic habitat. Construction impacts shall be
minimized by appropriate mitigation methods as called for in this chapter. Only
those appropriate uses listed in 17 Illinois Administrative Code 3708 will be
allowed. Appropriate uses do not include the construction or placement of any
new structures, fill, building additions, buildings on stilts, excavation or
channel modifications done to accommodate otherwise nonappropriate uses in the
floodway, fencing (including landscaping or planting designed to act as a
fence) and "storage of materials" except as specifically defined above as an
appropriate use. The approved appropriate uses are as follows: (Ord. 1289-19,
2-5-2019)
      1.   Flood control structures, dikes, dams and other public works or
private improvements relating to the control of drainage, flooding, erosion, or
water quality or habitat for fish and wildlife; (Ord. 613, 4-5-1995)
      2.   Structures or facilities relating to the use of, or requiring access
to the water or shoreline and facilities and improvements related to
recreational boating, commercial shipping and other functionally water-
dependent uses; (Ord. 650, 6-17-1997)
      3.   Storm and sanitary sewer outfalls;
      4.   Underground and overhead utilities;
      5.   Recreational facilities such as playing fields and trail systems
including any related fencing (at least 50 percent open when viewed from any 1
direction) built parallel to the direction of flood flows, and including open
air pavilions; (Ord. 613, 4-5-1995)
      6.   Reserved. (Ord. 650, 6-17-1997)
      7.   Bridges, culverts, roadways, sidewalks, railways, runways and
taxiways and any modification thereto; (Ord. 613, 4-5-1995)
      8.   Reserved. (Ord. 650, 6-17-1997)
      9.   Regulatory floodway regrading, without fill, to create a positive
nonerosive slope toward a watercourse;
      10.   Flood proofing activities to protect previously existing lawful
structures including the construction of watertight window wells, elevating
structures, or construction of floodwalls around residential, commercial or
industrial principal structures where the outside toe of the floodwall shall be
no more than ten feet (10') away from the exterior wall of the existing
structure, and, which are not considered substantial improvements to the
structure; (Ord. 613, 4-5-1995)
      11.   The replacement, reconstruction, or repair of a damaged building,
provided that the outside dimensions are not increased, and if the building was
damaged to fifty percent (50%) or more of the market value before the damage
occurred, the building will be protected from flooding to the flood protection
elevation.
      12.   Modifications to an existing building that would not increase the
enclosed floor area of the building below the 100-year frequency flood
elevation, and which will not block flood flows including but not limited to,
fireplaces, bay windows, decks, patios, and second story additions. If the
building is improved to fifty percent (50%) or more of the market value before
the modification occurred (i.e., a substantial improvement), the building will
be protected from flooding to the flood protection elevation.
      13.   Parking lots built at or below existing grade where either:
         a.   The depth of flooding at the 100-year frequency flood event will
not exceed 1.0 foot; or
         b.   The applicant of a short-term recreational use facility parking
lot formally agrees to restrict access during overbank flooding events and
accepts liability for all damage caused by vehicular access during all overbank
flooding events.
      14.   Aircraft parking aprons built at or below ground elevation where
the depth of flooding at the 100-year frequency flood event will not exceed 1.0
foot.
   E.   Permissible Appropriate Use: Within the regulatory floodway as
identified on the regulatory floodway maps designated by IDNR/OWR, the
construction of an appropriate use, will be considered permissible provided
that the proposed project meets the following engineering and mitigation
criteria and is so stated in writing with supporting plans, calculations and
data by a registered professional engineer and provided that any structure
meets the protections requirements of section
 6-1-9 of this chapter:
      1.   Preservation Of Flood Conveyance, So As Not To Increase Flood Stages
Upstream: For appropriate uses other than bridge or culvert crossings, on-
stream structures or dams, all effective regulatory floodway conveyance lost
due to the project will be replaced for all flood events up to and including
the 100-year frequency flood. In calculating effective regulatory floodway
conveyance, the following factors shall be taken into consideration: (Ord.
1289-19, 2-5-2019)
         a.   Regulatory floodway conveyance,
 
    1.486  
"K" = n     AR2/3
 
where "n" is Manning's roughness factor, "A" is the effective area of the
cross-section, and "R" is the ratio of the area to the wetted perimeter. (See
Open Channel Hydraulics, Ven Te Chow, 1959, McGraw-Hill Book Company, New
York.)
         b.   The same Manning's "n" value shall be used for both existing and
proposed conditions unless a recorded maintenance agreement with a Federal,
State, or local unit of government can assure the proposed conditions will be
maintained or the land cover is changing from a vegetative to a nonvegetative
land cover. (Ord. 613, 4-5-1995)
         c.   Transition sections shall be provided and used in calculations of
effective regulatory floodway conveyance. The following expansion and
contraction ratios shall be used unless an applicant's engineer can prove to
IDNR/OWR through engineering calculations or model tests that more abrupt
transitions may be used with the same efficiency: (Ord. 1289-19, 2-5-2019)
            (1)   When water is flowing from a narrow section to a wider
section, the water should be assumed to expand no faster than at a rate of one
foot (1') horizontal for every four feet (4') of the flooded stream's length.
            (2)   When water is flowing from a wide section to a narrow
section, the water should be assumed to contract no faster than at a rate of
one foot (1') horizontal for every one foot (1') of the flooded stream's
length.
            (3)   When expanding or contracting flows in a vertical direction,
a minimum of one foot (1') vertical transition for every ten feet (10') of
stream length shall be used.
            (4)   Transition sections shall be provided between cross- sections
with rapid expansions and contractions and when meeting the regulatory floodway
delineation on adjacent properties.
            (5)   All cross-sections used in the calculations shall be located
perpendicular to flood flows.
      2.   Preservation Of Floodway Storage So As Not To Increase Downstream
Flooding: Compensatory storage shall be provided for any regulatory floodway
storage lost due to the proposed work from the volume of fill or structures
placed and the impact of any related flood control projects. Compensatory
storage for fill or structures shall be equal to at least one and five-tenths
(1.5) times the volume of floodplain storage lost. Artificially created storage
lost due to a reduction in head loss behind a bridge shall not be required to
be replaced. The compensatory regulatory floodway storage shall be placed
between the proposed normal water elevation and the proposed 100-year flood
elevation. All regulatory floodway storage lost below the existing 10-year
flood elevation shall be replaced below the proposed 10-year flood elevation.
All regulatory floodway storage lost above the existing 10-year flood elevation
shall be replaced above the proposed 10-year flood elevation. All such
excavations shall be constructed to drain freely and openly to the watercourse.
If the compensatory storage will not be placed at the location of the proposed
construction, the applicant's engineer shall demonstrate to IDNR/OWR through a
determination of flood discharges and water surface elevations that the
compensatory storage is hydraulically equivalent. Finally, there shall be no
reduction in floodway surface area as a result of a floodway modification,
unless such modification is necessary to reduce flooding at existing structure.
      3.   Preservation Of Floodway Velocities So As Not To Increase Stream
Erosion Or Flood Heights: For all appropriate uses, except bridges or culverts
or on-stream structures, the proposed work will not result in an increase in
the average channel or regulatory floodway velocities or stage for all flood
events up to and including the 100-year frequency event. However in the case of
bridges or culverts or on-stream structures built for the purpose of backing up
water in the stream during normal or flood flows, velocities may be increased
at the structure site if scour, erosion and sedimentation will be avoided by
the use of rip-rap or other design measures. (Ord. 613, 4-5-1995)
      4.   Construction Of New Bridges Or Culvert Crossings And Roadway
Approaches: The proposed structures shall not result in an increase of upstream
flood stages greater than one-tenth foot (0.1') when compared to the existing
conditions for all flood events up to and including the 100-year frequency
event; or the upstream flood stage increases will be contained within the
channel banks (or within existing vertical extensions of the channel banks)
such as within the design protection grade of existing levees or flood walls or
within recorded flood easements. If the proposed construction will increase
upstream flood stages greater than one-tenth foot (0.1'), the developer must
contact IDNR/OWR, dam safety section for a dam safety permit or waiver.
         a.   The engineering analysis of upstream flood stages must be
calculated using the flood study flows, and corresponding flood elevations for
tailwater conditions for the flood study specified in section
6-1-5 of this chapter. Bridges and culverts must be analyzed using any commonly
accepted FEMA approved hydraulic models. (Ord. 1289-19, 2-5-2019)
         b.   Lost floodway storage must be compensated for per subsection E2
of this section.
         c.   Velocity increases must be mitigated per subsection E3 of this
section. (Ord. 613, 4-5-1995)
         d.   If the crossing is proposed over a public water that is used for
recreational or commercial navigation, an IDNR/OWR permit must be received.
         e.   The hydraulic analysis for the backwater caused by the bridge
showing the existing condition and proposed regulatory profile must be
submitted to IDNR/OWR for concurrence that a CLOMR is not required by
subsection D1 of this section. (Ord. 1289-19, 2-5-2019)
         f.   All excavations for the construction of the crossing shall be
designed per subsection E8 of this section.
      5.   Reconstruction Or Modification Of Existing Bridges, Culverts, And
Approach Roads:
         a.   The bridge or culvert and roadway approach reconstruction or
modification shall be constructed with no more than one- tenth foot (0.1')
increase in backwater over the existing flood profile for all flood frequencies
up to and including the 100-year event, if the existing structure is not a
source of flood damage.
         b.   If the existing bridge or culvert and roadway approach is a
source of flood damage to buildings or structures in the upstream floodplain,
the applicant's engineer shall evaluate the feasibility of redesigning the
structure to reduce the existing backwater, taking into consideration the
effects on flood stages on upstream and downstream properties. (Ord. 613, 4-5-
1995)
         c.   The determination as to whether or not the existing crossing is a
source of flood damage and should be redesigned must be prepared in accordance
with the 17 Illinois Administrative Code 3708 (Floodway Construction in
Northeastern Illinois) and submitted to the division for review and concurrence
before a permit is issued.
      6.   On-Stream Structures Built For The Purpose Of Backing Up Water: Any
increase in upstream flood stages greater than 0.0 foot when compared to the
existing conditions, for all flood events up to and including the 100-year
frequency event shall be contained within the channel banks (or within existing
vertical extensions of the channel banks) such as within the design protection
grade of existing levees or flood walls or within recorded flood easements. A
permit or letter indicating a permit is not required must be obtained from
IDNR/OWR, dam safety section for a dam safety permit or waiver for any
structure built for the purpose of backing up water in the stream during normal
or flood flow. All "dams" and impoundment "structures" as defined in section
6-1-2 of this chapter shall meet the permitting requirements of 17 Illinois
Administrative Code, part 3702 (Construction and Maintenance of Dams). If the
proposed activity involves a modification of the channel or floodway to
accommodate an impoundment, it shall be demonstrated that: (Ord. 1289-19, 2-5-
2019)
         a.   The impoundment is determined to be in the public interest by
providing flood control, public recreation, or regional stormwater detention;
         b.   The impoundment will not prevent the migration of indigenous fish
species, which require access to upstream areas as part of their life cycle,
such as for spawning;
         c.   The impoundment will not cause or contribute to degraded water
quality or habitat conditions. Impoundment design should include gradual bank
slopes, appropriate bank stabilization measures, and a presedimentation basin;
         d.   A nonpoint source control plan has been implemented in the
upstream watershed to control the effect of sediment runoff as well as minimize
the input of nutrients, oil and grease, metals, and other pollutants. If there
is more than one municipality in the upstream watershed, the municipality in
which the impoundment is constructed should coordinate with upstream
municipalities to ensure comprehensive watershed control;
         e.   The project otherwise complies with the requirements of this
section.
      7.   Flood Proofing Of Existing Habitable, Residential And Commercial
Structures: If construction is required beyond the outside dimensions of the
existing building, the outside perimeter of the floodproofing construction
shall be placed no further than ten feet (10') from the outside of the
building. Compensation of lost storage and conveyance will not be required for
floodproofing activities. (Ord. 613, 4-5-1995)
      8.   Excavation In The Floodway: When excavation is proposed in the
design of bridges and culvert openings, including the modifications to and
replacement of existing bridge and culvert structures, or to compensate for
lost conveyance for other appropriate uses, transition sections shall be
provided for the excavation. The following expansion and contraction ratios
shall be used unless an applicant's engineer can prove to IDNR/OWR through
engineering calculations or model tests that more abrupt transitions may be
used with the same efficiency. (Ord. 1289-19, 2-5-2019)
         a.   When water is flowing from a narrow section to a wider section,
the water should be assumed to expand no faster than at a rate of one foot (1')
horizontal for every four feet (4') of the flooded stream's length;
         b.   When water is flowing from a wide section to a narrow section,
the water should be assumed to contract no faster than at a rate of one foot
(1') horizontal for every one foot (1') of the flooded stream's length; and
         c.   When expanding or contracting flows in a vertical direction, a
minimum of one foot (1') vertical transition for every ten feet (10') of stream
length shall be used;
         d.   Erosion/scour protection shall be provided inland upstream and
downstream of the transition sections.
      9.   Channel Modifications: If the proposed activity involves a channel
modification, it shall be demonstrated that:
         a.   There are no practicable alternatives to the activity which would
accomplish its purpose with less impact to the natural conditions of the body
of water affected. Possible alternatives include levees, bank stabilization,
flood proofing of existing structures, removal of structures from the
floodplain, clearing the channel, high flow channel, or the establishment of a
stream side buffer strip of green belt. Channel modification is acceptable if
the purpose is to restore natural conditions and improve water quality and fish
and wildlife habitat;
         b.   Water quality, habitat, and other natural functions would be
significantly improved by the modification and no significant habitat area may
be destroyed, or the impacts are offset by the replacement of an equivalent
degree of natural resource values;
         c.   The activity has been planned and designed and will be
constructed in a way which will minimize its adverse impacts on the natural
conditions of the body of water affected, consistent with the following
criteria;
            (1)   The physical characteristics of the modified channel shall
match as closely as possible those of the existing channel in length, cross-
section, slope and sinuosity. If the existing channel has been previously
modified, restoration of more natural physical conditions should be
incorporated into channel modification design, where practical.
            (2)   Hydraulically effective transitions shall be provided at both
the upstream and downstream ends of the project, designed such that they will
prevent erosion.
            (3)   One-sided construction of a channel shall be used when
feasible. Removal of streamside (riparian) vegetation should be limited to one
side of the channel, where possible, to preserve the shading and stabilization
effects of the vegetation.
            (4)   Clearing of vegetation shall be limited to that which is
essential for construction of the channel.
            (5)   Channel banks shall be constructed with a side slope no
steeper than three to one (3:1) horizontal to vertical, wherever practical.
Natural vegetation and gradual side slopes are the preferred methods for bank
stabilization. Where high velocities or sharp bends necessitate the use of
alternative stabilization measures, natural rock or rip-rap are preferred
materials. Artificial materials such as concrete, gabions, or construction
rubble should be avoided unless there are no practicable alternatives.
            (6)   All disturbed areas associated with the modification shall be
seeded or otherwise stabilized as soon as possible upon completion of
construction. Erosion blanket or an equivalent material shall be required to
stabilize disturbed channel banks prior to establishment of the vegetative
cover.
            (7)   If the existing channel contains considerable bottom
diversity such as deep pools, riffles, and other similar features, such
features shall be provided in the new channel. Spawning and nesting areas and
flow characteristics compatible with fish habitat shall also be established
where appropriate.
            (8)   A sediment basin shall be installed at the downstream end of
the modification to reduce sedimentation and degradation of downstream water
quality.
            (9)   New or relocated channels should be built in the dry and all
items of construction, including vegetation, should be completed prior to
diversion of water into the new channel.
            (10)   There shall be no increases in stage or velocity as the
channel enters or leaves the project site for any frequency flood unless
necessitated by a public flood control project or unless such an increase is
justified as part of a habitat improvement or erosion control project.
            (11)   Unless the modification is for a public flood control
project, there shall be no reduction in the volume of floodwater storage
outside the floodway as a result of the modification; and
         d.   The project otherwise complies with the requirements of this
section.
      10.   Seeding And Stabilization Plan: For all activities located in a
floodway, a seeding and stabilization plan shall be submitted by the applicant.
      11.   Soil Erosion And Sedimentation Measures: For all activities in the
floodway, including grading, filling, and excavation, in which there is
potential for erosion of exposed soil, soil erosion and sedimentation control
measures shall be employed consistent with the following criteria:
         a.   The construction area shall be minimized to preserve the maximum
vegetation possible. Construction shall be scheduled to minimize the time soil
is exposed and unprotected. In no case shall the existing natural vegetation be
destroyed, removed, or disturbed more than fifteen (15) days prior to the
initiation of improvements.
         b.   Temporary and/or permanent soil stabilization shall be applied to
denuded areas as soon as possible. As a minimum, soil stabilization shall be
provided within fifteen (15) days after final grade is reached on any portion
of the site, and within fifteen (15) days to denuded areas which may not be at
final grade but will remain undisturbed for longer than sixty (60) days.
         c.   Sedimentation control measures shall be installed before any
significant grading or filling is initiated on the site to prevent the movement
of eroded sediments off site or into the channel. Potential sediment control
devices include filter fences, straw bale fences, check dams, diversion
ditches, and sediment basins.
         d.   A vegetated buffer strip of at least twenty five feet (25') in
width shall be preserved and/or reestablished, where possible, along existing
channels (see subsection E16 of this section). Construction vehicle use of
channels shall be minimized. Temporary stream crossings shall be constructed,
where necessary, to minimize erosion. Necessary construction in or along
channels shall be restabilized immediately.
         e.   Soil erosion and sedimentation control measures shall be designed
and implemented consistent with "Procedures and Standards for Urban Soil
Erosion and Sedimentation Control in Illinois" (1988) also known as the "Green
Book" and "Standards and Specifications for Soil Erosion and Sediment Control"
(IEPA, 1987). (Ord. 613, 4-5-1995)
      12.   Public Flood Control Projects: For public flood control projects,
the permitting requirements of this section will be considered met if the
applicant can demonstrate to IDNR/OWR through hydraulic and hydrologic
calculations that the proposed project will not singularly or cumulatively
result in increased flood heights outside the project right-of-way or easements
for all flood events up to and including the 100-year frequency event. (Ord.
613, 4-5-1995; amd. Ord. 1289-19, 2-5-2019)
      13.   General Criteria For Analysis Of Flood Elevations:
         a.   The flood profiles, flows and floodway data in the regulatory
floodway study, referenced in section
 6-1-5 of this chapter, must be used for analysis of the base conditions. If
the study data appears to be in error or conditions have changed, IDNR/OWR
shall be contacted for approval and concurrence on the appropriate base
conditions data to use.
         b.   If the 100-year regulatory floodway elevation at the site of the
proposed construction is affected by backwater from a downstream receiving
stream with a larger drainage area, the proposed construction shall be shown to
meet the requirements of this section for the 100-year frequency flood
elevations of the regulatory floodway conditions and conditions with the
receiving stream at normal water elevations.
         c.   If the applicant learns from IDNR/OWR, local governments, or a
private owner that a downstream restrictive bridge or culvert is scheduled to
be removed, reconstructed, modified, or a regional flood control project is
scheduled to be built, removed, constructed or modified within the next five
(5) years, the proposed construction shall be analyzed and shown to meet the
requirements of this section for both the existing conditions and the expected
flood profile conditions when the bridge, culvert or flood control project is
built.
      14.   Conditional Letter Of Map Revision: If the appropriate use would
result in a change in the regulatory floodway location or the 100-year
frequency flood elevation, the applicant shall submit to IDNR/OWR and to FEMA
all the information, calculations, and documents necessary to be issued a
conditional regulatory floodway map revision and receive from IDNR/OWR a
conditional approval of the regulatory floodway change before a permit is
issued. However, the final regulatory floodway map will not be changed by IDNR/
OWR until as-built plans or record drawings are submitted and accepted by FEMA
and IDNR/OWR. In the case of nongovernment projects, the municipality in
incorporated areas and the county in unincorporated areas shall concur with the
proposed conditional regulatory floodway map revision before IDNR/OWR approval
can be given. No filling, grading, dredging or excavating shall take place
until a conditional approval is issued. After initial filling, grading,
dredging or excavating, no activities shall take place until a final Letter of
Map Revision (LOMR) is issued by FEMA with concurrence from IDNR/OWR. (Ord.
1289-19, 2-5-2019)
      15.   Professional Engineer's Supervision: All engineering analyses shall
be performed by or under the supervision of a registered professional engineer.
      16.   Floodway Construction Near The Channel: For all activities in the
floodway involving the construction within twenty five feet (25') of the
channel, the following criteria shall be met:
         a.   All natural vegetation buffer strip shall be preserved within at
least twenty five feet (25') of the ordinary high water mark of the channel.
         b.   Where it is impossible to protect this buffer strip during the
construction of an appropriate use, a vegetated buffer strip shall be
established upon completion of construction. (Ord. 613, 4-5-1995)
         c.   The use of native riparian vegetation is preferred in the buffer
strip. Access through this buffer strip shall be provided, when necessary, for
stream maintenance purposes.
After receipt of conditional approval of the regulatory floodway change and
issuance of a permit and a conditional letter of map revision, construction as
necessary to change the regulatory floodway designation may proceed but no
buildings or structures or other construction that is not an appropriate use
may be placed in that area until the regulatory floodway map is changed and a
final letter of map revision is received. The regulatory floodway map will be
revised upon acceptance and concurrence by IDNR/OWR and FEMA of the "as built"
plans.
   F.   State Review: For those projects listed below located in a regulatory
floodway, the following criteria shall be submitted to IDNR/OWR for their
review and concurrence prior to the issuance of a permit:
      1.   IDNR/OWR will review an engineer's analysis of the flood profile due
to a proposed bridge pursuant to subsection E4 of this section.
      2.   IDNR/OWR will review an engineer's determination that an existing
bridge or culvert crossing is not a source of flood damage and the analysis
indicating the proposed flood profile, pursuant to subsection E5 of this
section.
      3.   The IDNR/OWR will review alternative transition sections and
hydraulically equivalent storage pursuant to subsections E1, E2 and E3 of this
section.
      4.   The IDNR/OWR will review and approve prior to the start of
construction any department projects, "dams" (as defined in section
6-1-2 of this chapter) and all other State, Federal or local units of
government projects, including projects of the Municipality or County.
   G.   Other Permits: In addition to the other requirements of this chapter, a
development permit for a site located in a floodway shall not be issued unless
the applicant first obtains a permit or written documentation that a permit is
not required from IDNR/OWR, issued pursuant to 615 Illinois Compiled Statutes,
5/5 et seq. No permit from IDNR/OWR shall be required if the division has
delegated this responsibility to the Village.
   H.   Dam Safety Permits: Any work involving the construction, modification
or removal of a "dam" as defined in section
6-1-2 of this chapter per 17 Illinois Administrative Code, part 3702 (Rules for
Construction of Dams) shall obtain an IDNR/OWR permit prior to the start of
such work. If the Village Engineer finds a dam that does not have an IDNR/OWR
permit, the Village Engineer shall immediately notify the IDNR/OWR Bartlett
office (or such other office as IDNR/OWR may designate from time to time). If
the Village Engineer finds a dam which is believed to be in unsafe condition,
the Village Engineer shall immediately notify the owner of the dam, the IDNR/
OWR Bartlett office (or such other office as IDNR/OWR may designate from time
to time), and the Illinois Emergency Management Agency (IEMA).
   I.   Activities That Do Not Require A Registered Professional Engineer's
Review: The following activities may be permitted without a registered
professional engineer's review. Such activities shall still meet the other
requirements of this chapter, including the mitigation requirements.
      1.   Any activity permitted by the IDNR/OWR's Regional Permit 3, which
authorizes, for example, underground and overhead utilities, storm and sanitary
sewer outfalls, sidewalks, patios, athletic fields, playground equipment and
streambank protection activities; may be permitted without a licensed PE's
review. Such activities shall still meet the other requirements of this
chapter, including the mitigation requirements. (Ord. 1289-19, 2-5-2019)
6-1-8: OCCUPATION AND USE OF SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD AREAS WHERE FLOODWAYS ARE NOT
IDENTIFIED:
In SFHA or floodplains, (including AO, AH or unnumbered A Zones) where no
floodways have been identified and no base flood or 100-year frequency flood
elevations have been established by FEMA, and draining more than a square mile,
no development shall be permitted unless the cumulative effect of the
proposals, when combined with all other existing and anticipated uses and
structures, shall not significantly impede or increase the flow and passage of
the floodwaters nor significantly increase the base flood or 100-year frequency
flood elevation.
   A.   Development Permit: No person, firm, corporation, or governmental body,
not exempted by State law, shall commence any development in an SFHA or
floodplain without first obtaining a development permit from the Village
Engineer. Application for a development permit shall be made on a form provided
by the Village Engineer. The application shall be accompanied by drawings of
the site, drawn to scale showing property line dimensions; and existing grade
elevations and all changes in grade resulting from excavation of filling,
sealed by a licensed engineer, architect or surveyor; the location and
dimensions of all buildings and additions to buildings; and the elevation of
the lowest floor (including basement) of all proposed buildings subject to the
requirements of section
6-1-9 of this chapter.
The application for a development permit shall also include the following
information. (Ord. 1289-19, 2-5-2019)
      1.   A detailed description of the proposed activity, its purpose, and
intended use;
      2.   Site location (including legal description) of the property, drawn
to scale, on the regulatory floodway maps, indicating whether it is proposed to
be in an incorporated or unincorporated area;
      3.   Anticipated dates of initiation and completion of activity;
      4.   Plans of the proposed activity shall be provided which include as a
minimum:
         a.   A vicinity map showing the site of the activity, name of the
waterway, boundary lines, names of roads in the vicinity of the site, graphic
or numerical scale, and north arrow; (Ord. 613, 4-5-1995)
         b.   A plan view of the project and engineering study reach showing
existing and proposed conditions including principal dimensions of the
structure or work, elevations in mean sea level (1988 adjustment) datum or
NAVD, adjacent property lines and ownership, drainage and flood control
easements, distance between proposed activity and navigation channel (when the
proposed construction is near a commercially navigable body of water)
floodplain limit, location and orientation of cross- sections, north arrow, and
a graphical or numerical scale; (Ord. 1289-19, 2-5-2019)
         c.   Cross-section views of the project and engineering study reach
showing existing and proposed conditions including principal dimensions of the
work as shown in plan view, existing and proposed elevations, normal water
elevation, 10-year frequency flood elevation, 100-year frequency flood
elevation, and graphical or numerical scales (horizontal and vertical); and
         d.   A soil erosion and sedimentation control plan for disturbed
areas. This plan shall include a description of the sequence of grading
activities and the temporary sediment and erosion control measures to be
implemented to mitigate their effects. This plan shall also include a
description of final stabilization and revegetation measures, and the
identification of a responsible party to ensure post- construction maintenance.
      5.   Engineering calculations and supporting data shall be submitted
showing that the proposed work will meet the criteria of subsection D of this
section.
      6.   Any and all other local, State and Federal permits or approvals that
may be required for this type of development.
   B.   Comparison; Calculation; Documentation: Based on the best available
existing data according to the Illinois State Water Survey's Floodplain
Information Repository, the Village Engineer shall compare the elevation of the
site to the base flood or 100-year frequency flood elevation. Should no
elevation information exist for the site, the developer's engineer shall
calculate the elevation according to subsection
6-1-5D of this chapter. Any development located on land that can be shown to
have been higher than the base flood elevation as of the sites first Flood
Insurance Rate Map identification is not in the SFHA and, therefore, not
subject to the requirements of this chapter. The building official shall
maintain documentation of the existing ground elevation at the development site
and certification that this ground elevation existed prior to the date of the
site's first Flood Insurance Rate Map identification.
   C.   Copies Of Permits: The Village Engineer shall be responsible for
obtaining from the applicant copies of all other local, State, and Federal
permits, approvals or permit- not-required letters that may be required for
this type of activity. The Village Engineer shall not issue the development
permit unless all required local, State and Federal permits have been obtained.
   D.   Preventing Increased Damages: No development in the SFHA, where a
floodway has not been determined shall create a damaging or potentially
damaging increase in flood heights or velocity or threat to public health,
safety and welfare or impair the natural hydrologic and hydraulic functions of
the floodway or channel, or impair existing water quality or aquatic habitat.
Construction impacts shall be minimized by appropriate mitigation methods as
called for in this chapter. (Ord. 613, 4-5-1995)
   E.   Riverine SFHA Standards: Within all riverine SFHAs where the floodway
has not been determined, the following standards shall apply:
      1.   Engineering Requirements And Study: The developer shall have a
registered professional engineer state in writing and show through supporting
plans, calculations, and data that the project meets the engineering
requirements of subsections
6-1-7E1 through E12 of this chapter for the entire floodplain as calculated
under the provisions of section
6-1-5 of this chapter. As an alternative, the developer should have an
engineering study performed to determine a floodway and submit that engineering
study to IDNR/OWR for acceptance as a regulatory floodway. Upon acceptance of
their floodway by the department, the developer shall then demonstrate that the
project meets the requirements of section
6-1-7 of this chapter for the regulatory floodway. The "floodway" shall be
defined according to the definition in section
6-1-2 of this chapter.
      2.   Development Permit: A development permit shall not be issued unless
the applicant first obtains a permit from IDNR/OWR or written documentation
that a permit is not required from IDNR/OWR.
      3.   No Permit Required: No permit from IDNR/OWR shall be required if the
division has delegated permit responsibility to the Village per 17 Illinois
Administrative Code, part 3708 for regulatory floodways, per IDNR/OWR's
Statewide permit entitled "Construction in Floodplains With No Designated
Floodways in Northeastern Illinois".
      4.   Dam Safety Permits: Any work involving the construction,
modification or removal of a "dam" or an on-stream "structure" to impound water
as defined in section
6-1-2 of this chapter shall obtain an IDNR/OWR permit prior to the start of
construction of a dam. If the Village Engineer finds a dam that does not have
an IDNR/OWR permit, the Village Engineer shall immediately notify the IDNR/OWR
Bartlett office. If the Village Engineer finds a dam which is believed to be in
unsafe condition, the Village Engineer shall immediately notify the owner of
the dam, the IDNR/OWR Bartlett office, and the Illinois Emergency Management
Agency (IEMA).
      5.   Permitted Activities: The following activities may be permitted
without a registered professional engineer's review or calculation of a base
flood elevation and regulatory floodway. Such activities shall still meet the
other requirements of this chapter.
         a.   Bridge and culvert crossings of streams in rural areas meeting
conditions of IDNR/OWR Statewide Permit No. 2;
         b.   Barge fleeting facilities meeting conditions of IDNR/OWR
Statewide Permit No. 3;
         c.   Aerial utility crossings meeting conditions of IDNR/OWR Statewide
Permit No. 4;
         d.   Minor boat docks meeting conditions of IDNR/OWR Statewide Permit
No. 5;
         e.   Minor, non-obstructive activities meeting conditions of IDNR/OWR
Statewide Permit No. 6; activities (not involving fill or positive change in
grade) are covered by this permit;
         f.   Outfall structures and drainage ditch outlets meeting conditions
of IDNR/OWR Statewide Permit No. 7;
         g.   Underground pipeline and utility crossings meeting the conditions
of IDNR/OWR Statewide Permit No. 8;
         h.   Bank stabilization projects meeting the conditions of IDNR/OWR
Statewide Permit No. 9;
         i.   Accessory structures and additions to existing residential
buildings meeting the conditions of IDNR/OWR Statewide Permit No. 10;
         j.   Minor maintenance dredging activities meeting conditions of IDNR/
OWR Statewide Permit No. 11;
         k.   Bridge and culvert replacement structures and bridge widenings
meeting conditions of IDNR/OWR Statewide Permit No. 12;
         l.   Temporary construction activities meeting conditions of IDNR/OWR
Statewide Permit No. 13;
         m.   Special uses of public waters meeting conditions of IDNR/OWR
Statewide Permit No. 14; and
         n.   Any development determined by IDNR/OWR to be located entirely
within a flood fringe area shall be exempt from State floodway permit
requirements.
      6.   Maintenance: The flood carrying capacity of any altered or relocated
watercourse shall be maintained. (Ord. 1289-19, 2-5-2019)
   F.   Compensatory Storage: Whenever any portion of a floodplain is
authorized for use, the volume of space which will be occupied by the
authorized fill or structure below the base flood or 100-year frequency flood
elevation shall be compensated for and balanced by a hydraulically equivalent
volume of excavation taken from below the base flood or 100-year frequency
flood elevation. The excavation volume shall be at least equal to one and five-
tenths (1.5) times the volume of storage lost due to the fill or structure. In
the case of streams and watercourses, such excavation shall be made opposite or
adjacent to the areas so filled or occupied. All floodplain storage lost below
the existing 10-year flood elevation shall be replaced below the proposed 10-
year floodplain elevation. All floodplain storage lost above the existing 10-
year flood elevation shall be replaced above the proposed 10-year flood
elevation. All such excavations shall be constructed to drain freely and openly
to the watercourse. (Ord. 613, 4-5-1995)
6-1-9: PERMITTING REQUIREMENTS APPLICABLE TO ALL FLOODPLAIN AREAS:
In addition to the requirements found in sections
6-1-6,
6-1-7 and
6-1-8 of this chapter for development in flood fringes, regulatory floodways,
and SFHA or floodplains where no floodways have been identified (Zones A, AO,
AH, AE, A1-A30, A99, VO, V1-30, VE, V, M or E), the following requirements
shall be met:
   A.   Health Standards: Public health standards.
   B.   Prohibited Materials: No developments in the SFHA shall include
locating or storing chemicals, explosives, buoyant materials, animal wastes,
fertilizers, flammable liquids, pollutants, or other hazardous or toxic
materials below the FPE.
   C.   Aboveground Openings: New and replacement water supply systems, wells,
sanitary sewer lines and on-site waste disposal systems may be permitted
providing all manholes or other aboveground openings located below the FPE are
watertight.
   D.   Carrying Capacity And Notification: For all projects involving channel
modification, fill, or stream maintenance (including levees), the flood
carrying capacity of the watercourses shall be maintained. In addition, the
Village shall notify adjacent communities in writing thirty (30) days prior to
the issuance of a permit for the alteration or relocation of the watercourse.
   E.   Protecting Buildings: All buildings located within a 100-year
floodplain also known as an SFHA, shall be protected from flood damage below
the flood protection elevation. However, existing buildings located within a
regulatory floodway shall also meet the more restrictive appropriate use
standards included in section
6-1-7 of this chapter. This building protection criteria applies to the
following situations:
      1.   Construction or placement of a new building;
      2.   A structural alteration to an existing building that either
increases the first floor area by more than twenty percent (20%) or the
building's market value by more than fifty percent (50%);
      3.   Installing a manufactured home on a new site or a new manufactured
home on an existing site. This building protection requirement does not apply
to returning a mobile home to the same site it lawfully occupied before it was
removed to avoid flood damage; and
      4.   Installing a travel trailer on a site for more than one hundred
eighty (180) days.
This building protection requirement may be met by one of the following
methods.
   F.   Permanent Land Fill Construction: A residential or nonresidential
building, when allowed, may be constructed on permanent land fill in accordance
with the following:
      1.   The lowest floor (including basement) shall be at or above the flood
protection elevation.
      2.   The fill shall be placed in layers no greater than one foot (1')
deep before compaction and should extend at least ten feet (10') beyond the
foundation of the building before sloping below the flood protection elevation.
The top of the fill shall be above the flood protection elevation. However, the
ten foot (10') minimum may be waived if a structural engineer certifies an
alternative method to protect the building from damages due to hydrostatic
pressures. The fill shall be protected against erosion and scour. The fill
shall not adversely effect the flow or surface drainage from or onto
neighboring properties.
   G.   Elevation: A residential or nonresidential building may be elevated in
accordance with the following:
      1.   The building or improvements shall be elevated on crawl space,
stilts, piles, walls, or other foundation that is permanently open to flood
waters and not subject to damage by hydrostatic pressures of the base flood or
100-year frequency flood. The permanent openings shall be no more than one foot
(1') above grade, and consist of a minimum of two (2) openings. The openings
must have a total net area of not less than one square inch for every one
square foot of enclosed area subject to flooding below the base flood
elevation.
      2.   The foundation and supporting members shall be anchored and aligned
in relation to flood flows and adjoining structures so as to minimize exposure
to known hydrodynamic forces such as current, waves, ice and floating debris.
      3.   All areas below the flood protection elevation shall be constructed
of materials resistant to flood damage. The lowest floor (including basement)
and all electrical, heating, ventilating, plumbing, and air conditioning
equipment and utility meters shall be located at or above the flood protection
elevation. Water and sewer pipes, electrical and telephone lines, submersible
pumps, and other waterproofed service facilities may be located below the flood
protection elevation.
      4.   No area below the flood protection elevation shall be used for
storage of items or materials.
      5.   Manufactured homes and travel trailers to be installed on a site for
more than one hundred eighty (180) days, shall be elevated to or above the
flood protection elevation; and, shall be anchored to resist flotation,
collapse, or lateral movement by being tied down in accordance with the rules
and regulations for the Illinois Mobile Home Tie-Down Act issued pursuant to 77
Illinois Administrative Code 870. (Ord. 613, 4-5-1995)
   H.   Dry Floodproofing: Nonconforming structures may be structurally dry
floodproofed (in lieu of elevation) provided that a registered professional
engineer shall certify that the building has been structurally dry floodproofed
below the flood protection elevation, the structure and attendant utility
facilities are watertight and capable of resisting the effects of the base
flood or 100-year frequency flood. The building design shall take into account
flood velocities, duration, rate of rise, hydrostatic and hydrodynamic forces,
the effects of buoyancy, and impacts from debris or ice. Floodproofing measures
shall be operable without human intervention and without an outside source of
electricity (levees, berms, floodwalls and similar works are not considered
floodproofing for the purpose of this subsection). (Ord. 613, 4-5-1995; amd.
Ord. 650, 6-17-1997)
Tool sheds and detached garages on an existing single- family platted lot, may
be constructed with the lowest floor below the flood protection elevation in
accordance with the following:
      1.   The building is not used for human habitation.
      2.   All areas below the base flood or 100-year frequency flood elevation
shall be constructed with waterproof material. Structures located in a
regulatory floodway shall be constructed and placed on a building site so as
not to block the flow of flood waters and shall also meet the appropriate use
criteria of Section
6-1-7 of this Chapter. In addition, all other requirements of Sections
 6-1-6,
6-1-7 and
6-1-8 of this Chapter must be met.
      3.   The structure shall be anchored to prevent flotation.
      4.   Service facilities such as electrical and heating equipment shall be
elevated or floodproofed to the flood protection elevation.
      5.   The building be valued at less than five thousand dollars
($5,000.00) and be less than five hundred (500) square feet in floor size.
      6.   The building shall be used only for the storage of vehicles or tools
and may not contain other rooms, workshops, greenhouses or similar uses.
   I.   Alteration; Restoration: Nonconforming structures located in a
regulatory floodway may remain in use, but may not be enlarged, replaced or
structurally altered. A nonconforming structure damaged by flood, fire, wind or
other natural or manmade disaster may be restored unless the damage exceeds
fifty percent (50%) of its market value before it was damaged, in which case it
shall conform to this Chapter. (Ord. 613, 4-5-1995)
6-1-10: OTHER DEVELOPMENT REQUIREMENTS:
The Board of Trustees shall take into account flood hazards, to the extent that
they are known in all official actions related to land management, use and
development.
   A.   New subdivisions, manufactured home parks, annexation agreements, and
planned unit developments (PUDS) within the SFHA shall be reviewed to assure
that the proposed developments are consistent with Sections
6-1-6,
6-1-7,
6-1-8 and
6-1-9 of this Chapter and the need to minimize flood damage. Plats or plans for
new subdivisions, mobile home parks and planned unit developments (PUDS) shall
include a signed statement by a registered professional engineer that the plant
or plans account for changes in the drainage of surface waters in accordance
with the Plat Act (765 Illinois Compiled Statutes 205/2).
   B.   Proposals for new subdivisions, manufactured home parks, travel trailer
parks, planned unit developments (PUDS) and additions to manufactured home
parks and additions to subdivisions shall include base flood or 100-year
frequency flood elevation data and floodway delineations. Where this
information is not available from an existing study filed with the Illinois
State Water Survey, the applicant's engineer shall be responsible for
calculating the base flood or 100-year frequency flood elevation per Section
6-1-5 and the "floodway delineation" per the definition in Section
6-1-2 of this Chapter and submitting it to the State Water Survey and IDNR/OWR
for review and approval as best available regulatory data.
   C.   Streets, blocks, lots, parks and other public grounds shall be located
and laid out in such a manner as to preserve and utilize natural streams and
channels. Wherever possible, the flood plains shall be included within parks or
other public grounds.
   D.   The Board of Trustees shall not approve any planned unit development
(PUD) or plat of subdivision located outside the corporate limits unless such
agreement or plat is in accordance with the provisions of this Chapter. (Ord.
613, 4-5-95)
6-1-11: VARIANCES:
No variances shall be granted to any development located in a "regulatory
floodway" as defined in Section
6-1-2. However, when a development proposal is located outside of a regulatory
floodway, and whenever the standards of this Chapter place undue hardship on a
specific development proposal, the applicant may apply to the Plan commission
for a variance. The Plan Commission shall review the applicant's request for a
variance and shall submit its recommendation to the Board of Trustees.
   A.   No variance shall be granted unless the applicant demonstrates that:
      1.   The development activity cannot be located outside the SFHA;
      2.   An exceptional hardship would result if the variance were not
granted;
      3.   The relief requested is the minimum necessary;
      4.   There will be no additional threat to public health, safety,
beneficial stream uses and functions, especially aquatic habitat, or creation
of a nuisance;
      5.   There will be no additional public expense for flood protection,
lost environmental stream uses and functions, rescue or relief operations,
policing, or repairs to streambeds and banks, roads, utilities, or other public
facilities;
      6.   The provisions of Sections
6-1-6 and
6-1-8 of this Chapter shall still be met;
      7.   The activity is not in a regulatory floodway;
      8.   The applicant's circumstances are unique and do not represent a
general problem; and
      9.   The granting of the variance will not alter the essential character
of the area involved including existing stream uses.
   B.   The Village Engineer shall notify an applicant in writing that a
variance from the requirements of Section
6-1-9 of this Chapter that would lessen the degree of protection to a building
will:
      1.   Result in increased premium rates for flood insurance up to amounts
as high as twenty five dollars ($25.00) for one hundred dollars ($100.00) of
insurance coverage;
      2.   Increase the risks to life and property; and
      3.   Require that the applicant proceed with knowledge of these risks and
that he will acknowledge in writing that he assumes the risk and liability.
   C.   Variances requested in connection with restoration of a site or
building listed on the national register of historical places or documented as
worthy of preservation by the Illinois historic preservation agency may be
granted using criteria more permissive than the requirements of subsections A
and B of this section. (Ord. 613, 4-5-1995)
6-1-12: DISCLAIMER OF LIABILITY:
The degree of flood protection required by this chapter is considered
reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on available information
derived from engineering and scientific methods of study. Larger floods may
occur or flood heights may be increased by manmade or natural causes. This
chapter does not imply that development either inside or outside of the SFHA,
will be free from flooding or damage. This chapter does not create liability on
the part of the village or any officer or employee thereof for any flood damage
that results from reliance on this chapter or any administrative decision made
lawfully thereunder. (Ord. 613, 4-5-1995)
6-1-13: PENALTY:
Failure to comply with the requirements of a permit or conditions of a variance
resolution shall be deemed to be a violation of this chapter. Upon due
investigation, the village engineer may determine that a violation of the
minimum standards of this chapter exists. The village engineer shall notify the
owner in writing of such violation.
   A.   If such owner fails after ten (10) days' notice to correct the
violation:
      1.   The village may make application to the circuit court for an
injunction requiring conformance with this chapter or make such other order as
the court deems necessary to secure compliance with this chapter. (Ord. 613, 4-
5-1995)
      2.   Any person convicted of a violation of any section or provision of
this chapter shall be punished by a fine as established in section
1-4-1 of this code for any one offense. (Ord. 791, 8-5-2003; amd. Ord. 1061, 4-
20-2010)
      3.   A separate offense shall be deemed committed upon each day during or
on which a violation occurs or continues.
      4.   The village may record a notice of violation on the title to the
property.
   B.   The village engineer shall inform the owner that any such violation is
considered a wilful act to increase flood damages and, therefore, may cause
coverage by a standard flood insurance policy to be suspended.
   C.   Nothing herein shall prevent the village from taking such other lawful
action to prevent or remedy any violations. All costs connected therewith shall
accrue to the person or persons responsible. (Ord. 613, 4-5-1995)
6-1-14: ABROGATION AND GREATER RESTRICTIONS:
This chapter is not intended to repeal, abrogate or impair any existing
easements, covenants, or deed restrictions. Where this chapter and other
ordinances, village code provisions, easements, covenants, or deed restrictions
conflict or overlap, whichever imposes the more stringent restrictions shall
prevail. This chapter is intended to repeal the original ordinance or
resolution which was adopted to meet the national flood insurance program
regulations, but is not intended to repeal the resolution which the village
passed in order to establish initial eligibility for the program. (Ord. 613, 4-
5-1995)
6-1-15: SEPARABILITY:
The provisions and sections of this chapter shall be deemed separable and the
invalidity of any portion of this chapter shall not affect the validity of the
remainder. (Ord. 613, 4-5-1995)
CHAPTER 2
STORM WATER MANAGEMENT
ARTICLE A. AUTHORITY, PURPOSE, AND DEFINITIONS
SECTION:
6-2A-1: Reserved
6-2A-2: Purpose
6-2A-3: Reserved
6-2A-4: Definitions
6-2A-1: RESERVED:
(Ord. 947, 3-20-2007)
6-2A-2: PURPOSE:
The principal purpose of this chapter is to promote effective, equitable,
acceptable, and legal storm water management measures by establishing
reasonable rules and regulations for development. Other purposes of this
chapter include:
   A.   Managing and mitigating the effects of urbanization on storm water
drainage throughout the village through planning, appropriate engineering
practices and proper maintenance;
   B.   Protecting from, and reducing the existing potential for, loss of human
life, and protecting health, safety and property from the hazards of flooding
damages on a watershed basis;
   C.   Preserving and enhancing the natural hydrologic and hydraulic functions
and natural characteristics of watercourses and floodplains to protect water
quality, protect aquatic habitats, reduce flood damages, reduce soil erosion,
provide recreational and aesthetic benefits and enhance community and economic
development;
   D.   Controlling sediment and erosion in and from storm water facilities,
developments, agricultural fields, and construction sites and reducing and
repairing stream bank erosion;
   E.   Requiring that planning for development provide for water resource
management, taking into account natural features such as vegetation, wildlife,
waterways, wetlands, and topography in order to reduce the probability that new
development will create unstable conditions susceptible to erosion;
   F.   Protecting environmentally sensitive areas from deterioration or
destruction by private or public actions;
   G.   Requiring appropriate and adequate provision for site runoff control,
especially when the land is developed with a large amount of impervious
surface;
   H.   Requiring the design and evaluation of each site storm water management
plan consistent with watershed capacities;
   I.   Encouraging the use of storm water storage and infiltration of storm
water in preference to storm water conveyance;
   J.   Lessening the taxpayers' burden for flood related disasters, repairs to
flood damaged public facilities and utilities, and flood rescue and relief
operations;
   K.   Meeting the Illinois department of natural resources, office of water
resources floodway permitting requirements delineated in 615 Illinois Compiled
Statutes 5/18g (1992) ("an act in relation to the regulation of the rivers,
lakes, and streams of the state of Illinois"), as amended from time to time;
   L.   Making federally subsidized flood insurance available in the village by
fulfilling the requirements of the national flood insurance program;
   M.   Complying with the rules and regulations of the national flood
insurance program codified in title 44 of the Code of Federal Regulations;
   N.   Restricting future development in the floodplain to facilities that
will not adversely affect the potential for flood damage;
   O.   Requiring regular, planned maintenance of storm water management
facilities;
   P.   Allowing the use of simple technologies whenever appropriate and
realistic, but requiring the use of more sophisticated techniques when
necessary to ensure the adequacy of storm water controls. (Ord. 947, 3-20-2007)
6-2A-3: RESERVED:
(Ord. 947, 3-20-2007)
6-2A-4: DEFINITIONS:
Within the context of this chapter, the following words and terms shall have
the meanings set forth except where otherwise specifically indicated. Words and
terms not defined shall have the meanings indicated by common dictionary
definition.
   ADMINISTRATIVE VIOLATION: An administrative violation of this chapter occurs
when rules and procedures regarding permit applications and storm water
management permits are not followed.
   ADMINISTRATOR: The person designated by the permitting village to administer
and enforce this chapter.
   AGRICULTURAL REVIEW ADVISORY COMMITTEE: Shall be composed of at least three
(3) Will County residents who live and own and operate or tenant operate at
least sixty (60) contiguous acres of farmland in Will County and
representatives appointed by the following agencies: Will and South Cook soil
and water conservation district, USDA, natural resource conservation service
and Will County farm bureau. The storm water management committee will appoint
these individuals in accordance with article 3, section 1D of the bylaws. The
storm water committee will consider committee member nomination recommendations
from any active Will County agricultural not for profit organization.
   AGRICULTURAL SUBSURFACE DRAINAGE: A water management technique driven by
economic and safety concerns, where the rate at which surplus ground water
should be removed is determined primarily by the moisture/air requirements of
the vegetation (commonly called "tiles", "field tiles", etc.).
   APPLICABLE ENGINEERING PRACTICE: Procedures, methods, or materials
recommended in standard engineering textbooks or references as suitable for the
intended purpose.
   APPLICANT: Any person, firm or governmental agency who executes the
necessary forms to procure official approval of a development or permit to
carry out construction of a development from the village.
   APPROPRIATE USE: Only uses of the designated floodway that are permissible
and will be considered for permit issuance. The list of permissible uses is
contained in article D of this chapter.
   ARMORING: A form of channel modification which involves the placement of
materials (concrete, riprap, bulkheads, etc.) within a stream channel or along
a shoreline to protect property above streams, lakes and ponds from erosion and
wave damage caused by wave action and stream flow.
   BASE FLOOD: The flood having a one percent (1%) probability of being equaled
or exceeded in a given year.
   BASE FLOOD ELEVATION (BFE): The highest water surface elevation that can be
expected during the base flood.
   BEST MANAGEMENT PRACTICES (BMPs): A measure used to control the adverse
storm water related effects of development. BMPs include structural devices
(e.g., swales, filter strips, infiltration trenches, and detention basins)
designed to remove pollutants, reduce runoff rates and volumes, and protect
aquatic habitats. BMPs also include nonstructural approaches, such as public
education efforts to prevent the dumping of household chemicals into storm
drains.
   BOUNCE: The difference between the normal water level and the design high
water level in a wet bottom pond, and the invert of the outlet control and the
design high water level for a dry bottom pond.
   BUFFER: An area of predominantly vegetated land located adjacent to
channels, wetlands, lakes or ponds for the purpose of reducing contaminants in
storm water that flows to such areas.
   BUILDING: A structure that is principally aboveground and is enclosed by
walls and a roof. This term includes a gas or liquid storage tank, a
manufactured home, mobile home or a prefabricated building. This term also
includes recreational vehicles and travel trailers to be installed on a site
for more than one hundred eighty (180) days, unless fully licensed and ready
for highway use.
   BUILDING PERMIT: A permit issued by the village for the construction,
erection or alteration of a structure or building.
   BULKHEAD: A retaining wall that protects property along water.
   BULLETIN 70: "Frequency Distributions And Hydroclimatic Characteristics Of
Heavy Rainstorms In Illinois" by Floyd Huff and James Angel of the Illinois
state water survey (1989).
   BYPASS FLOWS: Storm water runoff or ground water from upstream properties
tributary to a property's drainage system but not under its control.
   COE: The United States army corps of engineers.
   CHANNEL: Any river, stream, creek, brook, branch, natural or artificial
depression, ponded area, flowage, slough, ditch, conduit, culvert, gully,
ravine, wash, or natural or manmade drainageway, which has a definite bed and
bank or shoreline, in or into which surface, ground water, effluent, or
industrial discharges flow either perennially or intermittently.
   CHANNEL MODIFICATION: Alteration of a channel by changing the physical
dimensions or materials of its bed or banks. Channel modification includes
damming, riprapping (or other armoring), widening, deepening, straightening,
relocating, lining, and significant removal of bottom or woody rooted
vegetation but does not include the clearing of debris or removal of trash or
dredging to previously documented thalweg elevations and side slopes.
   CHANNELIZATION: A severe form of channel modification involving a
significant change in the channel cross section and typically involving
relocation of the existing channel (e.g., straightening).
   CLEARING: Any activity which removes vegetative ground cover.
   COMMERCIAL: Sale of goods to the public at large where the traffic generated
warrants construction of site improvements.
   COMMERCIAL REDEVELOPMENT: Development on a parcel upon which the existing
condition is buildings, parking lots and infrastructure associated with
commercial activities. Additions to existing buildings and new impervious
surfaces added after the effective date hereof are specifically excluded from
this definition.
   COMMITTEE: The Will County storm water management committee.
   COMMUNITY: The village of Manhattan.
   COMPENSATORY STORAGE: An excavated, hydrologically and hydraulically
equivalent volume of storage created to offset the loss of existing flood
storage.
   CONDITIONAL LETTER OF MAP AMENDMENT (CLOMA): A FEMA comment letter
conditionally removing a development proposed to be located in, and affecting
only that portion of, the area of floodplain outside the regulatory floodway
and having no impact on the existing regulatory floodway or base flood
elevations.
   CONDITIONAL LETTER OF MAP REVISION (CLOMR): A letter that indicates that
FEMA will revise base flood elevations, flood insurance rate zones, flood
boundaries, or floodways as shown on an effective FIRM or FBFM after the record
drawings are submitted and approved.
   CONSERVATION PLANNING: The practices and procedures associated with the
management of soil, water, plants, plant nutrients and other elements of
agricultural production. Documentation of the management system shall only be
as required by the NRCS or in cases of a complaint, as requested by the
administrator in response to a notification of a complaint.
   CONTROL STRUCTURE: A structure designed to limit the rate of flow that
passes through the structure to a specific rate, given a specific upstream and
downstream water surface elevation.
   COUNTY: Will County, Illinois.
   CRITICAL DURATION: The duration of a storm event that results in the
greatest peak runoff.
   CULVERT: A structure designed to carry drainage water or small streams below
barriers such as roads, driveways, or railway embankments.
   DAM: Any obstruction, wall embankment, or barrier, together with any
abutments and appurtenant works, constructed to store or divert water or to
create a pool (not including underground water storage tanks).
   DEPARTMENT: Will County land use department.
   DEPRESSIONAL AREA: Any area which is lower in elevation on all sides than
surrounding properties (i.e., does not drain freely), or whose drainage is
severely limited such as by a restrictive culvert. A depressional area will
fill with water on occasion when runoff into it exceeds the rate of
infiltration into underlying soil or exceeds the discharge through its
controlled outlet. Large depressional areas may provide significant storm water
or floodplain storage.
   DEPRESSIONAL STORAGE: The volume contained below a closed contour on a one
foot (1') contour interval topographic map, the upper elevation of which is
determined by the invert of a surface gravity outlet.
   DETENTION BASIN (Site Runoff Storage Facility): A constructed structure for
the temporary storage of storm water runoff with a controlled release rate.
   DEVELOPER: A person who creates or causes a development.
   DEVELOPMENT: Any constructed change to real estate including: a)
construction, reconstruction, repair, or replacement of a building or an
addition to a building; b) installing a manufactured home on a site, preparing
a site for a manufactured home, or installing a travel trailer or recreational
vehicle on a site for more than one hundred eighty (180) days. If the travel
trailer or recreational vehicle is on site for less than one hundred eighty
(180) days, it must be fully licensed and ready for highway use; c) drilling,
mining, installing utilities, construction of roads, bridges or similar
projects; d) construction or erection of levees, walls, fences, dams, or
culverts, channel modifications, filling, dredging, grading, excavating,
paving, or other nonagricultural alterations of the ground surface, storage
materials, deposit of solids or liquid waste; e) any other activity of man that
might change the direction, height, or velocity of flood or surface water,
including extensive vegetation removal; f) plowing and cultivation and other
similar agricultural practices that do not involve filling, grading or
construction of levees as regulated in section
6-2B-5 of this chapter. The following are not considered development:
maintenance of existing buildings and facilities such as reroofing or
resurfacing of roads with an impervious surface when there is no increase in
elevation.
   DIRECT DISCHARGE SITES: Parcels of land, or portions thereof, which are
immediately adjacent to the banks of the Des Plaines River, and Chicago
Sanitary and Ship Canal and which are tributary to these waterways in the
natural course of drainage.
   DIRECTOR: The Will County executive or his or her designee charged with
performing the duties specified in this chapter.
   DISTRICT: The lowland conservancy overlay district as defined in section
6-2D-8 of this chapter.
   DRAINAGE AREA: The land area upstream of a given point that may contribute
runoff flow at that point from rainfall.
   EFFECTIVE DATE: The effective date of this chapter: April 3, 2007.
   ELEVATION CERTIFICATES: A form published by FEMA, or its equivalent, that is
used to certify the base flood elevation and the lowest elevation of usable
space to which a building has been constructed.
   EMERGENCY OVERLAND FLOW ROUTE: The flow path of storm water runoff
calculated assuming all enclosed storm sewers are inoperable.
   EPHEMERAL STREAM: A stream whose bed elevation does not intersect the ground
water table; it carries flow only during and immediately after a runoff
producing rainfall event.
   EROSION: The process whereby soil is detached by the action of water or
wind.
   EXCAVATION: Any act by which organic matter, earth, sand, gravel, rock or
any other similar material is cut into, dug, quarried, uncovered, removed,
displaced, relocated or bulldozed and shall include the conditions resulting
therefrom.
   EXISTING GRADE: The vertical location of the existing ground surface prior
to excavation or filling.
   EXISTING MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION: A manufactured home park or
subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on
which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including at a minimum the
installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site
grading or the pouring of concrete pads) has been completed before April 1,
1990.
   EXPANSION TO AN EXISTING MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION: The
preparation of additional sites by the construction of facilities for servicing
the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including the
installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site
grading or the pouring of concrete pads).
   EXTENDED DETENTION: A volume of runoff temporarily detained and released
over a long period of time as specified in section
 6-2B-4-5 of this chapter.
   FEDERAL EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT AGENCY (FEMA): The federal agency and its
regulations, at 44 CFR 59-79, effective as of September 29, 1989, or as
amended.
   FEE IN LIEU OF DETENTION: A fee paid by a developer to the permitting
authority, commensurate with the costs and fee schedules adopted by the county
and/or the certified community based on the detention volume required for the
development to meet the ordinance release rates. Rules and procedures for fee
in lieu of detention are contained in section
6-2M-1 of this chapter.
   FILL: Any act, by which earth, sand, gravel, rock or any other material is
deposited, placed, replaced, pushed, dumped, pulled, transported or moved by
man to a new location and shall include the conditions resulting therefrom.
   FILTERED VIEW: The maintenance or establishment of woody vegetation of
sufficient density to screen developments from a stream or wetland, to provide
for stream bank stabilization and erosion control, to serve as an aid to
infiltration of surface runoff, and to provide cover to shade the water. The
vegetation need not be so dense as to completely block the view. Filtered view
means no clear cutting.
   FINAL GRADE: The vertical location of the ground or pavement surface after
the grading work is completed in accordance with the site development plan.
   FLOOD: A general and temporary condition of partial or complete inundation
of normally dry land areas from overflow of inland or tidal ways or the unusual
and rapid accumulation of runoff of surface waters from any source.
   FLOOD BOUNDARY AND FLOODWAY MAP (FBFM): A floodplain management map issued
by FEMA that depicts, based on detailed analysis, the boundaries of the base
flood, the two tenth percent (0.2%) probability flood, and the floodway.
   FLOOD FREQUENCY: Normally expressed as a period of years, based on a percent
chance of occurrence in any given year from statistical analysis, during which
a flood of a stated magnitude may be expected to be equaled or exceeded. For
example, the 2-year flood frequency has a fifty percent (50%) chance of
occurrence in any given year. Similarly, the 100-year flood frequency has a one
percent (1%) chance of occurrence in any given year.
   FLOOD FRINGE: That portion of the floodplain outside of the designated
floodway.
   FLOOD HAZARD BOUNDARY MAP (FHBM): A map issued by FEMA that is an official
community map, which depicts generalized areas of floodplains, replaced by a
detailed flood insurance study.
   FLOOD INSURANCE RATE MAP (FIRM): A map issued by FEMA that is an official
community map, on which map FEMA has delineated both the special flood hazard
areas and the risk premium zones applicable to the community. This map may or
may not depict floodways.
   FLOOD INSURANCE STUDY (FIS): A study of flood discharges and flood profiles
for a community, adopted and published by FEMA.
   FLOOD PROTECTION ELEVATION (FPE): The elevation of the BFE plus two feet
(2') of freeboard for structures within the plane limits of the base flood
elevation. Outside the plane limits, the water table or 100-year design water
surface elevation of any adjacent stormwater facility, including emergency
overland flow routes, whichever is higher, plus one foot (1') of freeboard.
   FLOODPLAIN (Also Known As SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD AREAS (SFHA)): Any land area
susceptible to being inundated by water from any source, including but not
limited to any areas of known flooding as identified by the Village. Without
limitation, floodplain includes the following:
   A.   Any and all lands within the jurisdiction of the Village that are
subject to inundation by the base flood (the floodplains of the Village are
generally identified as such on panel number(s) 17197 C 0285G, 0295G, 0303G,
0305G, 0310G, 0311G, 0315G, and 0320G of the Countywide Flood Insurance Rate
Map of Will County as prepared by the FEMA and dated February 15, 2019); and
   B.   Any and all parts of unincorporated Will County that are within the
extraterritorial jurisdiction of the Village (or that may be annexed into the
Village) and are subject to inundation by the base flood (the floodplains of
unincorporated Will County described in this section are generally identified
as such on panel number(s) 17197 C 0285G, 0295G, 0303G, 0305G, 0310G, 0311G,
0315G, and 0320G of the Countywide Flood Insurance Rate Map of Will County as
prepared by the FEMA and dated February 15, 2019).
   FLOODPROOF: Any combination of structural and nonstructural additions,
changes or adjustments to structures or property which reduce or eliminate
flood damage to real estate or improved real property, water and sanitary
facilities, structures and their contents.
   FLOODPROOFING CERTIFICATE: A form published by FEMA that is used to certify
that a building has been designed and constructed to be structurally dry
floodproofed to the FPE.
   FLOODWAY CONVEYANCE: The measure of the flow carrying capacity of the
floodway section and is defined using Manning's equation as:
 
K = 1.4863 AR2/3
   n
 
where "n" is Manning's roughness factor, "A" is the effective area of the cross
section, and "R" is ratio of the wetted area to the wetted perimeter.
   FLOODWAY OR DESIGNATED FLOODWAY: The channel, including on- stream lakes,
and that portion of the floodplain adjacent to a stream or watercourse,
generally depicted on the currently- effective FEMA FIRM (as amended from time
to time), which is needed to store and convey the existing 100-year frequency
flood discharge with no more than a 0.1 foot increase in stage due to the loss
of flood conveyance or storage, and no more than a ten percent (10%) increase
in velocities.
   A.   The floodways located within the Village are designated on the
Countywide Flood Insurance Rate Map of Will County prepared by FEMA and dated
February 15, 2019. In the event that two (2) applicable floodway maps exist for
any given waterway, the more restrictive floodway limit shall prevail.
   B.   The floodways located in unincorporated Will County that are within the
extraterritorial jurisdiction of the Village (or that may be annexed into the
Village) are designated on the Countywide Flood Insurance Rate Map of Will
County prepared by FEMA and dated February 15, 2019. In the event that two (2)
applicable floodway maps exist for any given waterway, the more restrictive
floodway limit shall prevail.
   C.   To locate the designated floodway boundary on any site, the designated
floodway boundary should be scaled off the designated floodway map and located
on a site plan, using reference marks common to both maps. Where interpretation
is needed to determine the exact location of the designated floodway boundary,
IDNR/OWR should be contacted for the interpretation.
   FREEBOARD: An increment of height added to the BFE or 100-year design water
surface elevation to provide a factor of safety for uncertainties in
calculations, unknown local conditions, wave actions and unpredictable effects
such as those caused by ice or debris jams.
   FUNCTIONAL: In the context of the usage in this chapter, functional refers
to stormwater facilities, which serve their primary purpose of meeting
developed release rate requirements but do not meet all of the final design
conditions. For example, a detention basin, which has been excavated but has
not had the side slopes graded, nor the final landscaping placed, may be
considered "functional" as a site runoff storage facility.
   GOOD HUSBANDRY: Generally accepted agricultural practices found in good farm
management.
   GRADING: Excavation or fill or any combination thereof and shall include the
conditions resulting from any excavation or fill.
   GROUND WATER (Also Known As SUBSURFACE WATER): Water that is located within
soil or rock below the surface of the earth.
   GROUND WATER CONTROL SYSTEM: A design system which may consist of tiles,
under drains, French drains, or other appropriate stormwater facilities, the
purpose of which is to lower the ground water table to a predictable elevation
throughout the year.
   HISTORIC STRUCTURE: Any structure that is: a) listed individually in the
National Register of Historic Places, or preliminarily determined by the
Secretary of the Interior as meeting the requirements for individual listing on
the National Register; b) certified or preliminarily determined by the
Secretary of the Interior as contributing to the Historic District or a
district preliminarily determined by the Secretary to qualify as a registered
historic district; c) individually listed on the State Inventory of Historic
Places by the Illinois Historic Preservation Agency; d) individually listed on
a local Inventory of Historic Places that has been certified by the Illinois
Historic Preservation Agency.
   HYDRAULIC CHARACTERISTICS: The features of a watercourse that determine its
water conveyance capacity. These features include, but are not limited to, size
and configuration of the cross section of the watercourse and floodway; texture
and roughness of materials along the watercourse; alignment of watercourse;
gradient of watercourse; amount and type of vegetation within the watercourse;
and size, configuration, and other characteristics of structures within the
watercourse. In low lying areas, the characteristics of the overbank area also
determine water conveyance capacity.
   HYDRAULICALLY CONNECTED IMPERVIOUS AREA: Shall consist of those areas of
concrete, asphalt and gravel surfaces along with rooftops which convey flows
directly to an improved drainage system consisting of storm sewers or paved
channels. Rooftops whose downspouts discharge to unpaved surfaces which are
designed for the absorption and filtration of stormwater runoff shall not be
considered as hydraulically connected impervious surfaces. Roadways whose
primary conveyance is through open ditches and swales shall not be considered
as hydraulically connected impervious surface. Roadways drained by curb and
gutter and storm sewer, and driveways hydraulically connected to those
roadways, shall be considered as directly connected impervious surface.
   HYDRAULICALLY EQUIVALENT COMPENSATORY STORAGE: Compensatory storage either
adjacent to the floodplain fill or not located adjacent to the development but
can be shown by hydrologic and hydraulic analysis to be equivalent to
compensatory storage located adjacent to the development.
   HYDRAULICS: The science and study of the mechanical behavior of water in
physical systems and processes.
   HYDROLOGICALLY DISTURBED: An area where the land surface has been cleared,
grubbed, compacted, or otherwise modified that changes runoff, volumes, rates,
or direction.
   HYDROLOGY: The science of the behavior of water, including its dynamics,
composition, and distribution in the atmosphere, on the surface of the earth,
and underground.
   IDNR/OWR: The Illinois Department of Natural Resources, Office of Water
Resources.
   IMPERVIOUS: Surfaces that cause the majority of rainfall to be converted to
direct runoff. Asphalt, concrete and roofing systems are to be considered
impervious.
   INDUSTRIAL REDEVELOPMENT: Development on a parcel upon which the existing
condition is buildings, parking lots and infrastructure associated with
industrial activities. Additions to existing buildings and new impervious
surfaces added after the effective date hereof are specifically excluded from
consideration as industrial redevelopment.
   INTERIM WATERSHED PLAN: A regional study of a watershed which does not
address the entire range of purposes, goals and objectives outlined in the
Countywide stormwater management plan approved by the committee and adopted by
the County.
   INTERMITTENT STREAM: A stream whose bed intersects the ground water table
for only a portion of the year on the average or any stream which flows
continuously for at least one month out of the year but not the entire year.
   LAKE: A natural or artificial body of water encompassing an area of two (2)
or more acres, which retains water throughout the year.
   LETTER OF MAP AMENDMENT (LOMA): The official determination by FEMA that a
specific structure is not in a regulatory floodplain. A LOMA amends the
effective FHBM, FBFM, or FIRM.
   LETTER OF MAP REVISION (LOMR): A letter from FEMA that revises base flood
elevations, flood insurance rate zones, flood boundaries, or floodway as shown
on an effective FHBM, FBFM, or FIRM.
   LOT: An area of land, with defined boundaries, that is designated in
official assessor's records as being one parcel.
   MAJOR STORMWATER SYSTEM: That portion of a stormwater facility needed to
store and convey flows beyond the capacity of the minor stormwater system.
   MANUFACTURED HOME: A structure transportable in one or more sections, which
is built on a permanent chassis and is designed for use with or without a
permanent foundation when attached to the required utilities. The term
manufactured home also includes park trailers, travel trailers, and other
similar vehicles placed on site for more than one hundred eighty (180)
consecutive days. The term manufactured home does not include a recreational
vehicle.
   MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION: A parcel (or contiguous parcels) of
land divided into two (2) or more manufactured home lots for rent or sale.
   MASS GRADING: Development in which the primary activity is a change in
topography affected by the movement of earth materials.
   MINOR STORMWATER SYSTEM: Shall consist of all infrastructure including curb,
gutter, culverts, roadside ditches and swales, storm sewers, and subsurface
drainage systems intended to convey stormwater runoff at less than a 100-year
flood frequency. The design frequency for minor stormwater systems shall be in
accordance with the applicable ordinances of the local community, or Highway
Department jurisdiction.
   MITIGATION: Measures taken to offset negative impacts from development in
wetlands or the floodplain.
   NAVD 88: National American Vertical Datum of 1988. NAVD 88 supersedes the
National Geodetic Vertical Datum of 1929 (NGVD).
   NRCS: The United States Department of Agriculture, Natural Resources
Conservation Service.
   NATIONAL FLOOD INSURANCE PROGRAM (NFIP): A Federal program whose
requirements are codified in title 44 of the Code of Federal Regulations.
   NATURAL: In reference to watercourses, means those stream channels, grassed
waterways and swales formed by the existing surface topography of the earth
prior to changes made by unnatural causes. A natural stream tends to follow a
meandering path; its floodplain is not constrained by levees; the area near the
bank has not been cleared, mowed or cultivated; the stream flows over soil and
geologic materials typical of the area with no alteration of the course or
cross section of the stream caused by filling or excavating.
   NATURAL DRAINAGE: Channels formed in the existing surface topography of the
earth prior to changes caused by unnatural causes.
   NET BENEFIT IN WATER QUALITY: The institution of Best Management Practices
as part of a development that when compared to the predevelopment condition can
be judged to reduce downstream sediment loading or pollutant loadings.
   NET WATERSHED BENEFIT: A finding that, when compared to the existing
condition, the developed project will do one of the following: substantially
reduce (more than 10 percent) downstream peak discharges; reduce downstream
flood stages (more than 0.1 foot); or reduce downstream damages to structures
occurring in the predevelopment condition. The demonstration of one of these
conditions must be through detailed hydrologic and hydraulic analysis of
watersheds on a regional scale as approved by the Administrator.
   NEW MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION: A manufactured home park or
subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on
which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including at a minimum the
installation of utilities, the construction of streets and either final site
grading or the pouring of concrete pads) has been completed on or after April
1, 1990.
   NONRIVERINE: Areas not associated with a stream or river such as isolated
depressional storage areas, ponds and lakes.
   OBSERVATION STRUCTURES: Structures built on a field tile where the pipe
inflow and outflow is visible upon removal of a lid.
   OPEN CHANNEL: A conveyance system with a definable bed and banks carrying
the discharge from field tiles and surface drainage. Open channels do not
include grassed swales within farm fields under agricultural production, which
are ephemeral in nature.
   ORDINARY HIGH WATER MARK (OHWM): The point on the bank or shore up to which
the presence and action of surface water is so continuous so as to leave a
distinctive mark, such as by erosion, destruction or prevention of terrestrial
vegetation, predominance of aquatic vegetation, or other easily recognized
characteristic.
   OVERLAND FLOW PATH: A design feature of the major stormwater system which
carries flows in excess of the minor stormwater system design capacity in an
open channel or swale, or as sheet flow or weir flow over a feature designed to
withstand the particular erosive forces involved.
   OVERSIGHT COMMITTEE: The Village's Planning and Zoning Commission (PZC). See
section
6-2J-5 of this chapter.
   PARCEL: All contiguous land under common ownership or control including
right(s)-of-way to be dedicated in conjunction with the proposed development.
   PERENNIAL STREAMS: Riverine watercourses whose thalweg generally intersects
the ground water table elevation and flows throughout the year.
   PERMITTING AUTHORITY: The Village of Manhattan.
   PLAN: The Will County comprehensive Countywide stormwater management plan,
adopted by the Will County Board on October 13, 1998, as amended from time to
time.
   POND: Any inland water body, fed by spring or surface water flow that is not
a lake.
   PRIMARY GRAVITY OUTLET: The outlet structure designed to meet the release
rate requirements of this chapter.
   PROFESSIONAL ENGINEER: An engineer registered in the State of Illinois,
under the Illinois Professional Engineering Practice Act 1 , as amended.
   PROFESSIONAL LAND SURVEYOR: A land surveyor registered in the State of
Illinois, under the Illinois Land Surveyors Act 2 , as amended.
   PROPERTY: Contiguous land under single ownership or control.
   PUBLIC BODIES OF WATER: All open public streams and lakes capable of being
navigated by watercraft in whole or in part for commercial uses and purposes
and all lakes, rivers and streams, which in their natural conditions were
capable of being improved and made navigable, or that are connected with or
discharge their waters into navigable lakes or rivers within, or upon, the
borders of the State of Illinois, together with all bayous, sloughs,
backwaters, and submerged lands that are open to the main channel or body of
water directly accessible thereto.
   PUBLIC FLOOD CONTROL PROJECT: A flood control project which will be operated
and maintained by a public agency to reduce flood damages to existing buildings
and structures, which includes a hydrologic and hydraulic study of the existing
and proposed conditions of the watershed. Nothing in this definition shall
preclude the design, engineering, construction or financing in whole or in part
of a flood control project by persons or parties who are not public agencies.
   PUBLIC FLOOD EASEMENT: An easement acceptable to the appropriate
jurisdictional body that meets the regulations of the IDNR/OWR, the department,
and the community, and that provides legal assurances that all areas subject to
flooding in the created backwater of the development will remain open to allow
flooding.
   QUALIFIED PROFESSIONAL: A person trained in one or more of the disciplines
of biology, geology, soil science, engineering, or hydrology whose training and
experience ensure a competent analysis and assessment of stream, lake, pond and
wetland conditions and impacts.
   RECORD DRAWINGS: Drawings prepared, signed, and sealed by a registered
professional engineer or registered land surveyor representing the final "as
built" record of the actual in-place elevations, location of structures, and
topography.
   RECREATIONAL VEHICLE OR TRAVEL TRAILER: A vehicle which is: a) built on a
single chassis; b) four hundred (400) square feet or less when measured at the
largest horizontal projection; c) designed to be self-propelled or permanently
towable by a light duty truck; and d) designed primarily not for use as a
permanent dwelling, but as a temporary living quarters for recreational camping
travel or seasonal use.
   REGISTERED STRUCTURAL ENGINEER: A person licensed under the laws of the
State of Illinois as a structural engineer.
   REGULATORY FLOODPLAIN: See definition of floodplain.
   REGULATORY FLOODWAY: Those portions of the floodplain depicted on maps as
floodway and recognized by the IDNR/OWR for regulatory purposes.
   REMOVAL: Cutting vegetation to the ground or stumps, complete extraction, or
killing by spraying.
   RETENTION FACILITY: Stores stormwater runoff without a gravity release.
   RIVERINE: Related to, formed by, or resembling a channel (including creeks
and rivers).
   RUNOFF: The waters derived from melting snow or rain falling within a
tributary drainage basin that exceeds the infiltration capacity of the soils of
that basin.
   SEASONAL HIGH GROUND WATER TABLE: The upper limits of the soil temporarily
saturated with water, being usually associated with spring wetness conditions.
This may be indicated by soil mottles with a Munsell color of 2 chroma or less.
   SEDIMENT TRAP: A structure or area that allows for the temporary deposit and
removal or disposal of sediment materials from stormwater runoff.
   SEDIMENTATION: The process that deposits hydraulically moved soils, debris,
and other materials either on other ground surfaces or in bodies of water or
stormwater drainage systems.
   SEEPAGE: The movement of drainable water through soil and rock.
   SETBACK: The horizontal distance between any portion of a structure or any
development activity and the ordinary high water mark of a perennial or
intermittent stream, the ordinary high water mark of a lake or pond, or the
edge of a wetland, measured from the structure's or development's closest point
to the ordinary high water mark, or edge.
   SITE: A parcel on which development is proposed or has occurred. The area of
the site shall include right-of-way to be dedicated in conjunction with the
development.
   SITE DEVELOPMENT PERMIT: A permit issued by the Village which permits
development, or limited development, of a site in accordance with approved
plans and in accordance with this chapter.
   SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD AREA (SFHA): An area having special flood, mudslide or
mudflow, or flood related erosion hazards, and which area is shown on an FHBM
or FIRM as Zone A, AO, A1-30, AE, A99, AH, VO, V1-30, VE, V, M, or E.
   STORMWATER FACILITY: All ditches, channels, conduits, bridges, culverts,
levees, ponds, natural and manmade impoundments, wetlands, riparian
environment, tile, swales, sewers, or other natural or artificial structures or
measures which serve as a means of draining surface and subsurface water from
land.
   STORMWATER MANAGEMENT PERMIT: The permit issued under article E of this
chapter.
   STRUCTURE: The results of a built change to the land constructed on or below
the ground, including the construction, reconstruction or placement of a
building or any addition to a building; installing a manufactured home on a
site; preparing a site for a manufactured home or installing a travel trailer
on a site for more than one hundred eighty (180) days unless they are fully
licensed and ready for highway use.
   SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVEMENT: If any one of the following conditions applies when
work is performed on an existing building then the work will be classified as a
substantial improvement: a) an improvement made to a building whose cost is
equal to or exceeds fifty percent (50%) of the building's market value before
the improvement; b) reconstruction or repair of a building, the cost of which
equals or exceeds fifty percent (50%) of the market value of the building
before reconstruction or repair; or c) additions to an existing building, the
cost of which equals or exceeds fifty percent (50%) of the market value of a
structure, or increases the floor area by more than twenty percent (20%). Note
that if a building is substantially improved, then the entire building must
comply with the building protection standards.
   SUBSURFACE DRAINAGE: The removal of excess soil water to control water table
levels at predetermined elevations for structural, environmental or other
reasons in areas already developed or being developed for agricultural,
residential, industrial, commercial, or recreational uses.
   SUBSURFACE WATER: Water beneath the ground or pavement surface. Sometimes
referred to as ground water or soil water.
T FACTOR: The soil loss tolerance. It is defined as the maximum amount of
erosion at which the quality of a soil as a medium for plant growth can be
maintained. Erosion losses are estimated by universal soil loss equation (USLE)
and revised universal soil loss equation (RUSLE).
   TECHNICAL MANUAL: The manual adopted by the County Board, which refers to
this chapter and provides additional explanations and examples.
   THALWEG: A line along the lowest point in a channel.
   TRANSITION SECTION: Reaches of the stream or floodway where water flows from
a narrow cross section to a wide cross section, or vice versa.
   USABLE SPACE: Space used for dwelling, storage, utilities, or other
beneficial purposes, including, without limitation, basements.
   VEGETATION: All plant growth, especially trees, shrubs, mosses, and grasses.
   VILLAGE: The Village of Manhattan, Will County, Illinois.
   WATER TABLE: The upper limit of a free water surface in a saturated soil or
underlying material.
   WATERCOURSE: Any river, stream, creek, brook, branch, natural or artificial
depression, ponded area, slough, gulch, draw, ditch, channel, conduit, culvert,
swale, grass waterway, gully, ravine, wash, or natural or manmade drainageway,
which has a definite channel, bed and banks, in or into which stormwater runoff
and floodwater flow either regularly or intermittently.
   WATERS OF THE U.S.: As defined by the United States Army Corps of Engineers
in their Federal methodology for the regulation of wetlands. For purposes of
this chapter, waters of the U.S. include wetlands, lakes, rivers, streams,
creeks, bogs, fens, and ponds. Waters of the U.S. do not include maintained
stormwater facilities.
   WATERSHED: All land area drained by, or contributing water to, the same
stream, lake, stormwater facility, or draining to a point.
   WATERSHED BENEFIT: See definition of net watershed benefit.
   WATERSHED CHARACTERISTICS: Includes land use, physiology, habitat, climate,
drainage system and community profile.
   WATERSHED PLAN: A study and evaluation of an individual drainage basin's
stormwater management, floodplain management, water quality and flood control
needs and capabilities.
   WETLAND: An area of land, which meets the criteria as defined in current
Federal methodology recognized by the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers whether or
not the area of land is subject to the regulatory authority of U.S. Army Corps
of Engineers or any other regulatory authority. (Ord. 947, 3-20-2007; amd. Ord.
1288-19, 2-5-2019)
 
Notes
1 1. 225 ILCS 325/1 et seq.
2 2. 225 ILCS 330/1 et seq.
ARTICLE B. REQUIREMENTS FOR STORM WATER MANAGEMENT
SECTION:
6-2B-1: General Information
6-2B-1-1: Other Applicable Articles
6-2B-1-2: Applicability Of Site Runoff Storage Requirements (Detention)
6-2B-2: General Storm Water Requirements
6-2B-2-1: Requirements Applicable To All Development
6-2B-2-2: Requirements Applicable To All Subdivisions And Commercial
Developments
6-2B-2-3: Building Permits
6-2B-2-4: Single Parcel Developments
6-2B-2-5: Overland Flow Paths
6-2B-2-6: Protection Of Buildings
6-2B-2-7: Depressional Storage
6-2B-3: Site Runoff Requirements
6-2B-3-1: Storm Water Facility Discharges
6-2B-3-2: Minor Storm Water System Criteria
6-2B-3-3: Major Storm Water System Criteria
6-2B-3-4: Existing Subsurface And Surface Drainage Systems
6-2B-3-5: Design Runoff Rate
6-2B-3-6: Design Rainfall
6-2B-3-7: Storm Water System Easements
6-2B-3-8: Flow Depths
6-2B-3-9: Diversion Of Flow To Another Watershed
6-2B-3-10: Best Management Practices Requirements
6-2B-4: Site Runoff Storage Requirements (Detention/Extended Detention)
6-2B-4-1: Release Rate
6-2B-4-2: Design Methods
6-2B-4-3: Existing Release Rate Less Than Allowable
6-2B-4-4: Downstream Water Surface Elevations
6-2B-4-5: Extended Detention Requirement
6-2B-4-6: Site Runoff Storage Facility Design Requirements
6-2B-4-7: Site Runoff Storage Facility Requirements Within The Regulatory
Floodplain
6-2B-4-8: Site Runoff Storage Facility Requirements Within The Regulatory
Floodway
6-2B-4-9: Reserved
6-2B-4-10: Off Site Facilities
6-2B-4-11: Reserved
6-2B-4-12: Cross Stream Structures For Site Runoff Storage Facilities
6-2B-5: Storm Water Requirements For Agricultural Land Use Including Croplands,
Pasturelands And Farmsteads
6-2B-5-1: Conservation Planning And Performance Standards
6-2B-5-2: Drainage Practices, Requirements And Design Criteria
6-2B-5-3: Sediment Control For Open Channels
6-2B-5-4: Maintenance And Construction Of Drainage Systems
6-2B-1: GENERAL INFORMATION:
6-2B-1-1: OTHER APPLICABLE ARTICLES:
All developments shall meet the requirements specified for general storm water
development (section
6-2B-2 of this article), site runoff (section
 6-2B-3 of this article), sediment and erosion control (article C of this
chapter), performance security and maintenance (article F of this chapter).
(Ord. 947, 3-20-2007)
6-2B-1-2: APPLICABILITY OF SITE RUNOFF STORAGE REQUIREMENTS (DETENTION):
All developments shall comply with the site runoff storage requirements
provided in section
6-2B-4 of this article in which:
   A.   More than two (2) single-family structures or one multi-family
structure are to be constructed on a parcel or site more than one acre in size;
   B.   Nonresidential land use is to be constructed on a parcel or site more
than one acre in size;
   C.   Existing multi-family or nonresidential land uses on a site one acre or
more in size, on which new development after the effective date hereof in the
aggregate exceeds twenty five thousand (25,000) square feet;
   D.   Roadway developments in rights of way under the ownership or control of
a unit of local governments when the contiguous area of new roadway
construction (excluding previously paved areas) exceeds two (2) acres;
   E.   The developer of a commercial or industrial redevelopment may request
that a fee in lieu of detention be approved provided that all of the following
are demonstrated to the sole satisfaction of the administrator:
      1.   The drainage plan will not increase existing flood damages, and
      2.   The drainage plan provides a net benefit in water quality compared
to the existing development.
The administrator shall determine the appropriate fee to be collected as
defined in article M of this chapter, and his or her decision in the matter
shall be considered final. (Ord. 947, 3-20-2007)
6-2B-2: GENERAL STORM WATER REQUIREMENTS:
6-2B-2-1: REQUIREMENTS APPLICABLE TO ALL DEVELOPMENT:
No development shall:
   A.   Result in any new or additional expense to any person other than the
developer for flood protection; nor
   B.   Increase flood elevations or decrease flood conveyance capacity
upstream or downstream of the area under the ownership or control of the
developer. This requirement shall not prohibit the removal or reduction of
built obstructions to flow, such as increasing culvert capacity or lowering
roadway elevations; nor
   C.   Increase runoff rates (from the 10-year event up to the 100-year event)
to any downstream properties unless the developer can demonstrate that the
increased runoff rates can be safely conveyed via storm sewers, ditches (if
allowed), or overland flow paths to the next downstream receiving stream, lake
or pond. If the developer is significantly raising runoff rates to downstream
properties and cannot demonstrate downstream conveyance capacity, some amount
of on site storm water management may be required in order to reduce the
proposed runoff rate down to existing runoff rates. (Ord. 947, 3-20-2007)
6-2B-2-2: REQUIREMENTS APPLICABLE TO ALL SUBDIVISIONS AND COMMERCIAL
DEVELOPMENTS:
All developments shall:
   A.   Extend the storm sewer system through the proposed development to serve
upstream properties in the natural drainage area. The storm sewer system should
reflect the ultimate development of the drainage area.
   B.   Provide a storm water drainage system that consists of a minor drainage
system, a major drainage system and an emergency overland flow route.
   C.   The storm sewer drainage system is assumed to consist of such
components as sewers, channels, swales, natural drainageways, inlets, catch
basins, manholes, streets, detention/retention basins, and other necessary
facilities.
   D.   The engineering plans shall have a certification by a registered
professional engineer as follows:
To the best of our knowledge and belief the drainage of surface waters will not
be changed by the construction of such subdivision or any part thereof or that
if such surface water drainage will change, adequate provision has been made
for the collection and diversion of such surface waters into public areas or
drains which the subdivider has a right to use, and that such surface waters
will not be deposited on the property of adjoining land owners in such
concentrations as may cause damage to the adjoining property because of the
construction of the subdivision.
Dated at              , this       day of      , A.D. 20   .
                                                         (Seal)
      Design Engineer
   E.   The storm sewer system shall be entirely separate from the sanitary
sewer system.
   F.   Storm sewers shall be designed to convey the peak flow from a 10-year
rainfall event with a hydraulic grade line that is entirely within the pipe.
Rainfall frequency data shall be obtained from the table attached to the
ordinance codified herein. Storm sewers and outfalls shall be designed to
function at their design capacity during flooding conditions on the receiving
stream or other body of water.
   G.   The storm sewers shall be a minimum of twelve inches (12") in diameter
and shall be constructed of reinforced concrete pipe only.
   H.   No ditch system shall be permitted on any new site developments. The
minor drainage system shall be constructed so that the drainage from each lot
or parcel is conveyed entirely through storm sewer pipe.
   I.   The major drainage system may be permitted to flow over roadways, rear
yard and side yard swales, and other open conveyances as long as the maximum
depth of ponding or flow is no more than nine inches (9") on pavement and one
foot (1') at any other location and the maximum water surface elevation is at
least one foot (1') below the lowest opening of any nearby structure. The
design of the major drainage system may account for the minor drainage system
(storm sewers) to be fully functional. No flow is allowed over the road,
perpendicular to the roadway.
   J.   Rear yard and side yard swales shall meet the following conditions:
      1.   The maximum side slopes shall be a four to one (4:1) ratio.
      2.   The appropriate easements are provided, a minimum of twenty feet
(20') wide.
   K.   Inlets/catch basins on roadways shall be located as necessary to
collect surface water, but spacing shall not exceed a maximum of four hundred
feet (400'). Inlets shall only be used for the first "run" and catch basins
shall be placed before a storm sewer enters a manhole. Manholes shall be
located at the junction of two (2) or more storm sewer pipes or at any change
in grade alignment or size of pipe. Maximum spacing of manholes shall be per
the village subdivision and development regulations.
   L.   All storm sewers shall use materials, and be installed in the manner
meeting or exceeding the requirements, standards, and specifications contained
in the "Standard Specifications For Water And Sewer Main Construction In
Illinois", the most current edition as amended, supplemented and amended by the
village engineer. These standards and specifications, with the modifications,
amendments, and amplifications of the village engineer, are available for
purchase or inspection and review in the office of the village engineer.
   M.   Where applicable, the developer shall install storm systems sufficient
in size and depth to carry the storm runoff from upstream properties naturally
tributary to the proposed subdivision. The village shall make special
provisions for that developer to recapture those additional costs incurred as a
result of oversizing and/or overexcavating the storm sewer system. (Ord. 947,
3-20-2007)
6-2B-2-3: BUILDING PERMITS:
Storm water facilities shall be functional before building permits are issued
for residential and nonresidential subdivision. (Ord. 947, 3-20-2007)
6-2B-2-4: SINGLE PARCEL DEVELOPMENTS:
Storm water facilities shall be functional where practicable for single parcel
developments before building construction begins. (Ord. 947, 3-20-2007)
6-2B-2-5: OVERLAND FLOW PATHS:
The development shall have an overland flow path at the downstream limit of the
property that will pass the base flood flow without increasing damage to
structures or property. Overland flow paths internal to the site shall be
considered as part of the major storm water system and shall be designed for
conveyance of the base flood (critical duration) and shall be a minimum of one
cfs per tributary acre without damage to structures. If the storm sewer pipe
and inlet sized for the base flood can be constructed in lieu of providing an
overland flow path as a part of the major drainage system, then the overland
flow path shall be considered an emergency overland flow path and it shall not
be considered a part of the major storm water system but must still meet the
protection of buildings criteria in section
6-2B-2-6 of this article.
For all overland flow routes, whether a part of the major drainage system or an
emergency overland flow route, the water surface elevation for determining the
FPE (flood protection elevation) shall be calculated assuming that the storm
sewers are inoperable.
Structures of any kind, including fences, shall not be permitted in overland
flow paths draining more than twenty (20) acres, unless the structures are
otherwise permissible and certified by a professional engineer or professional
landscape architect that the proposed structure will not cause any adverse
upstream impacts as a result of blocking or impeding the flow of storm water. A
fence, if permitted, shall conform to the village's fence ordinance provisions
for fences located in drainage easements as applicable. (Ord. 947, 3-20-2007)
6-2B-2-6: PROTECTION OF BUILDINGS:
All usable space in new buildings or added to existing buildings hydraulically
connected to a major storm water system, site runoff storage facility, or
overland flow path shall be elevated, floodproofed, or otherwise protected to
at least the FPE. (Ord. 947, 3-20-2007)
6-2B-2-7: DEPRESSIONAL STORAGE:
The function of existing on site depressional storage shall be preserved for
both on site and off site tributary flows in addition to required detention.
When depressional storage is removed it must be compensated for in the site
runoff storage facility at a one to one (1:1) ratio provided that off site
areas tributary to the existing depressional storage are routed through the
site runoff storage facility. This requirement is in addition to the site
runoff storage required in section
6-2B-4 of this article. The administrator may allow the function of
depressional storage to be preserved if the applicant performs detailed
preproject and postproject hydrologic and hydraulic modeling to identify the
effect of the depressional storage on discharges over a range of rainfall
frequencies. (Ord. 947, 3-20-2007)
6-2B-3: SITE RUNOFF REQUIREMENTS:
6-2B-3-1: STORM WATER FACILITY DISCHARGES:
Storm water facilities shall be required and designed so that runoff exits the
site at a point where it exited prior to the subject development and in a
manner such that flows will not increase flood damage to adjacent property
except when otherwise approved by the administrator. Concentrated discharges
from new developments must enter conveyance systems capable of carrying the
design flow rate without increasing flood damages or maintenance costs
downstream. (Ord. 947, 3-20-2007)
6-2B-3-2: MINOR STORM WATER SYSTEM CRITERIA:
Minor storm water systems shall be sized to convey runoff from the tributary
watershed under fully developed conditions for the 10-year storm event. Minor
storm water systems shall be enclosed systems (e.g., storm sewers) unless
otherwise approved by the administrator. (Ord. 947, 3-20-2007)
6-2B-3-3: MAJOR STORM WATER SYSTEM CRITERIA:
Major storm water systems shall be sized to carry the base flood without
causing additional flood damage. Maximum flow depths shall be nine inches (9")
in streets, parking lots and driveways, except that parking lots and driveways
intended for access only by commercial trucks may permit maximum flow depths of
twelve inches (12"). The maximum depth of flow in nonpaved drainage easements
shall be twelve inches (12"). The tail water used for the major drainage system
shall be the 10-year water surface elevation in the receiving system or, in the
case of storm water detention facilities, the 2-year design water surface
elevation plus one foot (1'). (Ord. 947, 3-20-2007)
6-2B-3-4: EXISTING SUBSURFACE AND SURFACE DRAINAGE SYSTEMS:
Storm water systems shall properly incorporate and be compatible with existing
subsurface and surface drainage systems including agricultural systems. Designs
shall not cause damage to the existing drainage system(s) or the existing
adjacent or tributary land including those with agricultural uses.
The following principles and requirements shall be observed in the design:
   A.   Off Site Outfall: Agricultural subsurface and surface drainage systems
shall be evaluated with regard to their capacity and capability to properly
convey low flow ground water and site runoff storage facility release without
damage to downstream structure and land use on the adjacent property. If the
outfall drain tile and surface drainage systems prove to be inadequate it will
be necessary to modify the existing systems or construct new systems which will
not conflict with the existing systems and will not impact the existing
agricultural land use. Existing subsurface systems shall only be used with
extended detention design and at the discretion of the administrator.
   B.   On Site: Agricultural drainage systems shall be located and evaluated
on site. All existing on site agricultural drain tile not serving a beneficial
use shall be abandoned by trench removal prior to other development and
recorded on record plans. If any existing drain tiles continue to upland
watersheds the developer must maintain drainage service during construction
until new sewers can be installed for a permanent connection.
   C.   Off Site Tributary: Existing drainage systems shall be evaluated with
regard to existing capabilities and reasonable future expansion capacities. All
existing tributary drain tiles shall be incorporated into the new conduits
including observation structures located at the property limits, shall provide
a free flow discharge and shall not allow surface runoff to enter the system.
   D.   New Roadway Construction: New roadway construction shall preserve
existing subsurface systems within the right of way. Inspection wells shall be
placed at the right of way (ROW) and tiles found to not be flowing between
inspection wells at the end of the construction shall be replaced. (Ord. 947,
3-20-2007)
6-2B-3-5: DESIGN RUNOFF RATE:
Design runoff rates for conveyance (i.e., pipe design) may be calculated using
the rational method for drainage areas of less than twenty (20) acres. For
drainage areas greater than twenty (20) acres the administrator may require the
use of hydrograph routing. (Ord. 947, 3-20-2007)
6-2B-3-6: DESIGN RAINFALL:
Any design runoff rate calculation method for conveyance shall use the data
presented in table 1, "Will County Storm Water Technical Guidance Manual
Rainfall Depths And Intensities", attached to the ordinance codified herein.
(Ord. 947, 3-20-2007)
6-2B-3-7: STORM WATER SYSTEM EASEMENTS:
For subdivision projects, the minor, major and emergency storm water systems
shall be located within easements or rights of way explicitly providing for
public access for maintenance of such facilities. For all other projects
requiring a permit, easements are required for public access for maintenance of
storm water facilities only for new construction or modifications involving
components of a drainage system that conveys runoff from off site properties.
Easements and rights of way shall be of sufficient width. Storm sewers shall be
installed at such locations therein as to permit open cut installation,
maintenance and repair within the confines of the easement or right of way
without relocation or other unreasonable interference with other public
utilities located therein, and so as to meet the following minimum standards:
Fifteen feet (15') in width, plus for storm sewers in excess of twenty four
inches (24") in diameter, two (2) additional feet for each twelve inches (12")
or portion thereof of additional storm sewer diameter rounded up to the next
multiple of five feet (5'). Sewers with depths of greater than fifteen feet
(15') may require additional width as determined by the administrator. (Ord.
947, 3-20-2007)
6-2B-3-8: FLOW DEPTHS:
Maximum flow depths for new transverse stream crossings shall not exceed the
crown of the road during the base flood condition. The maximum flow depth on a
roadway shall not exceed nine inches (9") at the curb line for flow parallel to
the roadway. For flow parallel to a new roadway the product of the flow depth
(in feet) and velocity (in feet per second) shall not exceed four (4) for the
base flood condition. (Ord. 947, 3-20-2007)
6-2B-3-9: DIVERSION OF FLOW TO ANOTHER WATERSHED:
Transfers of waters between watersheds (diversions) shall be prohibited except
when such transfers will not violate the provisions of section
 6-2B-2-1 of this article and are otherwise lawful. Watersheds for purpose of
regulation under this section shall be the major watershed divides as defined
in the county plan. (Ord. 947, 3-20-2007)
6-2B-3-10: BEST MANAGEMENT PRACTICES REQUIREMENTS:
The village of Manhattan strongly encourages storm water quality management
within the village of Manhattan. The developments are encouraged to incorporate
the following:
   A.   All best management practices as may be required pursuant to the United
States clean water act, 33 USC 1251 et seq., as amended.
   B.   Manage parcels as unified sites by incorporating watershed based
planning.
   C.   Create designs that promote a healthy aquatic ecology, provide for
sustainability, minimize maintenance, and human intervention.
   D.   Treat storm water as a multiple use resource.
The village of Manhattan does reserve the right to require storm water quality
best management practices at a particular site if the administrator deems that
the discharge is to a sensitive ecological area or that the intended use of the
property produces a particularly detrimental water quality of the discharge.
(Ord. 947, 3-20-2007)
6-2B-4: SITE RUNOFF STORAGE REQUIREMENTS (DETENTION/EXTENDED DETENTION):
6-2B-4-1: RELEASE RATE:
If no release rate is specified in an adopted watershed plan, then sufficient
flood storage shall be provided so that the site will not discharge at a rate
greater than 0.15 cfs per acre of development during and after a rainfall event
with a 100-year frequency except for exempted sites. Unless exempted, sites
shall not discharge at a rate greater than 0.04 cfs per acre of development
during and after a rainfall event with a 2-year frequency.
This area of hydrologic disturbance on the site shall be used to calculate the
required site runoff storage volume. The on site watershed area tributary to
the point of discharge shall be used to calculate the allowable release rate
for the site runoff storage facility, which shall be the maximum release rate
allowed considering only the on site watershed area runoff. (Ord. 947, 3-20-
2007)
6-2B-4-2: DESIGN METHODS:
Event hydrograph routing methods shall be used to calculate design runoff
volumes for site runoff facilities. The methods must be HEC-1 (SCS
methodology), HEC-HMS, TR-20, or TR-55 tabular method as appropriate based upon
the rounding limitations of the model used. Proprietary models that use the
approved methods may be accepted at the sole discretion of the administrator.
Digital copies of the model input files shall be provided. For sites of forty
(40) acres or more, the methods used must be acceptable to FEMA. Event methods
shall incorporate the following assumptions:
   A.   Antecedent moisture condition equals two (2); and
   B.   Appropriate Huff rainfall distribution; and
   C.   Twenty four (24) hour duration storm with a one percent (1%)
probability (100-year frequency) of occurrence in any one year as specified by
Illinois state water survey bulletin 70 northeast sectional rainfall
statistics.
Figure 1, attached to the ordinance codified herein, based upon generic
hydrograph curves developed by the Will County storm water management
committee, may be used for sites of twenty (20) acres or less when acceptable
to the administrator. The rational method is not acceptable. (Ord. 947, 3-20-
2007)
6-2B-4-3: EXISTING RELEASE RATE LESS THAN ALLOWABLE:
For sites where the undeveloped release rate is less than the maximum release
rate in section
 6-2B-4-1 of this article, the developed release rate and corresponding site
runoff storage volume shall be based on the existing undeveloped release rate
for the development. (Ord. 947, 3-20-2007)
6-2B-4-4: DOWNSTREAM WATER SURFACE ELEVATIONS:
All hydrologic and hydraulic computations must utilize appropriate assumptions
for downstream water surface elevations, from low flow through the base flood
elevation, considering the likelihood of concurrent flood events. (Ord. 947, 3-
20-2007)
6-2B-4-5: EXTENDED DETENTION REQUIREMENT:
The requirements of this section will apply only when an existing agricultural
land use is downstream of and adjacent to a site runoff storage facility
outlet. The runoff from a 0.75 inch rainfall event over the hydraulically
connected impervious area of the new development shall be stored below the
elevation of the primary gravity outlet (extended detention) of the site runoff
storage facility. The facility may be designed to allow for evapotransporation
or infiltration of this volume into a subsurface drainage system and shall not
be conveyed through a direct positive connection to downstream areas.
The hydraulically connected impervious area used in the calculation of required
extended detention volume may be reduced by the administrator if the soils are
prepared to maximize infiltration and deep rooted grasses or other plants
selected for their ability to promote infiltration or water absorption are
planted in areas appropriately dedicated. The reduction in hydraulically
connected impervious area used in the calculation shall be equal to the area of
the development meeting the above soils/native planting requirement.
Subsurface drainage systems may be designed as a component of the extended
detention portion of the detention basin to assist in infiltration in
accordance with the following criteria:
   A.   The extended detention volume shall be discharged at a rate no greater
than that required to empty the calculated extended detention volume within
five (5) days of the storm event.
   B.   No subsurface drainage pipe shall be located within ten feet (10') of
drainage pipes directly connected to the detention basin.
   C.   For purposes of meeting the maximum subsurface drainage discharge
requirements, flow control orifices and weirs may be used.
   D.   All design extended detention volume shall be provided above the
seasonal high ground water table or the invert elevation of the ground water
control system.
   E.   Farm field tile shall not be considered a subsurface drainage system.
(Ord. 947, 3-20-2007)
6-2B-4-6: SITE RUNOFF STORAGE FACILITY DESIGN REQUIREMENTS:
Storage facilities shall be designed and constructed with the following
characteristics:
   A.   The site runoff storage facility shall provide one foot (1') of
freeboard above the design high water elevation.
   B.   The storage facilities shall be accessible and easily maintained. Side
slopes above the NWL shall not exceed four to one (4:1) (horizontal to
vertical) under any circumstances. For storage facilities with a bounce of
greater than four feet (4') the maximum side slope shall not exceed five to one
(5:1) (horizontal to vertical). For industrial or commercial areas that do not
adjoin schools, residential, or planned residential areas the administrator may
approve four to one (4:1) side slopes for bounces up to six feet (6'). The
administrator may require that access roads or paths on the top of berms shall
be provided with an H10 design load rating and meeting village design criteria.
   C.   Storage facilities shall facilitate sedimentation and catchment of
floating material. Unless specifically approved by the administrator, concrete
lined low flow ditches shall not be used in detention basins.
   D.   Storage facilities shall minimize impacts of storm water runoff on
water quality by incorporating best management practices.
   E.   Storage facilities shall maximize the normal flow distance between
detention inlets and outlets, to the extent possible.
   F.   Storage facilities shall be designed such that the existing conditions
predevelopment peak runoff rate from the 100-year, critical duration rainfall
will not be exceeded assuming the primary restrictor is blocked.
   G.   Storage facilities with single pipe outlets shall have a minimum inside
diameter of twelve inches (12"). If design release rates necessitate a smaller
outlet, structures such as perforated risers, or flow control orifices shall be
used.
   H.   The following are special rules applying to Jackson Creek and Manhattan
Creek:
      1.   This subsection H shall apply to the "Jackson Creek preservation
corridor", defined as commencing at Ridge Road approximately one thousand four
hundred feet (1,400') north of Arsenal Road, thence northeasterly-easterly
along the centerline of the defined channel approximately ten (10) miles to the
easterly line of Manhattan township; and the "Manhattan Creek preservation
corridor", defined as commencing at Smith Road approximately one thousand five
hundred feet (1,500') east of Cedar Road, thence southwesterly along the
centerline of the defined channel approximately 7.25 miles to the confluence
with Jackson Creek.
      2.   The creeks shall be maintained, or restored, to its natural
condition. This shall include the restoration of the stream bed and banks where
it has been channelized or tiled.
      3.   Surface or buried creeks existing in the development property or
adjacent rights of way shall be restored. This shall include, but not
necessarily be limited to, daylighting piped creeks and historic creek
corridors, removing fish barriers, establishing buffers and planting native
vegetation including native trees. The restoration shall emphasize water
quality, fish habitat, aquatic biodiversity, vegetation, and appropriate land
use. To the extent practicable, natural drainage patterns shall be restored
based on historical research; examination of soils; and identification of
channel, floodplain, and vegetation characteristics both upstream and
downstream for current and projected land uses.
      4.   Proposed detention ponds discharging directly to the creek shall be
required to be:
         a.   A naturalized detention pond, or
         b.   A wet bottom pond with an average depth of no less than ten feet
(10') over twenty five percent (25%) of the surface area during normal pool
conditions and discharge pipes no less than six feet (6') below the normal
water surface of the pond.
      5.   The stream may not be modified except in accordance with a
restoration project designed by and supervised by a qualified stream channel
restoration specialist under the following circumstances:
         a.   Water quality, habitat and other natural functions must be
significantly improved by the modification; no significant habitat area may be
destroyed;
         b.   A natural meander pattern, pools, riffles, and substrate shall be
created;
         c.   Gentle side slopes (no steeper than 4 feet horizontally to 1 foot
vertically), including the installation of erosion control features shall be
constructed;
         d.   Natural materials shall be used wherever possible; and
         e.   The planting and maintenance of vegetation normally associated
with streams, including primarily native riparian vegetation, and upland
prairie plants shall be required.
      6.   Individual ownership of the floodplain, detention ponds and within
thirty five feet (35') of the stream banks shall be prohibited unless otherwise
approved by the administrator.
      7.   A minimum of thirty five feet (35') of appropriate native vegetation
shall be planted and maintained along the banks of the stream.
      8.   Provisions shall be made for passive public use of the area through
the construction of trails outside of the native vegetation area whenever
practicable.
      9.   The village shall provide for the construction of an on stream
wetland on Jackson Creek within section 24 of Jackson township for the purposes
of habitat creation and nutrient removal from the water body.
   I.   The following criteria are proposed as moderately conservative
standards for design of storm water basins within the village of Manhattan. If
a developer wishes to exceed the standards, the village recommends that the
developer (via their landscape contractor/designer) bear the burden of proof
that the landscape will be successful. The following limits of acceptable
fluctuation and drawdown times are based on best professional judgment for
landscape treatments typical to wet and dry storm water basin designs:
      1.   Wet Bottom Pond:
Minimum area 1.0 acre at NWL
Maximum area No maximum
Depth        Over 25 percent of the bottom area at least 10.0 feet deep
Maximum      100-year: 5.0 feet – residential (industrial/commercial may be greater based
bounce       on approval by administrator)
             2-year: 1.0 foot
Maximum      100-year: above NWL by 0.5 foot for less than or equal to 72 hours
drawdown     2-year: above NWL by 0.5 foot for less than or equal to 36 hours
time
             Freeboard elevation to 2-year water level: 4:1
Maximum      2-year water level to NWL: 8:1
slopes       NWL to 1.5 feet below NWL: 20:1 (safety shelf)
             Greater than 1.5 feet below NWL: 2:1
             Freeboard to 1.5 feet below NWL: 5:1 average maximum
             0.5 to 1.5 feet inundation at NWL, 10.0 feet average width (variable 8.0 to
Safety shelf 12.0 feet), with 25 percent of the shoreline 2.0 feet shorter than maximum
             width
Shoreline    Natural vegetation (shall be used unless otherwise approved); armoring
protection   (conditioned upon village review and approval); biotechnical stabilization
             (depending on site specific conditions); erosion control measures
Water        Maximize distance between inlets and outlets; no low flow channel to be
quality      provided; energy dissipation measures at outlets; measures such as aerators,
enhancements cascading streams, waterfalls, etc., are recommended for aesthetic appeal and
             to promote water circulation and aeration
Landscape    Natural, ornamental hybrid, low maintenance turf, and turf grass (depending on
options      site conditions and adjacent/adjoining land uses); public access via stone
             outcroppings, groomed areas, etc., are recommended
 
      2.   Naturalized Detention Basin:
Minimum area 8,000 square feet at NWL
Maximum area No maximum
Depth        Ranging from 0.5 to 5.0 feet (average 3.0 feet); at least 5 percent of the
             area below NWL having pockets up to 5.0 feet deep
Maximum      100-year: 5.0 feet – residential (industrial/commercial may be greater based
bounce       on approval by administrator)
             2-year: 1.0 foot
Maximum      100-year: above NWL by 0.5 feet for less than or equal to 72 hours
drawdown     2-year: above NWL by 0.5 feet for less than or equal to 36 hours
time
             Freeboard elevation to 2-year water level: 4:1
Maximum      2-year water level to 0.5 foot below NWL: 8:1
slopes       0.5 to 1.5 feet below NWL: variable 8:1 to 12:1 (safety ledge)
             Greater than 1.5 feet below NWL: 2:1
             Freeboard to 1.5 feet below NWL: 5:1 average maximum
Shoreline    Natural vegetation; biotechnical stabilization (depending on site specific
protection   conditions); erosion control measures
             Maximize distance between inlets and outlets; no low flow channel to be
Water        provided; energy dissipation measures at outlets; measures such as aerators,
quality      cascading streams, waterfalls, etc., are strongly recommended to maintain
enhancements cooler water temperatures, promote water circulation and aeration, and provide
             aesthetic appeal
Landscape    Natural, ornamental hybrid, and low maintenance turf; public access via stone
options      outcroppings, groomed areas, etc., are recommended. A planting and maintenance
             report, provided by a recognized wetlands firm, must be submitted and approved
 
      3.   Dry Basin Design:
 
Minimum No minimum
area
Maximum 8,000 square feet, unless approved by the administrator
area
Safety  Not applicable
shelf
Maximum 5.0 feet – residential (industrial/commercial may be greater based on approval
bounce  by administrator)
 
   (Ord. 947, 3-20-2007)
6-2B-4-7: SITE RUNOFF STORAGE FACILITY REQUIREMENTS WITHIN THE REGULATORY
FLOODPLAIN:
Storage facilities located within the regulatory floodplain shall:
   A.   Conform to all applicable requirements specified in article D of this
chapter; and
   B.   Store the required amount of site runoff to meet the release rate
requirement under all stream flow and backwater conditions in the receiving
stream up to the 10-year flood elevation.
Detention volume provided by enlarging existing regulatory floodplain storage
without providing a structure controlling discharge (on stream detention) will
be allowed only as a variance. The applicant must demonstrate that flood
damages are not increased and the development will not increase flood flows for
both the 2-year and 100-year floods on the stream with developed conditions on
the site; and
The administrator may approve designs which can be shown by detailed hydrologic
and hydraulic analysis to provide a net watershed benefit not otherwise
realized by strict application of the requirements of this section. (Ord. 947,
3-20-2007)
6-2B-4-8: SITE RUNOFF STORAGE FACILITY REQUIREMENTS WITHIN THE REGULATORY
FLOODWAY:
Storage facilities located within the regulatory floodway shall:
   A.   Meet the requirements for locating storage facilities in the regulatory
floodplain; and
   B.   Be evaluated by performing hydrologic and hydraulic analysis consistent
with the standards and requirements for any adopted watershed plans; and
   C.   Provide a net watershed benefit. (Ord. 947, 3-20-2007)
6-2B-4-9: RESERVED:
(Ord. 947, 3-20-2007)
6-2B-4-10: OFF SITE FACILITIES:
Site runoff storage facilities may be located off site if the following
conditions are met:
   A.   The off site storage facility meets all of the requirements of this
article; and
   B.   Adequate storage capacity in the off site facility is dedicated to the
development; and
   C.   The development includes means to convey storm water to the off site
storage facility. (Ord. 947, 3-20-2007)
6-2B-4-11: RESERVED:
(Ord. 947, 3-20-2007)
6-2B-4-12: CROSS STREAM STRUCTURES FOR SITE RUNOFF STORAGE FACILITIES:
Structures constructed across the channel to impound water to meet detention
requirements shall be prohibited on any perennial stream unless part of a
public flood control project with a net watershed benefit. Those streams
appearing as blue on a USGS quadrangle map shall be assumed perennial unless
better data is obtained. All cross stream structures for the purpose of
impounding water to provide detention in all cases on perennial and
intermittent streams must demonstrate that they will not cause short term or
long term stream channel instability. (Ord. 947, 3-20-2007)
6-2B-5: STORM WATER REQUIREMENTS FOR AGRICULTURAL LAND USE INCLUDING CROPLANDS,
PASTURELANDS AND FARMSTEADS:
Regulations under this section apply only to croplands, pasturelands,
farmsteads and outbuildings associated with those agricultural practices.
Compliance with the requirements of this section shall be construed as
compliance with this chapter for the above land uses and no further regulation
under this chapter will apply. Any other land use, including greenhouses,
nurseries, container grown plants, equestrian facilities, the sale of
agricultural products to the public or where commercial activities involving
the new construction of gravel or paved parking facilities or buildings whose
aggregate area is twenty five thousand (25,000) square feet or more are
required to comply with all applicable sections of this chapter. (Ord. 947, 3-
20-2007)
6-2B-5-1: CONSERVATION PLANNING AND PERFORMANCE STANDARDS:
To comply with this section, landowners shall practice conservation planning
whose product shall be a management system, which addresses site runoff, soil
erosion and sediment control, surface and subsurface drainage. Any acreage with
a signed and approved NRCS conservation plan is exempt from the requirements of
this section and this chapter.
Applicable approved practices include:
   A.   Vegetated grass waterways,
   B.   Contour buffer strips,
   C.   Critical area planting and cover crops,
   D.   Terrace ridges and diversions,
   E.   Contour strip cropping,
   F.   Contour farming,
   G.   Crop rotation,
   H.   Conservation tillage and crop residue management,
   I.   Other standard practices for conservation planning in accordance with
the NRCS field office technical guide (current edition) or as otherwise
approved by the Will County NRCS district conservationist or the Will County
agricultural administrator.
The performance standard for conservation planning shall be a management system
which will develop a set of field practices which will reduce the calculated
actual soil loss to the "tolerable soil loss" (T) as calculated by the revised
universal soil loss equation for the actual site conditions. Cropland tillage
and resource management methods shall be consistent with the technical guide
notice IL-108 and shall be considered evidence of compliance with the "T"
performance standard. (Ord. 947, 3-20-2007)
6-2B-5-2: DRAINAGE PRACTICES, REQUIREMENTS AND DESIGN CRITERIA:
Drainage for agricultural purposes shall be consistent with those practices
identified as appropriate for "good husbandry" given the soil types, slopes and
crops. An agricultural drainage system may consist of both subsurface drainage
systems and surface drainage systems. Where active drainage districts maintain
drainage systems, they shall be consulted on surface and subsurface drainage
within the district boundaries. Requirements applying to subsurface and surface
drainage systems shall be as follows:
   A.   Subsurface Drainage Systems: Drain tile systems shall be maintained and
constructed in accordance with subsurface drainage recommendations for the
appropriate soil drainage group as specified by the Illinois drainage guide,
University of Illinois extension service circular no. 1226. Surface inlets into
the subsurface drainage system shall be allowed only to maintain good
husbandry. Where their use cannot be practicably avoided due to topography,
they shall be installed using flow controls such as orifices and perforated
risers with gravel filters and/or vegetative filters.
   B.   Surface Drainage Systems: Surface drainage systems shall be maintained
and constructed in accordance with surface drainage recommendations for the
appropriate soil drainage group as specified by the Illinois drainage guide,
University of Illinois extension service circular no. 1226. Surface drainage
systems shall be built with geotechnically stable slopes and the surface when
applicable shall be further stabilized utilizing the establishment of cool and
warm season grass mixes as identified in field office technical guide (Illinois
108).
   C.   Buffer Strips: Open channels with a definable bed and banks shall use
buffer strips in order to reduce the amount of erosion occurring from the
conveyed flows as well as to help filter the runoff from the site into the
waterway. Buffer strips shall be a minimum of fifteen feet (15') wide from the
top of bank except where smaller widths are necessary due to site limitations
and when approved by the administrator.
   D.   Agricultural Drainage Systems: Agricultural drainage systems shall also
comply with all regulations regarding wetlands as enforced by federal, state,
and local agencies. (Ord. 947, 3-20-2007)
6-2B-5-3: SEDIMENT CONTROL FOR OPEN CHANNELS:
All open channel drainage systems shall maintain practices adjacent to the open
outlet channel that will reduce the transportation of sediment off site. Runoff
from agricultural fields must pass through a sediment control system prior to
discharge into the open channel conveyance system. Approved sediment control
systems may consist of the following:
   A.   Vegetated buffer zones planted with permanent grasses appropriate for
soil stabilization and filtering;
   B.   Grade control structures for overfall stabilization;
   C.   Sediment traps adjacent to the stream channel;
   D.   Other standard practices for conservation planning in accordance with
the NRCS field office technical guide (current edition) or as otherwise
approved by the Will County NRCS district conservationist or the administrator.
(Ord. 947, 3-20-2007)
6-2B-5-4: MAINTENANCE AND CONSTRUCTION OF DRAINAGE SYSTEMS:
Agricultural drainage systems shall be maintained so as to convey the expected
flows for good drainage practices. The existing agricultural surface drainage
systems shall not be enlarged unless such enlargement is consistent with all
other sections of this section
6-2B-5. Maintenance and construction of subsurface drainage systems will not be
subject to the requirements of other sections of this chapter except as they
are regulated by other agencies. Maintenance projects by legally functioning
drainage districts on existing agricultural drainage systems will not be
subject to further permitting requirements under this chapter except as they
relate to the jurisdiction of other agencies. (Ord. 947, 3-20-2007)
ARTICLE C. SEDIMENT AND EROSION CONTROL
SECTION:
6-2C-1: Site Planning
6-2C-2: Standards And Specifications
6-2C-3: General Requirements
6-2C-4: Extended Construction Shutdown Periods
6-2C-5: Hydraulic And Hydrologic Design Requirements
6-2C-6: "As Needed" Practices On The Plans
6-2C-7: Plan Requirements
6-2C-8: Conveyance Of Off Site Flow
6-2C-9: Stockpiles
6-2C-10: Storm Sewer Inlets
6-2C-11: Construction Dewatering
6-2C-12: Protection Of Public/Private Roadways
6-2C-13: Temporary Stream Crossings
6-2C-14: Inspections
6-2C-1: SITE PLANNING:
Sediment and erosion control planning shall be part of the initial site
planning process. In planning the development of the site, the applicant shall
consider the susceptibility of existing soils to erosion and topographic
features such as steep slopes and stream corridors which must be protected to
reduce the amount of sediment and erosion which occurs. Where appropriate,
existing vegetation shall be protected from disturbance during construction by
fencing or other means. In the planning process the applicant shall also
address the following:
   A.   For projects that involve phased construction, existing land cover for
those areas not under current development shall be addressed. If existing land
cover does not consist of an appropriate ground cover then these phases shall
be planted temporarily to reduce erosion from idle land.
   B.   In planning the sediment and erosion control strategy, preference shall
be given to reducing erosion rather than controlling sediment. In order to
accomplish this the plan must carefully consider the construction sequence of
the phases so that the amount of land area exposed to erosive forces is the
minimum consistent with completing construction. In no case shall more than
twenty (20) acres of ground cover be disturbed at one time without permanent or
temporary stabilization unless authorized by the administrator.
   C.   Storm water detention basins shall be constructed as early in the
construction process as practicable. (Ord. 947, 3-20-2007)
6-2C-2: STANDARDS AND SPECIFICATIONS:
   A.   Specifications for erosion control measures shall be in accordance with
the "Illinois Urban Manual" (1995 or latest edition). Sediment and erosion
control planning shall be in accordance with "Procedures And Standards For
Urban Soil Erosion And Sedimentation Control In Illinois" (revised July 1988)
by the urban committee of the Association of Illinois Soil and Water
Conservation Districts (the "green book") chapters 1 through 5. Where the
"Illinois Urban Manual" supersedes sections of the green book, the "Illinois
Urban Manual" shall prevail.
   B.   All projects that will result in the development of one acre or more,
except for agricultural projects regulated solely under section
6-2B-5 of this chapter, shall be required to obtain coverage under an
appropriate NPDES permit. The permittee shall certify to the village that all
required permits, plans and inspections have been prepared and maintained in
accordance with the NPDES permit. Specifically the permittee shall prepare, and
adhere to, a storm water pollution prevention plan (SWPPP) prepared for the
development project that shall meet all the conditions in the permit for
SWPPPs. A copy of such plan shall be maintained on the construction site at all
times that workers are present, and a copy of the permit, SWPPP and/or
inspection logs, shall be provided to the village upon request. Failure to
obtain an NPDES permit or to comply with the conditions of an NPDES permit for
the construction activity shall constitute a violation of this chapter. (Ord.
947, 3-20-2007)
6-2C-3: GENERAL REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   The runoff from disturbed areas shall not leave the development site
without first passing through sediment control facilities. This requirement
shall apply to all phases of construction and shall include an ongoing process
of implementation of measures and maintenance of those measures during both the
construction season and any construction shutdown periods.
   B.   The smallest practical area shall be exposed for the shortest practical
time during development. However in no case shall more than twenty (20) acres
be exposed at one time on a development unless a larger area is approved by the
administrator.
   C.   Natural vegetation should be retained and protected whenever possible.
Areas within twenty five feet (25') of natural watercourses, lakes, ponds and
wetlands should be left undisturbed whenever possible.
   D.   All applicants for developments of one acre or more shall submit an
application for an NPDES permit or a notice of intent (NOI) to be covered under
a general NPDES permit. A copy of any storm water pollution prevention plan
(SWPPP) required by such permit shall be provided to the village prior to
commencement of development activities and a copy shall be kept on the
development site at all times. (Ord. 947, 3-20-2007)
6-2C-4: EXTENDED CONSTRUCTION SHUTDOWN PERIODS:
The condition of the construction site for the winter shutdown period shall
address proper sediment and erosion control early in the fall growing season so
that slopes and other bare earth areas may be stabilized with temporary and/or
permanent vegetative cover. All open areas that are to remain idle throughout
the winter shall receive temporary erosion control measures including temporary
seeding, mulching and/or erosion control blanketing prior to the end of the
fall growing season. The areas to be worked beyond the end of the growing
season must incorporate soil stabilization measures that do not rely on
vegetative cover such as erosion control blankets and heavy mulching. In no
case shall requirements less than those required by IEPA NPDES permit ILR10
apply to projects disturbing more than one acre. (Ord. 947, 3-20-2007)
6-2C-5: HYDRAULIC AND HYDROLOGIC DESIGN REQUIREMENTS:
In the hydraulic and hydrologic design of major erosion control measures (those
of which the tributary drainage area is greater than 3 acres) such as sediment
basins and traps, diversions, and the like, the design frequency shall be
commensurate with the risk of the design event being exceeded. The following
design frequencies shall be regarded as minimum design frequencies for the
construction period:
   A.   For those projects whose construction period is less than six (6)
months then the storm event having a fifty percent (50%) chance (2-year event)
of being exceeded in any year shall be used for design purposes;
   B.   For those projects whose construction period is greater than six (6)
months but less than one year, the design frequency for major sediment basins
shall be a rainfall event with a twenty percent (20%) (5-year event) chance of
being exceeded in any one year; and
   C.   For those construction projects expected to last more than one year
major sediment basins shall be designed for a rainfall event with a ten percent
(10%) (10-year event) chance of being exceeded in any one year. (Ord. 947, 3-
20-2007)
6-2C-6: "AS NEEDED" PRACTICES ON THE PLANS:
The sediment and erosion control plan shall designate a series of practices
which shall be implemented either at the direction of the permittee or the
permittee's representative on site or at the direction of the administrator
should an inspection of the site indicate a deficiency in soil and sediment
erosion control measures. As a minimum, these measures shall include the
following:
   A.   Sedimentation basins;
   B.   Sediment traps;
   C.   Diversion swales;
   D.   Silt fences;
   E.   Temporary seeding;
   F.   Mulching;
   G.   Dust control;
   H.   Erosion control blankets. (Ord. 947, 3-20-2007)
6-2C-7: PLAN REQUIREMENTS:
Sediment and erosion control plans shall be in accordance with article E,
"Permit Submittal Requirements", of this chapter but shall include the
following:
   A.   Detailed construction phasing plan identifying sediment and erosion
control measures to be in place for each phase shall be submitted prior to
stripping the site of existing vegetation or cover.
   B.   Sediment and erosion control measures to be installed initially prior
to stripping existing vegetation or mass grading shall be indicated on the
plans.
   C.   Permanent stabilization measures shall be indicated on a separate plan.
   D.   The expected 2-year and 10-year runoff rates from all off site areas
draining into the site shall be identified on the plan.
   E.   Methods for conveying flows through the site during construction shall
be indicated. These methods must include the temporary and permanent
stabilization measures to be used to reduce velocity and erosion from flow
through the construction zone.
   F.   A maintenance schedule of each measure used shall be indicated on the
plan. As a minimum, all sediment and erosion control measures on site shall be
inspected weekly and also by the applicant's designee or after a one-half inch
(1/2") or greater rainfall event and any required repairs shall be made to keep
these measures functional as designed. All repairs and modifications shall be
reviewed by the administrator or his/her designee. (Ord. 947, 3-20-2007)
6-2C-8: CONVEYANCE OF OFF SITE FLOW:
To the extent practicable, proposed ditches and waterways which are to convey
off site flows through the site shall be stabilized upon construction. Where
new waterways are constructed they shall be stabilized to the extent
practicable prior to their use to convey flood flows. (Ord. 947, 3-20-2007)
6-2C-9: STOCKPILES:
Stockpiles of soil and other erodable or floatable building materials (sand,
limestone, etc.) shall not be located in floodplains, overflow routes or areas
subject to frequent inundation. If a stockpile is to remain in place for more
than three (3) days, then sediment and erosion control shall be provided for
the stockpile. (Ord. 947, 3-20-2007)
6-2C-10: STORM SEWER INLETS:
Storm sewer inlets, catch basins, and manholes with open lid grates shall be
protected with manufactured filtration devices developed to prevent sediments
from entering the drainage system. Silt screens, hay bales, and filter fabrics
under storm grates are not allowed. (Ord. 947, 3-20-2007)
6-2C-11: CONSTRUCTION DEWATERING:
Water pumped or which is otherwise discharged from the site during construction
dewatering shall be filtered and a means provided to reduce erosion. (Ord. 947,
3-20-2007)
6-2C-12: PROTECTION OF PUBLIC/PRIVATE ROADWAYS:
Graveled roads, access drives, parking areas of sufficient width and length,
and vehicle wash down facilities, if necessary, shall be provided to prevent
soils from being tracked onto public or private roadways. Any soil tracked onto
a public or private roadway shall be removed before the end of each workday or
sooner as directed by the authority maintaining the roadway. (Ord. 947, 3-20-
2007)
6-2C-13: TEMPORARY STREAM CROSSINGS:
Temporary stream crossings of intermittent and perennial streams used only for
and during construction shall be designed to convey a 2-year flood (minimum) or
other flood event approved by the administrator without overtopping unless a
more frequent design event is allowed by the administrator. The entire crossing
shall be designed to withstand hydrodynamic forces and erosive forces up to the
base flood event without washing out. Ephemeral streams may be crossed at
temporary at grade crossings provided that the crossing point is stabilized
with materials resistive to the erosive forces produced by runoff from the
upstream drainage area, and the design is approved by the administrator.
Temporary stream crossings shall be removed upon completion of construction
activities. All temporary stream crossings shall be completely removed and the
stream restored to its preconstruction condition upon completion of
construction. Restoration shall incorporate appropriate vegetation consistent
with the adjacent existing vegetation prior to construction or in accordance
with a restoration plan approved by the administrator. (Ord. 947, 3-20-2007)
6-2C-14: INSPECTIONS:
The administrator or persons designated by the administrator shall be permitted
on the site to inspect the erosion and sediment control measures and records
related to the NPDES permit at any time. (Ord. 947, 3-20-2007)
ARTICLE D. PROTECTION OF SPECIAL MANAGEMENT AREAS
SECTION:
6-2D-1: Floodplains And Floodways
6-2D-2: Floodplain, Regulatory Floodplain, Base Flood Elevation (BFE) And
Regulatory Floodway Locations
6-2D-3: General Performance Standards
6-2D-3-1: Public Health And Safety Protection Standards
6-2D-3-2: Building Protection Standards
6-2D-3-3: Nonconforming Structures
6-2D-4: Compensatory Storage Volume Standards
6-2D-5: Floodway Standards
6-2D-6: Riverine Floodplain
6-2D-7: Bridge And Culvert Standards
6-2D-8: Stream And Wetlands Protection
6-2D-8-1: Authority
6-2D-8-2: Title
6-2D-8-3: Purpose And Intent
6-2D-8-4: Site Development Permit
6-2D-8-5: General Provisions; Area Affected
6-2D-8-6: Watercourse Relocation And Minor Modifications (Including
Channelization And Relocation)
6-2D-8-7: Impact Assessment
6-2D-8-8: Stream Maintenance Easement
6-2D-8-9: Threatened And Endangered Species
6-2D-8-10: Security
6-2D-8-11: Liability
6-2D-8-12: Separability
6-2D-8-13: Retroactivity
6-2D-1: FLOODPLAINS AND FLOODWAYS:
This article sets forth requirements for developments within floodplains and
floodways. In addition, developments in the SFHA draining more than one square
mile with no designated floodway must meet IDNR/OWR Illinois Administrative
Code part 3700 rules. Projects which meet all the requirements and conditions
to be considered permitted under IDNR/OWR Statewide, regional and general
permits, and are not in designated floodways, shall be considered to have met
the technical requirements of this section. References to IDNR/OWR permits or
approvals in this section shall be construed as "their designee" where a
portion or all of their authority has been delegated.
All development shall meet the requirements set forth in table 2, "Summary of
Applicable Ordinance Section for Development in Floodplains", attached to the
ordinance codified herein. The table is intended only as a guide to indicate
the applicable ordinance sections for development in floodplains. (Ord. 947, 3-
20-2007)
6-2D-2: FLOODPLAIN, REGULATORY FLOODPLAIN, BASE FLOOD ELEVATION (BFE) AND
REGULATORY FLOODWAY LOCATIONS:
The BFE shall be delineated on the site topography map to establish the
regulatory floodplain area limits for regulation under this chapter. Regulatory
floodplains shall be delineated on the site map from the current FEMA FIRM,
FBFM or LOMR and include those areas of the SFHA which are not regulatory
floodplains. Each community, whether certified or not, remains responsible for
maintaining the effective FIS and a list of FIRM panels for their respective
communities.
   A.   The BFE shall be:
      1.   The elevation of the 100-year profile corresponding to the location
of the development as indicated in the flood profiles in the flood insurance
studies of Will County prepared by FEMA dated February 15, 2019, and such
amendments as may be prepared from time to time; or
      2.   The base flood or 100-year frequency flood elevation for each
floodplain delineated as an "AH Zone" or "AO Zone" shall be that elevation (or
depth) delineated on the Countywide Flood Insurance Rate Map of Will County and
dated February 15, 2019, and such amendments or revisions to such study and
maps as may be prepared from time to time; or (Ord. 1288-19, 2-5-2019)
      3.   a. When no BFE information exists and the upstream tributary
drainage area is six hundred forty (640) acres or greater, the BFE shall be
determined using a site specific floodplain study by a professional engineer
using appropriate hydrologic and hydraulic models as follows acceptable to FEMA
and IDNR/OWR.
         b.   Where a channel has a tributary drainage area of six hundred
forty (640) acres or more, the above analyses shall be submitted to the IDNR/
OWR for concurrent approval.
         c.   For a nonriverine regulatory floodplain, the historic flood of
record plus three feet (3') may be used for the BFE instead of performing a
detailed hydrologic and hydraulic study for developments of less than forty
(40) acres, at the discretion of the Administrator. (Ord. 947, 3-20-2007)
      4.   For floodplains that are not regulatory, are not draining more than
six hundred forty (640) acres, and with no BFE determined, the Administrator
may require a site specific floodplain study for the purpose of establishing an
FPE for the development. A site specific study is required for all developments
of forty (40) acres or more that have regulatory floodplain on any portion of
the site.
The location of the regulatory floodway shall be as delineated on the
Countywide Flood Insurance Rate Map of Will County prepared by FEMA and dated
February 15, 2019, and such amendments or revisions to such study and maps as
may be prepared from time to time. The location of the regulatory floodway
boundary shall be scaled onto the site plan using references common to both the
map and the plan (typically the centerlines of adjacent roadways). Where an
interpretation is needed to determine the exact location of the regulatory
floodway boundary, IDNR/OWR should be contacted. Note: If an area of the site
is located in the regulatory floodway that is higher than the BFE, that area is
subject to the floodway standards of section
6-2D-5 of this article, including the appropriate use criteria, until such time
as a LOMR is received from the IDNR/OWR and FEMA. (Ord. 1288-19, 2-5-2019)
   B.   General criteria for analysis of flood elevations in the regulatory
floodway are as follows:
      1.   The flood profiles, flows, and data in the current effective FIS
must be used for analysis of the base conditions. If the study data appears to
be in error or conditions have changed, FEMA and IDNR/OWR shall be contacted
for approval and concurrence on the appropriate base conditions data to use.
The Director and Administrator shall be copied on all related correspondence.
      2.   If the BFE at the site of the proposed development is affected by
backwater from a downstream receiving stream with a larger drainage area, the
proposed development shall be shown to meet the requirements of this section
with the receiving stream at both the normal water and BFEs.
      3.   If the applicant is informed by IDNR/OWR, local governments, or a
private owner that a downstream or upstream restrictive bridge or culvert is
scheduled to be removed, reconstructed, modified, or a regional flood control
project is scheduled to be built, removed, constructed or modified within the
next five (5) years, the proposed development shall be analyzed and shown to
meet the requirements of this section for both the existing conditions and the
expected flood profile conditions when the bridge, culvert or flood control
project is built, removed or modified as applicable.
      4.   If the appropriate use will result in a change in the regulatory
floodway location or a change in the BFE, the applicant shall submit the
information required to be issued a conditional letter of map revision (CLOMR)
to IDNR/OWR and FEMA. A public notice inviting public comment on the proposed
change in the BFE or location of the regulatory floodway will be issued by
IDNR/OWR or its designee before a CLOMR is issued. Filling, grading, dredging
or excavating may take place upon issuance of a conditional approval from IDNR/
OWR and the Administrator. No further development activities shall take place
in the existing or proposed floodplain until a letter of map revision (LOMR) is
issued by FEMA unless such activities meet all the requirements of section
6-2D-3 of this article. The Director shall be copied on all related
correspondence.
      5.   For those circumstances listed below and located in a regulatory
floodway, the following information shall be submitted to IDNR/OWR for their
review and concurrence:
         a.   Analysis of the flood profile due to a proposed bridge, culvert
crossings and roadway approaches.
         b.   An engineer's determination that an existing bridge, culvert
crossing or approach road is not a source of flood damage and the analysis
indicating the proposed flood profile.
         c.   Alternative transition sections and hydraulically equivalent
compensatory storage.
         d.   Stormwater management permits to local units of government for
regulatory floodway and floodplain development.
         e.   IDNR/OWR will issue permits for any IDNR/OWR projects, dams,
etc., all other State, Federal or WCSMC or certified community projects. (Ord.
947, 3-20-2007)
6-2D-3: GENERAL PERFORMANCE STANDARDS:
The following general performance standards are applicable to all development
in a regulatory floodplain. The standards of this section apply except when
superseded by more stringent requirements in the subsequent sections:
   A.   No development except as allowed in section
 6-2D-7 of this article shall be allowed in the regulatory floodplain that
singularly or cumulatively creates an increase in flood stage or velocity off
site, or a damaging or potentially damaging increase in flood heights or
velocity on site or threat to public health, safety and welfare.
   B.   For all projects involving a channel modification, fill, stream
maintenance or a levee, the flood conveyance and storage capacity of the
regulatory floodplain shall not be reduced.
   C.   If the proposed development would result in a change in the regulatory
floodplain or BFE, the applicant shall obtain a LOMA/LOMR from FEMA. If the
development will result in an increase in the BFE of more than one foot (1') at
any location a CLOMR must be obtained before any work is performed in the
regulatory floodplain. No buildings may be built in the existing or proposed
regulatory floodplain until the LOMA/LOMR receives concurrence from IDNR/OWR
and is issued by FEMA unless the building meets all the building protection
standards (section
6-2D-3-2 of this article). Proposed changes to the regulatory floodway
delineation and the BFE must be submitted to IDNR/OWR for concurrence.
   D.   If the development is located in a public body of water, as defined by
IDNR/OWR, a permit must also be received from IDNR/OWR.
   E.   Prior to the commencement of any construction, modification or removal
of a dam the developer shall obtain an IDNR/OWR dam safety permit or letter
indicating a permit is not required.
   F.   For public flood control projects, the floodplain management standards
will be considered met if the applicant can demonstrate to IDNR/OWR and WCSMC
that each of the following conditions are met:
      1.   Demonstrate by hydraulic and hydrologic modeling that the proposed
project will not singularly or cumulatively result in increased flood heights
outside the project site or demonstrate that any increases will be contained in
easements for all flood events up to and including the base flood event.
      2.   Demonstrate that the project will be operated and maintained by a
public agency.
      3.   Demonstrate that the project will reduce flood damage to an existing
building or structure.
These standards do not preclude the design, engineering, construction or
financing, in whole or in part of a public flood control project by persons who
are not public agencies.
   G.   Proposals for new subdivisions, manufactured home parks, planned unit
developments (PUDs) and additions to manufactured home park and additions to
subdivisions shall include base flood or 100-year frequency flood elevation
data and floodway delineations. (Ord. 947, 3-20-2007)
6-2D-3-1: PUBLIC HEALTH AND SAFETY PROTECTION STANDARDS:
   A.   New and replacement water supply systems, wells and sanitary sewer
lines may be permitted if all manholes or other aboveground openings located
below the FPE are watertight.
   B.   New or replacement on site waste disposal systems are not allowed in
the regulatory floodplain within village limits.
   C.   New, substantially improved or replacement wastewater treatment plants
shall have watertight openings for those openings located below the FPE. Such
facilities should be located to avoid impairment to the facility or
contamination of floodwaters during the base flood.
   D.   No developments in the SFHA shall include the locating or storing of
hazardous materials, buoyant materials, solid wastes, fertilizers, pesticides
or other toxic materials or potential pollutants. (Ord. 947, 3-20-2007)
6-2D-3-2: BUILDING PROTECTION STANDARDS:
The building protection standards apply to all buildings located in the
regulatory floodplain; however, it should be noted that most new and
replacement buildings are not appropriate uses of the regulatory floodway.
   A.   The lowest floor including basements of all new residential structures,
substantially improved structures and additions shall be elevated up to at
least the FPE. An attached garage for a structure must be elevated up to at
least 0.1 foot above the BFE.
      1.   If placed on fill, the top of the fill for the residential structure
shall be above the FPE. The top of fill for an attached garage shall be at
least 0.1 foot above the BFE. The fill shall be placed at that elevation for a
distance of twenty feet (20') out from the building unless the building design
is certified by a registered structural engineer to be protected from damages
due to hydrostatic pressures. Additionally, the fill shall not settle below the
FPE for the residential structure and not below 0.1 foot above the base flood
for an attached garage, and shall be adequately protected against erosion,
scour and differential settlement. The building shall meet all of the
requirements of FEMA technical bulletin 10-01.
      2.   If elevated by means of walls, pilings, or other foundation, the
building's supporting structure must be permanently open to floodwaters and not
subject to damage by hydrostatic pressures of the base flood. The permanent
openings shall be no more than one foot (1') above existing grade, and consist
of a minimum of two (2) openings. The openings must have a total net area of
not less than one square inch for every one square foot of enclosed area
subject to flooding below the BFE. The lowest inside grade must match the
lowest existing outside grade adjacent to the structure. The foundation and
supporting members shall be anchored and aligned in relation to flood flows and
adjoining structures so as to minimize exposure to known hydrodynamic forces
such as current, waves, ice and floating debris. All areas below the FPE shall
be constructed of materials resistant to flood damage. The lowest floor
(including basement) for the residential structure and all electrical, heating,
ventilating, plumbing, and air conditioning equipment and utility meters shall
be located at or above the FPE. An attached garage must be elevated to at least
0.1 foot above the BFE. Water and sewer pipes, electrical and telephone lines,
submersible pumps and other waterproofed service facilities may be located
below the FPE. No area below the FPE shall be used for storage.
   B.   The lowest floor including the basement of all new or substantially
improved nonresidential buildings shall be elevated at least to the FPE as
described above or be structurally dry floodproofed to at least the FPE. A
nonresidential building may be structurally dry floodproofed (in lieu of
elevation) provided that a professional engineer or registered structural
engineer shall certify that the building has been structurally dry floodproofed
below the FPE and the structure and attendant utility facilities are watertight
and capable of resisting the effects of the base flood. The building design
shall take into account flood velocities, duration, rate of rise, hydrostatic
and hydrodynamic forces, the effects of buoyancy and impacts from debris or
ice. Floodproofing measures shall be operable without human intervention and
without an outside source of electricity. (Levees, berms, floodwalls and
similar works are not considered floodproofing for the purpose of this
subsection.)
   C.   Manufactured homes and recreational vehicles to be installed on a site
for more than one hundred eighty (180) days shall be at or above the FPE and
shall be anchored to resist flotation, collapse, or lateral movement in
accordance with the Illinois manufactured home tie down code (77 Illinois
administrative code 870 1999) as amended.
   D.   Accessory structures, such as toolsheds and detached garages which are
not substantial improvements on an existing single-family lot, may be
constructed with the lowest floor below the FPE in accordance with the
following criteria:
      1.   The building shall not be used for human habitation.
      2.   All areas below the FPE shall be constructed with waterproof
material. Structures located in a regulatory floodway shall meet the floodway
standards in section
6-2D-5 of this article.
      3.   The structure shall be anchored to prevent flotation and movement.
      4.   Service facilities such as electrical and heating equipment shall be
elevated or floodproofed to the FPE.
      5.   The building shall be no greater than six hundred (600) square feet
in floor size, and be valued at less than seven thousand five hundred dollars
($7,500.00). The building shall meet the permanent opening criteria of
subsection A2 of this section.
      6.   The building shall be used only for the storage of vehicles or tools
and may not contain basements or other rooms, workshops, greenhouses or similar
uses.
Accessory structures that do not meet all of the above criteria may be
constructed if they are dry floodproofed or elevated at least one-half (1/2) of
one foot (1') above the BFE. (Ord. 947, 3-20-2007)
6-2D-3-3: NONCONFORMING STRUCTURES:
A nonconforming structure damaged by flood, fire, wind or other disaster may be
restored unless the damage meets or exceeds fifty percent (50%) of its market
value before it was damaged, in which case it shall conform to the building
protection standards of this chapter. (Ord. 947, 3-20-2007)
6-2D-4: COMPENSATORY STORAGE VOLUME STANDARDS:
The following standards apply within the regulatory floodplain or, for sites
draining more than six hundred forty (640) acres, the limits of the delineated
floodplain as accepted by the administrator:
   A.   Hydraulically equivalent compensatory storage volume will be required
for development in a riverine regulatory floodplain and shall be at least equal
to the regulatory floodplain flood storage volume displaced. The storage volume
displaced below the existing 10-year frequency flood elevation must be replaced
below the proposed 10-year frequency flood elevation. The storage volume
displaced above the 10-year existing frequency flood elevation must be replaced
above the proposed 10-year frequency flood elevation. Additional storage of not
less than fifty percent (50%) of the net volume displaced shall be provided
based upon the total volume filled below the BFE. The additional fifty percent
(50%) need not be hydraulically equivalent. The volume of storage lost shall be
calculated based on the existing BFE and the volume of compensatory storage
shall be calculated based upon the final with project BFE.
   B.   Compensatory storage volume for development in a nonriverine regulatory
floodplain area that is also adjacent to a lake shall be equal to the storage
volume displaced. Additional storage of not less than fifty percent (50%) of
the net volume displaced shall be provided. The volume of storage lost shall be
calculated based on the existing BFE and the volume of compensatory storage
shall be calculated based upon the final with project BFE.
   C.   Compensatory storage volume requirements for development in a
nonriverine regulatory floodplain that is not adjacent to a lake shall be
replaced in accordance with the requirements for the loss of depressional
storage in section
6-2B-2-7 of this chapter.
   D.   The hydraulically equivalent compensatory storage areas shall be
designed to drain freely and openly to the channel and shall be located
adjacent to the development. This standard does not apply to nonriverine
regulatory floodplain.
   E.   A recorded covenant running with the land is required to maintain the
compensatory storage volume in areas modified to provide compensatory storage
volume. (Ord. 947, 3-20-2007)
6-2D-5: FLOODWAY STANDARDS:
The only development in a regulatory floodway which will be allowed are
appropriate uses which will not cause an increase in flood heights or
velocities for all flood events up to and including the base flood. Only those
appropriate uses listed below will be allowed in the regulatory floodway.
Appropriate uses do not include the construction or placement of any new
structures, fill, building additions, buildings on stilts, fencing (including
landscaping or planting designed to act as a fence) and storage of materials
except as specifically defined below as an appropriate use. If the development
is proposed for the regulatory floodway portion of the regulatory floodplain,
the following standards apply in addition to the standards for the regulatory
floodplain:
   A.   Only the construction, modification, repair or replacement of the
following appropriate uses will be allowed in the regulatory floodway:
      1.   Public flood control structures and private improvements relating to
the control of drainage and flooding of existing buildings, erosion, water
quality or habitat for fish and wildlife;
      2.   Structures or facilities relating to functionally water dependent
uses such as additions, modifications, and improvements to existing wastewater
treatment plants (except for additions to habitable structures on the site) and
facilities and improvements relating to recreational boating (this does not
include new wastewater treatment plants);
      3.   Storm and sanitary sewer outfalls;
      4.   Underground and overhead utilities;
      5.   Recreational facilities such as playing fields, open pavilions,
gazebos and trail systems including any related fencing (at least 50 percent
open when viewed from any 1 direction) built parallel to the direction of flood
flows;
      6.   Boathouses or other nonhabitable structures without sanitary
facilities that are accessory to existing buildings and will not block flood
flows nor reduce regulatory floodway storage;
      7.   Bridges, culverts and associated roadways, sidewalks and railways,
required for crossing the regulatory floodway or for access to other
appropriate uses in the regulatory floodway and any modification thereto;
      8.   Reserved;
      9.   Regulatory floodway grading, without fill, to create a positive
nonerosive slope toward a channel;
      10.   Floodproofing activities to protect previously existing lawful
structures including the construction of watertight window wells, elevating
structures, or the construction of floodwalls or berms around residential,
commercial or industrial principal structures where the outside toe of the
floodwall or berm shall be no more than ten feet (10') away from the exterior
wall of the existing structure, and which are not considered to be substantial
improvements to the structure;
      11.   The repair, replacement or reconstruction of a damaged building,
provided, that none of the outside dimensions of the building are increased
and, provided, that the cost of repair is less than fifty percent (50%) of the
building's value before it was damaged. When damage is fifty percent (50%) or
more (a substantial improvement), the activity shall conform to section
6-2D-3-2 of this article;
      12.   Modifications to an existing building that would not increase the
enclosed floor area of the building below the BFE and which will not block
flood flows. These modifications include fireplaces, bay windows, decks, patios
and second story additions. No enclosed floor areas may be built on stilts. The
modifications may not singularly or cumulatively equal fifty percent (50%) or
more of the building's market value.
   B.   Additions or changes to the above list of appropriate uses must be
approved by the committee prior to the adoption by the county board and IDNR/
OWR.
   C.   All development in the regulatory floodway shall require a permit from
IDNR/OWR and must be in accordance with all provisions of this chapter.
   D.   Construction of an appropriate use will be considered permissible,
provided, that the proposed project meets the following engineering and
mitigation criteria and is so stated in writing with supporting plans,
calculations and data prepared and signed by a professional engineer:
      1.   All effective regulatory floodway conveyance lost due to the
development of appropriate uses, other than bridge or culvert crossings or on
stream structures or dams, shall be replaced for all flood events up to and
including the base flood.
      2.   The following expansion and contraction ratios shall be used to
determine transition sections in calculations of effective regulatory floodway
conveyance:
         a.   Flowing water will expand no faster than at a rate of one foot
(1') horizontal for every four feet (4') of the flooded stream's length.
         b.   Flowing water will contract no faster than at a rate of one foot
(1') horizontal for every one foot (1') of the flooded stream's length.
         c.   Flowing water will not expand or contract faster than one foot
(1') vertical for every ten feet (10') of flooded stream length.
         d.   All cross sections used in the calculations shall be located
perpendicular to flood flows.
         e.   Transition sections must be used to determine the effective
conveyance areas on adjacent properties.
      3.   Development of an appropriate use will not result in an increase in
the average channel or regulatory floodway velocities or stage. However, in the
case of bridges or culverts or on stream structures built for the purpose of
backing up water in the stream during normal or flood flows, velocities may be
increased at the structure site if scour, erosion and sedimentation will be
avoided by the use of riprap or other design measures.
   E.   In the case of on stream structures built for the purpose of backing up
water during normal or flood flows, the increase in flood stage when compared
to existing conditions for all storm events up to and including the base flood
event shall be contained within recorded easements or the channel banks. A dam
safety permit or letter indicating a dam safety permit is not required must be
obtained from IDNR/OWR for such structures.
   F.   IDNR/OWR will issue permits for all floodway projects including IDNR/
OWR projects, dams, etc., and for all other state, WCSMC, or certified
community projects.
   G.   If the proposed activity involves a channel modification, it shall be
demonstrated that:
      1.   There are no practicable alternatives to the activity which would
accomplish its purpose with less impact to the natural conditions of the body
of water affected. Possible alternatives include levees, bank stabilization,
floodproofing of existing structures, removal of structures from the
floodplain, clearing the channel, high flow channel, or the establishment of a
stream side buffer strip of greenbelt. Channel modification is acceptable if
the purpose is to restore natural conditions and improve water quality and fish
and wildlife habitat;
      2.   Water quality, habitat, and other natural functions would be
significantly improved by the modification and no significant habitat area may
be destroyed, or the impacts are offset by the replacement of an equivalent
degree of natural resource values;
      3.   The activity has been planned and designed and will be constructed
in a way which will minimize its adverse impacts on the natural conditions of
the body of water affected, consistent with the following criteria:
         a.   The physical characteristics of the modified channel shall match
as closely as possible those of the existing channel in length, cross section,
slope and sinuosity. If the existing channel has been previously modified,
restoration of more natural physical conditions should be incorporated into
channel modification design, where practical.
         b.   Hydraulically effective transitions shall be provided at both the
upstream and downstream ends of the project, designed such that they will
prevent erosion.
         c.   One sided construction of a channel shall be used when feasible.
Removal of stream side (riparian) vegetation should be limited to one side of
the channel, where possible, to preserve the shading and stabilization effects
of the vegetation.
         d.   Clearing of vegetation shall be limited to that which is
essential for construction of the channel.
         e.   Channel banks shall be constructed with a side slope no steeper
than three to one (3:1) horizontal to vertical, wherever practical. Natural
vegetation and gradual side slopes are the preferred methods for bank
stabilization. Where high velocities or sharp bends necessitate the use of
alternative stabilization measures, natural rock or riprap are preferred
materials. Artificial materials such as concrete, gabions, or construction
rubble should be avoided unless there are no practicable alternatives.
         f.   All disturbed areas associated with the modification shall be
seeded or otherwise stabilized as soon as possible upon completion of
construction. Erosion blanket or an equivalent material shall be required to
stabilize disturbed channel banks prior to establishment of the vegetative
cover.
         g.   If the existing channel contains considerable bottom diversity
such as deep pools, riffles, and other similar features, such features shall be
provided in the new channel. Spawning and nesting areas and flow
characteristics compatible with fish habitat shall also be established where
appropriate.
         h.   A sediment basin shall be installed at the downstream end of the
modification to reduce sedimentation and degradation of downstream water
quality.
         i.   New or relocated channels should be built in the dry and all
items of construction, including vegetation, should be completed prior to
diversion of water into the new channel.
         j.   There shall be no increases in stage or velocity as the channel
enters or leaves the project site for any frequency flood unless necessitated
by a public flood control project or unless such an increase is justified as
part of a habitat improvement or erosion control project.
         k.   Unless the modification is for a public flood control project,
there shall be no reduction in the volume of floodwater storage outside the
floodway as a result of the modification; and
      4.   The project otherwise complies with the requirements of this
section. (Ord. 947, 3-20-2007)
6-2D-6: RIVERINE FLOODPLAIN:
These standards apply to riverine regulatory floodplains without a regulatory
floodway.
The applicant shall obtain approval from IDNR/OWR for all development any
portion of which is located partially or completely within the regulatory
floodplain (without a delineated regulatory floodway) with a tributary drainage
area of six hundred forty (640) acres or more.
   A.   The development shall not singularly or cumulatively result in an
obstruction of flood flows or potential flood damages outside the site due to
an increase in flood heights, velocities, or loss of floodplain area storage.
   B.   A professional engineer shall submit a study that demonstrates one of
the following:
      1.   Determine a floodway which meets the definition of a regulatory
floodway and demonstrate that the proposed development meets the floodway
standards in section
6-2D-5 of this article, or
      2.   Determine a BFE and demonstrate that the proposed development will
maintain the existing conditions conveyance, will not increase flood
velocities, will not increase flood profiles and will compensate for any lost
floodplain storage. (Ord. 947, 3-20-2007)
6-2D-7: BRIDGE AND CULVERT STANDARDS:
These standards are for the reconstruction, modification or new construction of
bridges, culvert crossings and roadway approaches located in the regulatory
floodplain.
   A.   A proposed new structure shall not result in an increase of upstream
flood stages greater than 0.1 foot when compared to the existing conditions for
all flood events up to and including the base flood event unless contained
within the channel banks or recorded easements. The evaluation must be
submitted to the IDNR/OWR for review and a permit obtained.
   B.   If the proposed new structure will increase upstream flood stages
greater than 0.1 foot, the applicant must contact IDNR/OWR for a dam safety
permit or waiver. The director shall be copied on all related correspondence.
   C.   Lost regulatory floodplain storage must be replaced as required in
section
 6-2D-4, "Compensatory Storage Volume Standards", of this article except that
artificially created storage lost due to a reduction in head loss behind an
existing bridge or culvert crossing shall not be required to be replaced,
provided, no flood damage will be incurred downstream.
   D.   Velocity increases must be mitigated by use of appropriate measures to
avoid scour, erosion and sedimentation at the structure.
   E.   For modification or replacement of existing structures, the existing
structure must first be evaluated in accordance with IDNR/OWR rules (17
Illinois administrative code part 3708) to determine if the existing structure
is a source of flood damage. If the structure is a source of flood damage, the
applicant's engineer shall submit justification to allow the damage to continue
and evaluate the feasibility of relieving the structure's impact. Modifications
or replacement structures shall not increase flood stages (0.0 feet) compared
to the existing condition for all flood events up to and including the base
flood event. The evaluation must be submitted to IDNR/OWR, for review and
concurrence before a permit is issued. The director shall be copied on all
related correspondence.
   F.   If any work is proposed in, near or over a public body of water, a
permit or letter indicating a permit is not required must be obtained from
IDNR/OWR.
   G.   The hydraulic analysis for the backwater caused by the bridge showing
the existing condition and proposed regulatory profile must be submitted to
IDNR/OWR for concurrence that a CLOMR is not required.
   H.   Construction vehicles shall cross streams by the means of existing
bridges or culverts. Where an existing crossing is not available, a temporary
crossing that has been issued a permit or waiver by IDNR/OWR shall be
constructed in which:
      1.   The approach roads will be 0.5 foot or less above existing grade.
      2.   The crossing will allow stream flow to pass without backing up the
water above the stream bank vegetation line or above any drainage tile or
outfall.
      3.   The top of the roadway fill in the channel will be at least two feet
(2') below the top of the lowest bank. Any fill in the channel shall be
nonerosive material, such as riprap or gravel.
      4.   The access road and temporary crossings will be removed within one
year after installation, unless an extension of time is granted by the
administrator. (Ord. 947, 3-20-2007)
6-2D-8: STREAM AND WETLANDS PROTECTION:
6-2D-8-1: AUTHORITY:
The lowland conservancy overlay district is adopted by the mayor and board of
trustees of the village of Manhattan, Illinois, under the authority of the
Illinois Revised Statutes, chapter 34, paragraphs 3151 et seq., 65 Illinois
Compiled Statutes 5/11-13-1 et seq. The village of Manhattan, Illinois, also
asserts its jurisdiction over all isolated wetlands within the village
corporate limits and facilities planning areas that were formerly under the
jurisdiction of the U.S. army corps of engineers prior to January 9, 2000.
(Ord. 947, 3-20-2007)
6-2D-8-2: TITLE:
This section
6-2D-8 shall be known and may be cited as the village of Manhattan LOWLAND
CONSERVANCY OVERLAY DISTRICT ORDINANCE. (Ord. 947, 3-20-2007)
6-2D-8-3: PURPOSE AND INTENT:
It is the purpose and intent of this section
6-2D-8 to promote the health, safety and general welfare of the present and
future residents of village of Manhattan and downstream drainage areas by
providing for the protection, preservation, proper maintenance, and use of
village of Manhattan watercourses, lakes, ponds, floodplain and wetland areas.
All work to be done in a lowland conservancy district will require a permit
from the army corps of engineers. The responsibility for obtaining the permit
is by the applicant. If requested by the village, a sign-off from the army
corps of engineers will be required if the site appears to be near a wetland
area. Absolutely no work shall be undertaken until the administrator has
received an approved permit by the army corps of engineers.
This section
6-2D-8 is more specifically adopted:
   A.   To prevent flood damage by preserving storm and flood water storage
capacity (including depressional storage);
   B.   To maintain the normal hydrologic balance of streams, floodplains,
ponds, lakes, wetlands, and ground water by storing and providing for
infiltration of wet period runoff in floodplains and wetlands, and releasing it
slowly to the stream to maintain in-stream flow;
   C.   To manage storm water runoff and maintain natural runoff conveyance
systems, and minimize the need for major storm sewer construction and
drainageway modification;
   D.   To improve water quality, both by filtering and storing sediments and
attached pollutants, nutrients, and organic compounds before they drain into
streams or wetlands, and by maintaining the natural pollutant assimilating
capabilities of streams, floodplains and wetlands;
   E.   To protect shorelines and stream banks from soil erosion, using natural
means and materials wherever possible;
   F.   To protect fish spawning, breeding, nursery and feeding grounds;
   G.   To protect wildlife habitat;
   H.   To preserve areas of special recreational, scenic, or scientific
interest, including natural areas and habitats of endangered species;
   I.   To maintain and enhance the aesthetic qualities of developing areas;
and
   J.   To encourage the continued economic growth and high quality of life of
the village of Manhattan which depends in part on an adequate quality of water,
a pleasing natural environment, and recreational opportunities in proximity to
the village of Manhattan.
In order to achieve the purpose and intent of this section
 6-2D-8, the village of Manhattan hereby designates the lowland conservancy
overlay district that shall be considered as an overlay to the zoning districts
created by the village of Manhattan zoning ordinances as amended. Any proposed
development activity within the district must obtain a site development permit
as approved by the governing body of village of Manhattan. See section
6-2D-8-4 of this article. (Ord. 947, 3-20-2007)
6-2D-8-4: SITE DEVELOPMENT PERMIT:
To ensure that proposed development activity can be carried out in a manner
which is compatible and harmonious with the natural amenities of the lowland
conservancy overlay district and with surrounding land uses, a request for a
site development permit for such development activity must be submitted for
approval by the administrator.
   A.   Findings: No site development permit shall be issued unless the village
of Manhattan finds that:
      1.   The development will not detrimentally affect or destroy natural
features such as ponds, streams, wetlands, and forested areas, nor impair their
natural functions, but will preserve and incorporate such features into the
development's site;
      2.   The location of natural features and the site's topography have been
considered in the designing and siting of all physical improvements;
      3.   Adequate assurances have been received that the clearing of the site
of topsoil, trees, and other natural features will not occur before the
commencement of building operations; only those areas approved for the
placement of physical improvements may be cleared;
      4.   The development will not reduce the natural retention storage
capacity of any watercourse, nor increase the magnitude and volume of flooding
at other locations; and that in addition, the development will not increase
stream velocities; and
      5.   The soil and subsoil conditions are suitable for excavation and site
preparation, and the drainage is designed to prevent erosion and
environmentally deleterious surface runoff.
There shall be no development, including the immediate or future clearing or
removal of natural ground cover and/or trees, within the lowland conservancy
overlay district for any purpose, unless a site development permit is granted
subject to the provisions of this section
6-2D-8 or the provisions of the village of Manhattan zoning ordinance.
Dumping, filling, mining, excavating, dredging, or transferring of any earth
material within the district is prohibited unless a site development permit is
granted.
No ponds or impoundments shall be created nor other alterations or improvements
shall be allowed in the district for recreational uses, storm water management,
flood control, agricultural uses or as scenic features unless a site
development permit is granted.
   B.   Application For Permit: Application for a site development permit shall
be made by the owner of the property, or his/her authorized agent, to the
village of Manhattan, on a form furnished for that purpose. Each application
shall bear the name(s) and address(es) of the owner or developer of the site
and of any consulting firm retained by the applicant together with the name of
the applicant's principal contact at such firm, and shall be accompanied by a
filing fee of two hundred dollars ($200.00) unless the application is part of a
subdivision review where other fees take priority. The applicant further agrees
to reimburse the village for any outside review engineering fees, incurred by
the village, in addition to the filing fees. Each application shall include
certification that any land clearing, construction, or development involving
the movement of earth shall be in accordance with the plans approved upon
issuance of the permit.
   C.   Submissions: Each application for a site development permit shall be
accompanied by the following information: general provisions, site development
plan, geologic and soil report, drainage control plan, site grading and
excavation plan, landscape plan, justification for watercourse relocation and
minor modifications, stream modification/relocation plan, channel and bank
armoring, culverts, on stream impoundments, and an impact assessment.
   D.   Review And Approval: Each application for a site development permit
shall be reviewed and acted upon according to the following procedures:
      1.   The village of Manhattan will review each application for a site
development permit to determine its conformance with the provisions of this
section
6-2D-8. The village of Manhattan may also refer any application to the Will/
South Cook soil and water conservation district and/or any other local
government or public agency within whose jurisdiction the site is located for
review and comments. Within thirty (30) days after receiving an application,
the village of Manhattan shall in writing: a) approve the permit application,
if it is found to be in conformance with the provisions of this section 6-2D-8,
and issue the permit; b) approve the permit application subject to such
reasonable conditions as may be necessary to secure substantially the
objectives of this section
6-2D-8, and issue the permit subject to these conditions; or c) disapprove the
permit application, indicating the deficiencies and the procedure for
submitting a revised application and/or submission.
      2.   No site development permit shall be issued for an intended
development site unless:
         a.   The development, including, but not limited to, subdivisions and
planned unit developments, has been approved by the village of Manhattan where
applicable; or
         b.   Such permit is accompanied by or combined with a valid building
permit issued by the village of Manhattan; or
         c.   The proposed development is coordinated with any overall
development program previously approved by the village of Manhattan for the
area in which the site is situated.
   E.   Permit Exceptions: The provisions of this section
6-2D-8 shall not apply to:
      1.   Emergency work necessary to preserve life or property; when
emergency work is performed under this section
6-2D-8, the person performing it shall report the pertinent facts relating to
the work to the administrator within ten (10) days after commencement of the
work and shall thereafter obtain a site development permit and shall perform
such work as may be determined by the agency to be reasonably necessary to
correct any impairment to the watercourse, lake, pond, floodplain or wetland;
      2.   Work consisting of the operation, repair, or maintenance of any
lawful use of land existing on the date of adoption hereof;
      3.   Lands adjacent to farm ditches if:
         a.   Such lands are not adjacent to a natural stream or river; or
         b.   Those parts of such drainage ditches adjacent to such lands were
not streams before ditching; or
         c.   Such lands are maintained in agricultural uses without buildings
and structures.
Where farm ditches are found to contribute to adverse environmental impacts or
hazards to persons or property, the village of Manhattan may include designated
farm ditches in the district. The village of Manhattan may also require that
linings, bulkheads, dikes and culverts be removed to mitigate hazards, or that
other mitigable measures be taken, such as the maintenance of a natural
vegetation buffer strip.
   F.   Effect On Other Permits: The granting of a site development permit
under the provisions herein shall in no way affect the owner's responsibility
to obtain the approval required by any other statute, ordinance, or regulation
of any state agency or subdivision thereof, or to meet other village of
Manhattan ordinances and regulations. Where state and/or federal permits are
required, a site development permit will not be issued until they are obtained.
(Ord. 947, 3-20-2007)
6-2D-8-5: GENERAL PROVISIONS; AREA AFFECTED:
This section
6-2D-8 applies to development in or near streams, lakes, ponds and wetlands
within the village of Manhattan. Streams, lakes, and ponds (including
intermittent streams) are those which are shown on the United States department
of the interior geological survey (USGS) 7.5 minute quadrangle national
wetlands inventory maps and those additional streams, lakes, and ponds
delineated on the village of Manhattan water resources management plan map
adopted as part of this section
6-2D-8. Those are hereby made a part of this section
 6-2D-8, and two (2) copies thereof shall remain on file at the village of
Manhattan administrative building for public inspection. Wetlands are those
designated by the most recent version of the U.S. army corps of engineers
manual of wetland delineation.
If new drainage courses, lakes, ponds or wetlands are created as part of a
development, the requirements for setbacks and uses within setbacks, and the
criteria for watercourse relocation and minor modification shall apply. The
district shall be amended as appropriate to include these areas.
   A.   The Lowland Conservancy Overlay District: The lowland conservancy
overlay district shall be considered as an overlay to the zoning districts
created by the village of Manhattan zoning ordinance as amended. In addition to
the requirements of this section
6-2D-8, applicants for a site development permit within the district shall meet
all requirements of the underlying zoning districts. In the event of a conflict
between the overlay district requirements and the underlying zoning district
requirements, the most restrictive requirements prevail.
   B.   District Boundary: The procedures, standards and requirements contained
in this section
6-2D-8 shall apply to all lots within wetlands and streams, and all lots lying
wholly or in part:
      1.   Within the special flood hazard area (SFHA) designated by the
federal emergency management agency (FEMA); or
      2.   Within one hundred feet (100') of the ordinary high water mark
(OHWM) of a perennial stream or intermittent stream, the ordinary high water
mark of a lake or pond, or the edge of a wetland; or
      3.   Within depressional areas serving as floodplain or storm water
storage areas, as designated on the lowland conservancy district map.
   C.   Minimum Setback Of Development Activity From Streams, Lakes,
Depressional Storage, Ponds, And Wetlands: Absolutely no development activity
(except as provided below) may occur within the minimum setback. The minimum
setback, which should be a vegetated buffer strip, preferably planted with
native plant species, shall be maintained or restored around the periphery of
the area in question. The width of the buffer strip shall be as follows:
      1.   Twenty five feet (25') for a tributary length of two hundred fifty
feet (250') or less.
      2.   Fifty feet (50') for a tributary length greater than two hundred
fifty feet (250') and less than five hundred feet (500').
      3.   Seventy five feet (75') for a tributary length over five hundred
feet (500').
Note: The tributary length is the maximum length of the project limits to the
sensitive area or the length from a drainage divide to the sensitive area.
The minimum setback shall be measured between the ordinary high water mark of
streams, lakes and ponds, or the edge of wetlands, or within a designated
depressional area. In no case shall the setback be less than the boundary of
the 100-year floodway as defined by FEMA. These setback requirements do not
apply to a stream in a culvert unless the stream is taken out of the culvert as
part of development activity. If a culvert functions as a low flow culvert,
where water is intended to periodically flow over it, the setback requirements
apply.
   D.   Development Activities:
      1.   The following development activities may be permitted, subject to
issuance of a site development permit, within the minimum setback areas only
if, as a practical matter, they cannot be located outside the setback area.
Such development activities will only be approved based upon a report, prepared
by a qualified professional, which demonstrates that they will not adversely
affect water quality; destroy, damage or disrupt significant habitat area;
adversely affect drainage and/or storm water retention capabilities; adversely
affect flood conveyance and storage; lead to unstable earth conditions, create
erosion hazards, or be materially detrimental to any other property in the area
of the subject property or to the village of Manhattan as a whole, including
the loss of open space or scenic vistas:
         a.   Minor improvements such as walkways, benches, comfort stations,
informational displays, directional signs, footbridges, observation decks, and
docks;
         b.   The maintenance, repair, replacement, and reconstruction of
existing utilities, highways and bridges, electrical transmission and
telecommunication lines, poles, and towers; and
         c.   The establishment and development of public and private parks and
recreation areas, outdoor education areas, historic, natural and scientific
areas, game refuges, fish and wildlife improvement projects, game bird and
animal farms, wildlife preserves and public boat launching ramps.
      2.   Review of proposed development activity within the minimum setback
area will consider the following:
         a.   Only limited filling and excavating necessary for the development
of public boat launching ramps, swimming beaches, or the development of park
shelters or similar structures is allowed. The development and maintenance of
roads, parking lots and other impervious surfaces necessary for permitted uses
are allowed only on a very limited basis, and where no alternate location
outside of the setback area is available.
         b.   Land surface modification within the minimum setback shall be
permitted for the development of storm water drainage swales between the
developed area of the site (including a storm water detention facility on the
site) and a stream, lake or pond, or wetland. Detention basins within the
setback are generally discouraged, unless it can be shown that resultant
modifications will not impair water quality, habitat, or flood storage
functions.
         c.   No filling or excavating within wetlands is permitted except to
install piers for the limited development of walkways and observation decks.
Walkways and observation decks should avoid high quality wetland areas, and
should not adversely affect natural areas designated in the Illinois natural
areas inventory or the habitat of rare or endangered species.
         d.   Wetland area occupied by the development of decks and walkways
must be mitigated by an equal area of wetland habitat improvement.
         e.   Modification of degraded wetlands for purposes of storm water
management is permitted where the quality of the wetland is improved and total
wetland acreage is preserved. Where such modification is permitted, wetlands
shall be protected from the effects of increased storm water runoff by measures
such as detention or sedimentation basins, vegetated swales and buffer strips,
and sediment and erosion control measures on adjacent developments. The direct
entry of storm sewers into wetlands shall be avoided. Environmental impact
analysis of wetland modification may be required in accordance with section
 6-2D-8-7 of this article.
An applicant for a site development permit (see section
6-2D-8-4 of this article) must stabilize areas left exposed after land surface
modification with vegetation normally associated with that stream or wetland.
The planting of native riparian vegetation is recommended as the preferred
stabilization measure. Other techniques should be used only when and where
vegetation fails to control erosion. The preferred alternative is riprap, using
natural rock materials where practicable, installed on eroding bank areas in a
manner that provides interstitial space for vegetative growth and habitat for
macroinvertebrates and other stream organisms. Lining of the stream channel
bottom is not permitted.
The applicant shall minimize access to the applicant's proposed development
activity within all or part of the lowland conservancy overlay district where
such access could adversely affect the stream, lake, pond, wetland, or related
environmentally sensitive areas.
   E.   Site Development Plan: A site development plan must be prepared for any
proposed development within, or partly within, the lowland conservancy overlay
district and must indicate:
      1.   Dimension and area of parcel, showing also the vicinity of the site
in sufficient detail to enable easy location, in the field, of the site for
which the site development permit is sought, and including the boundary line,
underlying zoning, a legend, a scale, and a north arrow. This requirement may
be satisfied by the submission of a separate vicinity map;
      2.   Location of any existing and proposed structures;
      3.   Location of existing or proposed on site sewage systems or private
water supply systems;
      4.   Location of any perennial or intermittent stream, lake or pond, and
its ordinary high water mark;
      5.   Location and landward limit of all wetlands;
      6.   Location of setback lines as defined in this section
 6-2D-8;
      7.   Location of the 100-year floodway and floodplain limits;
      8.   Location of existing or future access roads;
      9.   Specifications and dimensions of stream, wetland or other water
areas proposed for alterations;
      10.   Cross sections and calculations indicating any changes in flood
storage volumes; and
      11.   Such other information as reasonably requested by the village of
Manhattan.
The applicant shall present evidence, prepared by a qualified professional
engineer, that demonstrates that the proposed development activity will not
endanger health and safety, including danger from the obstruction or diversion
of flood flow. The developer shall also show, by submitting appropriate
calculations and resource inventories, that the proposed development activity
will not substantially reduce natural floodwater storage capacity, destroy
valuable habitat for aquatic or other flora and fauna, adversely affect water
quality or ground water resources, increase storm water runoff velocity so that
water levels on other lands are substantially raised or the danger from
flooding increased, or adversely impact any other natural stream, floodplain,
or wetland functions, and is otherwise consistent with the intent of this
section
 6-2D-8.
   F.   Geologic And Soil Report: The site proposed for development shall be
investigated to determine the soil and geologic characteristics, including soil
erosion potential. A report, prepared by a licensed professional engineer,
geoscientist, or soil scientist experienced in the practice of geologic and
soil mechanics, shall be submitted with every application for land development
within the lowland conservancy overlay district. This report shall include a
description of soil type and stability of surface and subsurface conditions.
Any area that the investigation indicates as being subject to geologic or soil
hazards shall not be subjected to development, unless the engineer or soil
scientist can demonstrate conclusively that these hazards can be overcome.
   G.   Hydrologic Controls/Drainage Control Plan: A drainage control plan that
describes the hydraulic characteristics of on site and nearby watercourses as
well as the proposed drainage plan, prepared by a registered professional
engineer experienced in hydrology and hydraulics, shall be submitted with each
application for land development within the lowland conservancy overlay
district. Unless otherwise noted, the following restrictions, requirements and
standards shall apply to all development within the lowland conservancy overlay
district:
      1.   Natural open channel drainageways shall be preserved; and
      2.   Runoff from areas of concentrated impervious cover (e.g., roofs,
driveways, streets, patios, etc.) shall be collected and transported to a
drainageway (preferably a natural drainageway) with sufficient capacity to
accept the discharge without undue erosion or detrimental impact. Vegetated
drainage swales are preferred over conveyances constructed of concrete or other
manufactured materials.
The drainage control plan shall identify appropriate measures, such as recharge
basins and detention/retention basins, which will limit the quantitative and
qualitative effects of storm water runoff to predevelopment conditions.
   H.   Site Grading And Excavation Plan: This subsection applies to the extent
that grading and excavation and erosion control plans, which satisfy the
following requirements, are not already required by a jurisdiction.
      1.   A site grading and excavation plan, prepared by a registered
professional engineer, trained and experienced in civil engineering, shall be
submitted with each application for a site development permit and shall include
the following:
         a.   Details of the existing terrain and drainage pattern with one
foot (1') contours;
         b.   Proposed site contours at one foot (1') intervals;
         c.   Dimensions, elevation and contours of grading, excavation and
fill; slopes of all drainage swales shall be a minimum of two percent (2%)
through the side and rear yard drainage easements;
         d.   A description of methods to be employed in disposing of soil and
other material that is removed from allowable grading and excavation sites,
including location of the disposal site if on the property;
         e.   A schedule showing when each stage of the project will be
completed, including the total area of soil surface to be disturbed during each
stage, and estimated starting and completion dates. The schedule shall be
prepared so as to limit, to the shortest possible period, the time soil is
exposed and unprotected. In no case shall the existing natural vegetation be
destroyed, removed or disturbed more than fifteen (15) days prior to initiation
of the improvements; and
         f.   A detailed description of the revegetation and stabilization
methods to be employed, to be prepared in conjunction with the landscape plan
per subsection I of this section. This description should include locations of
erosion control measures such as sedimentation basins, straw bales, diversion
swales, etc.
The grading and excavation plan must be consistent with all the provisions of
this section
 6-2D-8.
      2.   Unless otherwise provided in this section
6-2D-8, the following restrictions, requirements and standards shall apply to
all development within the district:
         a.   Every effort shall be made to develop the site in such a manner
so as to minimize the alteration of the natural topography;
         b.   No grading, filling, cleaning, clearing, terracing or excavation
of any kind shall be initiated until final engineering plans are approved and
the site development permit is granted by the village of Manhattan; and
         c.   The depositing of any excavation, grading or clearing material
within a stream, lake, pond or wetland area shall be prohibited.
In addition to locating all site improvements on the subject property to
minimize adverse impacts on the stream, lake, pond, or wetland, the applicant
shall install a berm, curb, or other physical barrier during construction, and
following completion of the project, where necessary, to prevent direct runoff
and erosion from any modified land surface into a stream, lake, pond, or
wetland. All parking and vehicle circulation areas should be located as far as
possible from a stream, lake, pond, or wetland.
The village of Manhattan may limit development activity in or near a stream,
lake, pond, or wetland to specific months, and to a maximum number of
continuous days or hours, in order to minimize adverse impacts. Also, the
village of Manhattan may require that equipment be operated from only one side
of a stream, lake, or pond in order to minimize bank disruption. Other
development techniques, conditions, and restrictions may be required in order
to minimize adverse impacts on streams, lakes, ponds or wetlands, and on any
related areas not subject to development activity.
   I.   Natural Vegetation Buffer Strip Required; Vegetation And Revegetation/
Landscape Plan: To minimize erosion, stabilize the stream bank, protect water
quality, maintain water temperature at natural levels, preserve fish and
wildlife habitat, to screen manmade structures, and also to preserve aesthetic
values of the natural watercourse and wetland areas, a natural vegetation strip
shall be maintained along the edge of the stream, lake, pond or wetland. The
natural vegetation strip shall be as described in subsection C of this section
and shall be measured from the ordinary high water mark of a perennial or
intermittent stream, lake or pond and the edge of wetland.
Within the natural vegetation strip, trees and shrubs may be selectively pruned
or removed for harvest of merchantable timber, to achieve a filtered view of
the water body from the principal structure and for reasonable private access
to the stream, lake, pond, or wetland. Said pruning and removal activities
shall ensure that a live root system stays intact to provide for stream bank
stabilization and erosion control.
A landscape plan, prepared by a professional, shall be submitted with each site
development permit application for development activity within the lowland
conservancy overlay district and contain the following:
      1.   A plan describing the existing vegetative cover of the property and
showing those areas where the vegetation will be removed as part of the
proposed construction; and
      2.   A plan describing the proposed revegetation of disturbed areas
specifying the materials to be used.
The vegetation must be planned in such a way that access for stream maintenance
purposes shall not be prevented. (Ord. 947, 3-20-2007)
6-2D-8-6: WATERCOURSE RELOCATION AND MINOR MODIFICATIONS (INCLUDING
CHANNELIZATION AND RELOCATION):
   A.   Watercourse relocation or modification is generally not permitted
because these activities are not usually consistent with the purposes of this
section
6-2D-8. Under certain circumstances, relocation and minor modification may be
permitted through a site development permit where certain problems can be
mitigated by relocation and/or minor modification, specifically when:
      1.   Off site hydrologic conditions are causing erosion, flooding and
related problems; or
      2.   On site soil and geologic conditions are resulting in unstable
conditions that pose hazards to life, health, and existing structures or
property; or
      3.   The quality of previously modified or relocated streams can be
improved through restoration; or
      4.   Officially adopted storm water management plans call for placement
of detention or retention facilities in a stream; or
      5.   Public utilities, including sanitary sewers, pipelines, and
roadways, require stream crossing or relocation where there are not practical
alternatives.
Modification of watercourses as a convenience for site design purposes is not
permitted.
   B.   1. Conditions And Restrictions For Permitting Stream Modification:
Stream modification, when permitted, is subject to the following conditions and
restrictions:
         a.   Water quality, habitat and other natural functions must be
significantly improved by the modification; no significant habitat area may be
destroyed;
         b.   The amount of flow and velocity of a stream is not to be
increased or decreased as the stream enters or leaves a subject property,
unless this reflects an improvement over previous conditions in terms of
reduced flooding, reduced erosion, or enhanced low flow conditions;
         c.   Prior to diverting water into a new channel, a qualified
professional approved by the village of Manhattan shall inspect the stream
modification, and issue a written report to the village of Manhattan that the
modified stream complies with the requirements in subsection
6-2D-5G2 of this article; and
         d.   Stream channel enlargement, or other modifications that would
increase conveyance, shall not be permitted if the intended purpose is to
accommodate development activities in the floodplain.
      2.   Required Content Of Stream Modification, Relocation Plan: Stream
relocation may be permitted in accordance with a stream relocation plan that
provides for:
         a.   The creation of a natural meander pattern, pools, riffles, and
substrate;
         b.   The formation of gentle side slopes (at least 3 feet horizontally
per 1 foot vertically), including installation of erosion control features;
         c.   The utilization of natural materials wherever possible;
         d.   The planting of vegetation normally associated with streams,
including primarily native riparian vegetation;
         e.   The creation of spawning and nesting areas wherever appropriate;
         f.   The reestablishment of the fish population wherever appropriate;
         g.   The restoration of water flow characteristics compatible with
fish habitat areas, wherever appropriate;
         h.   The filling and revegetation of the prior channel;
         i.   A proposed phasing plan, specifying time of year for all project
phases;
         j.   Plans for sediment and erosion control; and
         k.   Establishment of a low flow channel that reflects the conditions
of a natural stream.
      3.   Criteria For Permitting Armoring Of Channels And Banks: Armoring in
the form of bulkheads, riprap or other materials or devices is not permitted
except in accordance with the following:
         a.   Significant erosion cannot be prevented in any other way and the
use of vegetation and gradual bank slopes has not sufficiently stabilized the
shoreline or bank;
         b.   The bulkhead or other device is not placed within a wetland, or
between a wetland and a lake or pond;
         c.   The bulkhead, riprap or other device will minimize the
transmittal of wave energy or currents to other properties; and
         d.   The change in the horizontal or vertical configuration of the
land must be kept to a minimum. Where permission to install bulkheads or other
armoring devices is requested as part of the site development permit
application, documentation and certification pertaining to the items above must
be submitted.
      4.   Criteria For Permitting The Use Of Culverts: Culverts are not
permitted in streams except in accordance with the following:
         a.   Where a culvert is necessary for creating access to a property;
use of culverts as a convenience, in order to facilitate general site design,
is not to be considered;
         b.   The culvert must allow passage of fish inhabiting the stream, and
accommodate the 100-year flood event without increasing upstream flooding,
except where a restricting culvert is desirable as part of an overall storm and
flood water management plan;
         c.   The culvert must be maintained free of debris and sediment to
allow free passage of water, and, if applicable, fish; and
         d.   The stream bottom should not be significantly widened for the
placement of a culvert as this increases siltation; if multiple culverts must
be installed, one culvert should be at the level of the bottom of the stream
and the others at or above normal water elevation.
      5.   Criteria For Permitting On Stream Impoundments: Impoundment of
streams is not permitted except in accordance with the following:
         a.   The impoundment is determined to be in the public interest by
providing regional storm water detention, flood control, or public recreation;
         b.   The impoundment will not prevent the upstream migration of
indigenous fish species;
         c.   A nonpoint source control plan has been implemented in the
upstream watershed to control the effects of sediment runoff as well as
minimize the input of nutrients, oil and grease, metals, and other pollutants;
         d.   Impoundments without permanent low flow pools are preferred
except where a permanent pool is necessary to achieve the intended benefits of
the impoundment (e.g., recreation or water quality mitigation); and
         e.   Impoundment design shall include gradual bank slopes, appropriate
bank stabilization measures, and a presedimentation basin. (Ord. 947, 3-20-
2007)
6-2D-8-7: IMPACT ASSESSMENT:
The village of Manhattan may ask an applicant to submit a report prepared by a
qualified professional, and approved by the village of Manhattan, in order to
assess the potential impact of proposed development on a lake, stream or
wetland and associated environmentally sensitive areas, including loss of flood
storage potential, loss of habitat, changes in species diversity and quantity,
impacts on water quality, increases in human intrusion, and impacts on
associated streams, lakes, ponds, wetlands or downstream areas. (Ord. 947, 3-
20-2007)
6-2D-8-8: STREAM MAINTENANCE EASEMENT:
The applicant shall grant an access easement for stream maintenance purposes to
the village of Manhattan, over twenty five feet (25') parallel to the stream
bank. (Ord. 947, 3-20-2007)
6-2D-8-9: THREATENED AND ENDANGERED SPECIES:
All developments shall conform to the requirements set forth in 520 Illinois
Compiled Statutes 10/11, which states that a consultation with the department
shall be undertaken to evaluate whether actions proposed by the development are
likely to jeopardize the continued existence of listed endangered or threatened
species or are likely to result in the destruction or adverse modification of
the designated essential habitat of such species. Final disposition of any
disagreement not resolved by nonlocal laws, ordinance, etc., will be made by
the village board. (Ord. 947, 3-20-2007)
6-2D-8-10: SECURITY:
The applicant may be required to file with the village of Manhattan a letter of
credit, or other improvement security satisfactory to the village and in an
amount deemed sufficient by the village engineer, to ensure compliance with any
aspect of this section
6-2D-8; to cover all costs of improvements, landscaping, or maintenance of
improvements and landscaping, for such period as specified by the village of
Manhattan, and engineering and inspection costs; and to cover the cost of
failure or repair of improvements installed on the site. (Ord. 947, 3-20-2007)
6-2D-8-11: LIABILITY:
Prior to issuance of a construction permit, the applicant shall enter into an
agreement with the village of Manhattan which runs with the property, in a form
acceptable to the village of Manhattan attorney, indemnifying the village of
Manhattan for any damage resulting from development activity on the subject
property which is related to the physical condition of the stream or wetland.
(Ord. 947, 3-20-2007)
6-2D-8-12: SEPARABILITY:
Every section, provision, or part of this section
6-2D-8 is declared separable from every other section, provision, or part; and
if any section, provision, or part thereof shall be held invalid, it shall not
affect any other section, provision, or part. (Ord. 947, 3-20-2007)
6-2D-8-13: RETROACTIVITY:
The requirements of this section
6-2D-8 apply to all platted and unplatted lands within the jurisdiction of the
village of Manhattan. (Ord. 947, 3-20-2007)
   6-2E.txt ()CHAPTER 2
   STORM WATER MANAGEMENT
ARTICLE E. PERMIT SUBMITTAL REQUIREMENTS
SECTION:
6-2E-1: General Requirements
6-2E-1-1: Storm Water Management And Other Permits Required
6-2E-1-2: Permit Review Fees
6-2E-1-3: Professional Seals And Certifications Required
6-2E-2: Duration And Revision To Permits
6-2E-2-1: Permit Expiration
6-2E-2-2: Permit Extension
6-2E-2-3: Permit Revision
6-2E-3: Required Submittals
6-2E-3-1: Modification Of Submittal Requirements
6-2E-3-2: Applications And Project Overview
6-2E-3-3: Plan Set Submittal
6-2E-3-4: Storm Water Submittal
6-2E-3-5: Floodplain Submittal
6-2E-4: Submittals Prior To Permit Issuance
6-2E-4-1: Performance Security
6-2E-4-2: Maintenance Schedule And Funding
6-2E-5: Record Drawings
6-2E-6: Issuance Or Denial Of Permit And Appeal Of Permit Denial
6-2E-1: GENERAL REQUIREMENTS:
6-2E-1-1: STORM WATER MANAGEMENT AND OTHER PERMITS REQUIRED:
A storm water management permit shall be required if:
   A.   The development or a substantial improvement is located in the
regulatory floodplain or there is a regulatory floodplain within the property
boundary; or
   B.   The development disturbs more than five thousand (5,000) square feet of
ground cover, or five hundred (500) square feet if within twenty five feet
(25') of a lake, pond, stream or wetland; unless the development solely
involves one or more of the following:
      1.   Installation, renovation, or replacement of a septic system, potable
water service line, or other utility to serve an existing structure; or
      2.   Excavation or removal of vegetation in rights of way or public
utility easements for the purpose of installing or maintaining utilities not
including storm sewers; or
      3.   Maintenance, repair, or at grade replacement of existing lawn areas
not otherwise requiring a storm water permit under this chapter; or
      4.   Maintenance of an existing storm water facility, not requiring other
state or federal permits or approvals.
All development shall secure all appropriate storm water management related
approvals, including, without limitation, an IDNR/OWR floodway/floodplain
construction permit, a USACOE 404 permit and an IDNR/OWR dam safety permit if
required, from all federal, state and regional authorities and other
appropriate federal, state, and regional approvals prior to the issuance of a
storm water management permit for areas of a site requiring such other
approvals. (Ord. 947, 3-20-2007)
6-2E-1-2: PERMIT REVIEW FEES:
All permit fees, as established by separate ordinance by the village board,
shall be paid at the time of application. Fees may include, but are not limited
to, the cost of permit administration, review and inspections prior to
construction, during construction and within the permanent cover establishment
period following construction. (Ord. 947, 3-20-2007)
6-2E-1-3: PROFESSIONAL SEALS AND CERTIFICATIONS REQUIRED:
   A.   The design of storm water facilities, calculations for the
determination of the regulatory floodplain, or calculations of the impacts of
development shall meet the standards of this chapter and shall be prepared,
signed, and sealed by a professional engineer. The professional engineer shall
provide an opinion that the technical submittal meets the criteria required by
this chapter; and
   B.   For structures (not including earth embankments) that are subject to a
differential water pressure greater than three feet (3') the submittal shall
include evidence that the subject design has been reviewed by a qualified
professional who shall, as a minimum, have registration as a professional
engineer. Such reviews shall include stability of the structure under design
conditions considering the protection of downstream life and property in the
event of a failure. When directed by the Administrator the calculations
submitted for such structures shall be reviewed, signed and sealed by a
registered structural engineer.
For projects which include earth embankments which are subjected to
differential water pressure the submittal shall include evidence that the
embankment design and construction specifications are adequate for the design
conditions. This review shall include consideration of the existing foundation
soils for the embankment, the materials from which the embankment is to be
constructed, compaction requirements for the embankment and protection of the
embankment from failure due to overtopping. Construction and materials
specifications for all such embankments shall be included with the plan set
submittal. When directed by the Administrator, or when the impounded water
pressure differential exceeds three feet (3'), or when appropriate considering
the volume impounded and water surface elevation differential to which the
embankment is subjected, these calculations may be required to be reviewed,
signed and sealed by a qualified geotechnical or structural engineer; (Ord.
947, 3-20-2007)
   C.   A topographical map of the site, record drawings, and other required
drawings shall be prepared, signed, and sealed by a professional land surveyor
or professional engineer and tied to North American Vertical Datum, 1988
adjustment and any FEMA bench marks. (Ord. 1288-19, 2-5-2019)
6-2E-2: DURATION AND REVISION TO PERMITS:
6-2E-2-1: PERMIT EXPIRATION:
Permits expire December 31 of the third year following the date of permit
issuance or upon expiration of State or Federal permits required for stormwater
management. (Ord. 947, 3-20-2007)
6-2E-2-2: PERMIT EXTENSION:
If the permitted activity has been started but is not completed by the
expiration date of the permit, and the permittee intends to pursue the
permitted activity, then the permittee may submit a written request that the
expiration date be extended. Upon receipt of such request, the Administrator
may extend the expiration date in one year increments a maximum of three (3)
times for permitted activities outside regulatory floodplains and floodways.
Expiration dates for permitted activities in regulatory floodplains and
floodways may be extended in one year increments a maximum of three (3) times
provided the activity is in compliance with the then current requirements of
this chapter or the applicable certified community ordinance. (Ord. 947, 3-20-
2007)
6-2E-2-3: PERMIT REVISION:
If, after permit issuance, the permittee decides to revise the approved plans,
the permittee shall submit revised plans to the Director or the Administrator,
along with a written request for approval. If the Director or the Administrator
determines that the revised plans are in compliance with the then current
requirements of this chapter or the applicable certified community ordinance,
an approval of the revised plans may be issued. (Ord. 947, 3-20-2007)
6-2E-3: REQUIRED SUBMITTALS:
All permit submittals shall include the material listed in the sections noted
in table 3, attached to the ordinance codified herein, for the applicable type
of development, unless the submittal requirements are specifically modified by
the procedure in section
 6-2E-3-1 of this section
6-2E-3. (Ord. 947, 3-20-2007)
6-2E-3-1: MODIFICATION OF SUBMITTAL REQUIREMENTS:
The Administrator may, at his discretion, modify the submittal requirements on
a case by case basis considering the size, complexity and likelihood that a
development will affect the discharge of stormwater. Such modifications shall
be requested and answered in writing. The Administrator's response shall note
the relevant findings, and be specific as to what submittal requirements are
changed. The Director shall be copied on all related correspondence. The
Administrator may not modify submittal requirements for any aspect of the
development requiring State or Federal permits or approvals, nor for any
application in which any variance of the permitting authorities ordinance is
requested. (Ord. 947, 3-20-2007)
6-2E-3-2: APPLICATIONS AND PROJECT OVERVIEW:
The applicant shall provide the following information as a minimum, on forms or
in a format approved by the administrator:
   A.   The name and legal address of the owner(s) of the site and the permit
applicant; and
   B.   The common address, legal description, property identification number
(PIN) of the site; and
   C.   The name of the project, area of the site in acres, type of
development; and
   D.   A general narrative description of the development, existing and
proposed conditions, and project planning principles considered, including best
management practices used; and
   E.   Affidavits signed by the owner or the applicant's authorized
representative attesting to their understanding of the requirements of this
chapter or the applicable certified community ordinance and their intent to
comply therewith; and
   F.   A statement of opinion by a qualified person either denying or
acknowledging the presence of floodplain on the development site; and
   G.   Copies of other storm water related permits or permit applications as
required; and
   H.   A subsurface drainage investigation report; and
   I.   An engineer's estimate of probable construction cost of the storm water
facilities. (Ord. 947, 3-20-2007)
6-2E-3-3: PLAN SET SUBMITTAL:
All applicants for a storm water permit shall provide the following basic plan
exhibits: site topographic map, general plan view drawing, sediment/erosion
control plan, and a vicinity topographic map. Each exhibit may be on more than
one drawing for clarity. The specific information to be included on each
exhibit shall be as noted below:
   A.   Site topographic map meeting the following requirements shall be
submitted:
      1.   Map scales as one inch equals one hundred feet (1" = 100') (or less)
and accurate to plus or minus 0.5 foot; and
      2.   Existing and proposed contours on site and within one hundred feet
(100') of site; and
      3.   Existing and proposed drainage patterns and watershed boundaries;
and
      4.   Delineation of predevelopment regulatory floodplain/floodway limits;
and
      5.   Delineation of postdevelopment regulatory floodplain/floodway
limits; and
      6.   Location of cross sections and any other hydrologic/hydraulic
computer modeled features; and
      7.   Location of all on site drain tiles; and
      8.   Boundary of all wetlands, lakes, ponds, etc., with normal water
elevation noted; and
      9.   Location of all existing buildings and those to remain on the site
noted; and
      10.   Nearest base flood elevations; and
      11.   FEMA and any site specific bench marks (tied to county bench marks)
used; and
      12.   Highlight all contours used in the calculation of depressional
storage.
   B.   General plan view drawing meeting the following requirements shall be
submitted:
      1.   Drawing at the same scale as the site topographic map; and
      2.   Existing major and minor storm water systems; and
      3.   Proposed major and minor storm water systems; and
      4.   Design details for storm water facilities (i.e., structure and
outlet work detail drawings, etc.); and
      5.   Scheduled maintenance program for permanent storm water facilities
including BMP measures; and
      6.   Planned maintenance tasks and schedule; and
      7.   Identification of entities responsible for maintenance; and
      8.   Permanent public access maintenance easements granted or dedicated
to, and accepted by, a government entity; and
      9.   Proposed regulatory floodplain and floodway location (with the base
flood and flood protection elevations noted); and
      10.   Highlight all plan areas at elevations below the 100-year high
water elevation of site runoff storage facilities.
      11.   For work in the floodplain, cross section views of the project and
engineering study reach showing existing and proposed conditions including
principal dimensions of the work as shown in plan view, existing and proposed
elevations, normal water elevation, existing and proposed 10-year and 100-year
flood elevation, and graphical or numerical scales (horizontal and vertical).
   C.   Sediment and erosion control plan meeting the following requirements
shall be submitted:
      1.   Drawings at the same scale as the site topographic map; and
      2.   Sediment/erosion control installation measures, including standard
details, and schedule; and
      3.   Existing and proposed roadways, structures, parking lots, driveways,
sidewalks and other impervious surfaces; and
      4.   Limits of clearing and grading; and
      5.   Floodplain/floodway locations; and
      6.   Proposed buffer location, existing soil types, vegetation and land
cover conditions; and
      7.   List of maintenance tasks and schedule for sediment/erosion control
measures; and
      8.   Location and description of methods to prevent tracking of sediment
or soil off site, including construction entrance details as appropriate; and
      9.   Description of dust and traffic control measures; and
      10.   Locations of stockpiles to be in place more than one hundred eighty
(180) days.
   D.   Vicinity topographic map meeting the following requirements shall be
submitted:
      1.   Vicinity topographic map identifying all off site areas draining to
the development and downstream to the receiving intermittent or perennial
stream (a 2 foot contour map is preferred at a scale readable by the reviewer
but a USGS quadrangle map is acceptable); and
      2.   Watershed boundaries for areas draining through or from the
development; and
      3.   Soil types related to hydrologic soils group, vegetation and land
cover affecting runoff upstream of the site for any area draining through the
site; and
      4.   Location of development site within the major watershed(s); and
      5.   Show the overland flow path from the downstream end of the
development to the receiving intermittent or perennial stream.
   E.   The submittal shall not be considered complete until the preliminary
plat and final engineering drawings have been determined to be complete by the
village. (Ord. 947, 3-20-2007)
6-2E-3-4: STORM WATER SUBMITTAL:
The storm water submittal shall include narrative discussion and calculations
to support a finding that the proposed development complies with the technical
requirements of the permitting authorities ordinance. The submittal shall
consist of, at a minimum, the following material:
   A.   A narrative description of the existing and proposed site drainage
patterns and conditions. Include description of off site conditions, which help
to identify storm water issues considered in the design.
   B.   A schedule for implementation of the site storm water plan.
   C.   On site and off site runoff calculations which address the following:
      1.   Documentation of the procedures/assumptions used to calculate
hydrologic and hydraulic conditions for sizing major and minor systems; and
      2.   Cross section data for open channels; and
      3.   Hydraulic grade line and water surface elevations under design flow
conditions; and
      4.   Hydraulic grade line and water surface elevations under base flood
flow conditions.
   D.   Site runoff storage calculations, which address the following:
      1.   Calculation of hydraulically connected impervious area and
corresponding retention volume.
      2.   Documentation of the procedures/assumptions used to calculate
hydrologic and hydraulic conditions for determining the allowable release rate.
      3.   Documentation of the procedures/assumptions used to calculate on
site depressional storage.
      4.   Documentation of the procedures/assumptions used to calculate
hydrologic and hydraulic conditions for determining the storage volume.
      5.   Elevation area storage data and calculations for site runoff
storage.
      6.   Elevation discharge data, and calculations specifically related to
the outlet control structure depicted in the plan exhibits.
      7.   The general plan view drawing of subsection
6-2E-3-3B of this article shall indicate the areas of directly connected
impervious areas and any offsetting landscaped areas as defined in section
6-2B-4-5 of this chapter. (Ord. 947, 3-20-2007)
6-2E-3-5: FLOODPLAIN SUBMITTAL:
The applicant shall obtain approval from IDNR/OWR and FEMA for all new base
flood and floodway determinations for those cases in which their permitting
authority applies or as noted in section
6-2D-2 of this chapter. The storm water management permit will not be issued
until such approval is received. Documentation supporting a finding that the
proposed development is in compliance with sections
6-2D-1 and
6-2D-2 of this chapter shall be submitted with the application. At a minimum,
the following material shall be submitted for approval with the application:
   A.   Regulatory Floodplain Boundary: Regulatory floodplain boundary
determination:
      1.   Provide source of flood profile information.
      2.   Provide all hydrologic and hydraulic study information for site
specific floodplain studies, unnumbered zone A area elevation determinations,
and floodplain map revisions.
   B.   Hydrologic And Hydraulic Analyses: Floodway hydrologic and hydraulic
analyses for the following conditions:
      1.   Existing conditions (land used and stream systems).
      2.   Proposed conditions (land used and stream systems).
      3.   Tabular summary of 100-year flood elevations and discharges for
existing and proposed conditions.
      4.   Calculations used for model development.
      5.   Hydraulic/hydrologic computer model input/output.
   C.   Floodplain Fill And Compensatory Storage Calculations: Floodplain fill
and compensatory storage calculations for below and above 10-year flood
elevation up to the base flood elevation:
      1.   Tabular summary for below and above 10-year flood elevation of fill,
compensatory storage, and compensatory storage ratios provided in proposed
plan.
      2.   Cross sections used for the above calculations.
   D.   Floodproofing Measures:
      1.   Narrative discussion of floodproofing measures including material
specifications, calculations, and design details, operation summary.
   E.   Flood Easements: Flood easements when required by this chapter or the
applicable certified community ordinance. (Ord. 947, 3-20-2007)
6-2E-4: SUBMITTALS PRIOR TO PERMIT ISSUANCE:
The following additional submittals as noted in sections
 6-2E-4-1 and
6-2E-4-2 of this article are required prior to issuance of the storm water
permit. (Ord. 947, 3-20-2007)
6-2E-4-1: PERFORMANCE SECURITY:
Performance security in accordance with article L of this chapter shall be
required prior to permit issuance. (Ord. 947, 3-20-2007)
6-2E-4-2: MAINTENANCE SCHEDULE AND FUNDING:
A completed maintenance schedule for the storm water management facilities and
special management areas, in accordance with article F of this chapter shall be
submitted along with identification of the entity responsible for maintenance
and funding and backup funding sources for maintenance in accordance with
section
6-2F-6 of this chapter. (Ord. 947, 3-20-2007)
6-2E-5: RECORD DRAWINGS:
The developer is required to submit record drawings of all permitted storm
water facilities. The record drawings shall be signed and sealed by a
professional engineer or professional land surveyor who shall state that the
project as constructed is substantially in conformance with the project as
permitted. The record drawings shall include calculations verifying that the
volumes of detention and compensatory storage required in the permit have been
provided. (Ord. 947, 3-20-2007)
6-2E-6: ISSUANCE OR DENIAL OF PERMIT AND APPEAL OF PERMIT DENIAL:
The administrator shall either issue or deny a storm water permit within thirty
(30) days of receiving a complete permit application and all required
submittals and fees, unless additional time is granted by both the
administrator and the applicant. When a permit is denied, the applicant may
appeal the administrator's decision to the village board provided such appeal
is made in writing within fifteen (15) days of the date of the notification of
denial. The village board shall render a decision to issue the storm water
permit, issue the permit with conditions, or uphold the administrator's denial
of the permit. The village board shall render its decision within thirty (30)
days of the appeal. Failure to take action shall be deemed action to uphold the
permit denial by the administrator. (Ord. 947, 3-20-2007)
ARTICLE F. LONG TERM MAINTENANCE
SECTION:
6-2F-1: Responsibility
6-2F-2: Transfer To Permitting Authority Or Other Public Entity
6-2F-3: Transfer To Homeowners' Or Similar Association
6-2F-4: Conveyance To One Or More Persons
6-2F-5: Incorporation Of Maintenance Obligations In Storm Water Management
Permit
6-2F-6: Funding Of Long Term Maintenance Of Storm Water Facilities
6-2F-1: RESPONSIBILITY:
Unless maintenance responsibility has been delegated to and accepted by another
qualified entity under this section, the owner shall maintain that portion of a
storm water drainage system located upon his land. With the approval of the
administrator the storm water drainage system, or specified portions thereof,
may be:
   A.   Dedicated or otherwise transferred to and accepted by the permitting
community or other public entity; or
   B.   Conveyed or otherwise transferred to and accepted by a homeowners'
association, or similar entity, the members of which are to be the owners of
all of the lots or parcels comprising the development; or
   C.   Conveyed to one or more persons or in one or more undivided interests
to one or more persons.
Except for those portions of a storm water drainage system to be dedicated or
otherwise transferred to the permitting authority or other public entity,
included in the application for a storm water permit shall be a plan for the
long term management, operation and maintenance of the storm water drainage
system and a description of the sources of funding therefor. Amendments to the
plan must be approved by the administrator. (Ord. 947, 3-20-2007)
6-2F-2: TRANSFER TO PERMITTING AUTHORITY OR OTHER PUBLIC ENTITY:
If any portion of the storm water drainage system is to be dedicated or
otherwise transferred to the permitting authority or other public entity under
subsection
6-2F-1A of this article, appropriate easements for ingress and egress to and
maintenance of such portions shall be reserved for the benefit of such entity
on the final plat. (Ord. 947, 3-20-2007)
6-2F-3: TRANSFER TO HOMEOWNERS' OR SIMILAR ASSOCIATION:
If any portion of the storm water drainage system is to be conveyed or
otherwise transferred to a homeowners' or similar association under subsection
6-2F-1B of this article then:
   A.   Appropriate easements for ingress and egress to and maintenance of such
portions shall be reserved for the benefit of such association and the
permitting authority on the final plat;
   B.   The association shall be duly incorporated and a copy of the
certificate of incorporation, duly recorded, and bylaws, and any amendment to
either of them, shall be delivered to the administrator;
   C.   The bylaws of the association shall, at a minimum, contain:
      1.   A provision acknowledging and accepting the association's obligation
to maintain certain portions of the storm water drainage system as required by
this chapter;
      2.   A mechanism for imposing an assessment upon the owners of all of the
lots or parcels comprising the development sufficient, at a minimum, to provide
for the maintenance of those portions of the storm water drainage system as
required by this chapter and the payment of all taxes levied thereon;
      3.   A provision adopting the plan of long term maintenance set forth in
the application for a storm water management permit, with approved amendments;
      4.   A provision identifying the officer of the association responsible
for carrying out the obligations imposed upon the association under this
article, and an obligation to inform the administrator of the name, address and
phone number of this officer and any changes thereto;
      5.   A provision requiring the consent of the permitting authority to any
amendment of the bylaws changing any of the provisions of the bylaws required
by this article; and
      6.   A provision requiring the consent of the permitting authority to the
dissolution of the association.
   D.   Any conveyance or other instrument of transfer delivered under
subsection
 6-2F-1B of this article shall include a covenant affirmatively imposing upon
the association the obligations set forth in this section and the association's
affirmative acceptance thereof. (Ord. 947, 3-20-2007)
6-2F-4: CONVEYANCE TO ONE OR MORE PERSONS:
If any portion of the storm water drainage system is to be conveyed to one or
more persons under subsection
6-2F-1C of this article, then:
   A.   Appropriate easements for ingress and egress to and maintenance of such
portions shall be reserved for the benefit of the permitting authority on the
final plat;
   B.   The final plat shall contain a legend imposing the maintenance
obligations of this section upon the grantee and his successors in interest as
a covenant running with the land and incorporating by reference the plan of
long term maintenance set forth in the application for a storm water management
permit, with approved amendments;
   C.   The final plat shall contain a legend reserving the right of the
permitting authority to enter upon the land to perform the maintenance required
in this section if the owner does not do so and to place a lien against the
land for the cost thereof;
   D.   Any conveyance delivered under subsection
6-2F-1C of this article, and any subsequent conveyance, shall include a
covenant affirmatively imposing upon the grantee the obligations, restrictions
and provisions set forth in this section and the grantee's affirmative
acceptance thereof. (Ord. 947, 3-20-2007)
6-2F-5: INCORPORATION OF MAINTENANCE OBLIGATIONS IN STORM WATER MANAGEMENT
PERMIT:
The provisions of this article shall be incorporated by reference in the storm
water management permit and the applicant's acceptance of the permit shall be
deemed to be the applicant's acceptance and assumption of the obligations
imposed under this section. At the option of the administrator, the storm water
management permit may be recorded. (Ord. 947, 3-20-2007)
6-2F-6: FUNDING OF LONG TERM MAINTENANCE OF STORM WATER FACILITIES:
As a condition of approval of any application for a storm water management
permit, unless the maintenance responsibility for the storm water drainage
system to be constructed or installed in connection therewith has been accepted
by a public entity, the administrator will require assurance of long term
funding in a form found acceptable to the permitting authority. A corporation
with a bond rating of "A" or higher from a major investment firm (i.e.,
Standard and Poor, Moody or equivalent) will be considered to have met the long
term maintenance funding requirement. Absent some other form of agreement, then
the administrator shall require the establishment of a special service area
pursuant to 35 Illinois Compiled Statutes 200/27-5 et seq., either as the
primary means of providing for the long term maintenance of the facilities, or
as a backup vehicle in the event the entity designated by the applicant as
having primary maintenance responsibility fails to adequately carry out its
duties.
If the establishment of a special service area is required, the administrator
shall consider and approve a good faith estimate by the applicant of the tax
rate required to produce a tax to be levied upon all taxable property within
the area, sufficient for the long term maintenance of the facilities and submit
the same to the permitting authority which shall incorporate such rate into its
enactment of the ordinances necessary for the establishment of the area.
On or before August 1 of each year thereafter, the administrator shall submit
to the permitting authority a good faith estimate of the amount of tax required
to be levied upon all taxable property within the area for the next fiscal year
for the continued maintenance of the storm water drainage system. (Ord. 947, 3-
20-2007)
ARTICLE G. ENFORCEMENT AND PENALTIES
SECTION:
6-2G-1: Inspection And Maintenance Authority
6-2G-2: Required Inspections
6-2G-3: Offenses
6-2G-3-1: Permit Violation; Notice
6-2G-4: Offenses; Penalties; Remedies
6-2G-5: Violations Of Section 6-2B-5 Of This Chapter
6-2G-1: INSPECTION AND MAINTENANCE AUTHORITY:
Pursuant to the authority granted by 55 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/5-1104 and
5-1062, the village or county may, after thirty (30) days' notice to the owner
or occupant, enter upon any lands or waters within the village for the purpose
of inspecting and/or maintaining storm water facilities or causing the removal
of any obstruction to an affected watercourse. Such requirement of notice shall
not infringe upon any rights of the village to take immediate actions to
protect the public health and safety. (Ord. 947, 3-20-2007)
6-2G-2: REQUIRED INSPECTIONS:
Any development constructed pursuant to a storm water management permit shall
be subject to periodic inspections by the administrator, director or their
designee to ensure conformity with permit provisions and conditions. Such
inspections may be conducted without notice at any time while the permit is
effective. (Ord. 947, 3-20-2007)
6-2G-3: OFFENSES:
Any person who violates, disobeys, omits, neglects, refuses to comply with, or
resists the enforcement of any provision of this chapter ("chapter violation")
or any requirement or condition in any permit issued pursuant to this chapter
("permit violation"), and, in the case of a permit violation, fails to correct
such violation, omission or neglect, or cease such disobedience, refusal or
resistance after notice and reinspection as provided in section
6-2G-3-1 of this article, shall be guilty of an offense under this chapter.
(Ord. 947, 3-20-2007)
6-2G-3-1: PERMIT VIOLATION; NOTICE:
Whenever the administrator or director determines that a permit violation
exists, he shall give notice of the violation in the manner prescribed in
section
6-2J-7 of this chapter to the permittee. Such notice shall state the nature of
the violation and fix a date not less than ten (10) days after the date of the
notice when the site will be reinspected. (Ord. 947, 3-20-2007)
6-2G-4: OFFENSES; PENALTIES; REMEDIES:
   A.   Any person found guilty of an offense under this chapter shall pay a
civil fine in an amount not less than fifty dollars ($50.00) and not more than
seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00). Each calendar day during which such
violation continues to exist shall constitute a separate offense. Where
monetary penalties are imposed for violations of section
6-2B-5 of this chapter by regional, state or federal agencies, the amount of
these other agency fines will be offset against the monetary penalties for
violation of this chapter.
   B.   In addition to any fine imposed under subsection A of this section, the
administrator or the director may revoke any storm water management permit
issued to such person.
   C.   In addition to any fine imposed under subsection A of this section or
action taken under subsection B of this section, the administrator or the
director may issue an order requiring the suspension of any further work on the
site. Such stop work order shall be in writing, shall indicate the reason for
its issuance, and shall specify the action, if any, required to be taken in
order to resume work. One copy of the stop work order shall be posted on the
site in a conspicuous place and one copy shall be delivered in the manner
prescribed in section
6-2J-7 of this chapter to the permittee, if any, or, if none, to the person in
whose name the site was last assessed for taxes as disclosed by the records of
the supervisor of assessments.
   D.   In the enforcement of this chapter, the administrator or the director
may bring any action, legal or equitable, including an action for injunctive
relief that may be necessary. (Ord. 947, 3-20-2007)
6-2G-5: VIOLATIONS OF SECTION 6-2B-5 OF THIS CHAPTER:
An advisory committee, called the "agricultural review advisory committee",
shall be appointed by the SMC. The committee shall be comprised of three (3)
members actively farming sixty (60) or more contiguous acres in Will County.
The committee will also include representatives of the soil and water
conservation district, the natural resources conservation service and the farm
bureau.
All complaints and ordinance violations related to section
6-2B-5 of this chapter shall be reviewed by the agricultural review advisory
committee, who shall render an opinion to the village board on the validity of
the complaint, remedies, and penalties to be imposed. (Ord. 947, 3-20-2007)
ARTICLE H. GENERAL PROVISIONS
SECTION:
6-2H-1: Scope Of Regulation
6-2H-2: Exemptions
6-2H-3: Reserved
6-2H-4: Interpretation
6-2H-5: Warning And Disclaimer Of Liability
6-2H-6: Reserved
6-2H-7: Violations
6-2H-8: Severability
6-2H-9: Repealer
6-2H-10: Reserved
6-2H-11: Effective Date
6-2H-1: SCOPE OF REGULATION:
This chapter applies to all development within the village, including that
under the control of any governmental entity, agency, or authority. When the
village shall undertake development in the regulatory floodway, or regulatory
floodplain where no regulatory floodway has been designated, the village shall
obtain a permit from IDNR/OWR prior to issuance of a storm water management
permit. All units of local government shall obtain storm water management
permits from the village for all development projects within the corporate
limits of the village. (Ord. 947, 3-20-2007)
6-2H-2: EXEMPTIONS:
   A.   This chapter does not apply to:
      1.   Development which has been substantially completed before the
effective date hereof; and
      2.   Development which has been determined to be exempt by the village.
   B.   Nonconforming structures shall not be replaced or enlarged in any
manner unless such replacement or enlargement conforms to the requirements of
this chapter. (Ord. 947, 3-20-2007)
6-2H-3: RESERVED:
(Ord. 947, 3-20-2007)
6-2H-4: INTERPRETATION:
   A.   This chapter shall be liberally construed to protect the health,
welfare, safety, and the environment of the residents of the village and to
effectuate the purposes of this chapter and the enabling legislation.
   B.   Nothing in this chapter shall be deemed to consent to, license, permit
to locate, construct, or maintain any structure, site, facility or operation,
or to carry on any trade, industry, occupation, or activity.
   C.   When provisions of this chapter differ from any other applicable law,
statute, ordinance, rule or regulation, the more stringent provision shall
apply.
   D.   The provisions of this chapter are cumulative of all other laws,
statutes, ordinances, rules and regulations which relate to the subject matter
hereof and, except as otherwise expressly provided herein, nothing in this
chapter shall be construed as a limitation upon the application or enforcement
of any such law, statute, ordinance, rule or regulation. To the greatest extent
possible, the provisions of this chapter shall be construed to be consistent
with the provisions of such other laws, statutes, ordinances, rules or
regulations, and with each other, to the end that all such provisions may be
given their fullest application. (Ord. 947, 3-20-2007)
6-2H-5: WARNING AND DISCLAIMER OF LIABILITY:
   A.   The degree of flood protection provided by this chapter is considered
reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based upon engineering experience and
scientific methods of study. Increased flooding may result from causes beyond
the control of any governmental authority. This chapter does not, therefore,
guarantee that areas outside the floodplain or permitted land uses within the
floodplain will be free from flooding and associated damages.
   B.   Nothing in this chapter shall be construed or applied in any manner to
create liability on the part of or a cause of action against the county, any
municipality or other governmental authority, or any elected official, or any
officer, agent, or employee of any of the foregoing, or any certified review
specialist for any flood damage resulting from reliance on the provisions of
this chapter. (Ord. 947, 3-20-2007)
6-2H-6: RESERVED:
(Ord. 947, 3-20-2007)
6-2H-7: VIOLATIONS:
   A.   It shall be unlawful for any person to undertake any development
without first securing a storm water management permit as required by this
chapter.
   B.   It shall be unlawful for any person to violate, disobey, omit, neglect
and refuse to comply with, or resist enforcement of any provision of this
chapter or any condition of a storm water management permit. (Ord. 947, 3-20-
2007)
6-2H-8: SEVERABILITY:
   A.   The several provisions of this chapter shall be severable in accordance
with the following rules:
      1.   If any court of competent jurisdiction shall adjudge any provision
of this chapter to be invalid, such judgment shall not affect any other
provision of this chapter.
      2.   If any court of competent jurisdiction shall adjudge to be invalid
the application of any provision of this chapter, to a particular parcel of
land, a particular structure, or a particular development, such judgment shall
not affect the application of said provision to any other land, structure or
development. (Ord. 947, 3-20-2007)
6-2H-9: REPEALER:
This chapter repeals the original ordinance or resolution, which was adopted to
meet the national flood insurance program regulations, but is not intended to
replace any ordinance or resolution passed in order to establish initial
eligibility for the national flood insurance program. (Ord. 947, 3-20-2007)
6-2H-10: RESERVED:
(Ord. 947, 3-20-2007)
6-2H-11: EFFECTIVE DATE:
This chapter shall take effect for all purposes, and its effective date shall
be April 3, 2007. (Ord. 947, 3-20-2007)
ARTICLE I. VARIANCES
SECTION:
6-2I-1: Purpose
6-2I-2: Application For Variance
6-2I-2-1: Information Required
6-2I-2-2: Application Fee
6-2I-3: Public Hearing
6-2I-4: Granting Of Variances
6-2I-5: Recommendations
6-2I-6: Decision
6-2I-7: Conditions
6-2I-1: PURPOSE:
In order to provide a narrowly circumscribed means by which relief may be
granted when strict compliance with the requirements of this chapter is
impossible or impracticable, variances from the specific provisions of this
chapter may be granted according to the standards set forth in this article.
(Ord. 947, 3-20-2007)
6-2I-2: APPLICATION FOR VARIANCE:
It is the responsibility of the owner or developer and/or their engineer to
review this chapter and identify any and all variances. An application for a
variance, prepared by the owner's or developer's licensed professional engineer
and signed by the owner or developer of the development to which it relates,
shall be filed with the administrator. No application for a variance will be
accepted for filing unless it relates to a previously or contemporaneously
filed application for a storm water management permit. Applications for a
variance shall be filed in such number of duplicate copies as the administrator
may designate by administrative order. No action will be taken on an
application for a variance unless it and the corresponding application for a
storm water management permit to which it relates are complete as determined by
the administrator. The administrator shall send a copy of the complete
application to the director and to all other certified communities within the
same watershed. Applications for a variance need not be made upon any specific
form, but shall contain the information set forth in section
6-2I-2-1 of this article. (Ord. 947, 3-20-2007)
6-2I-2-1: INFORMATION REQUIRED:
An application for variance shall set forth:
   A.   The common addresses and legal descriptions of all lands comprising the
development;
   B.   The names and addresses of all owners of record of the legal title of
all lands comprising the development;
   C.   If title to any of the land comprising the development is held in
trust, the names and addresses of all beneficiaries of the trust;
   D.   The names and addresses of the developers of the land, if different
from the owner;
   E.   The names and addresses of all consultants retained by the developer in
connection with the application for a variance;
   F.   The names and addresses of all property owners within two hundred fifty
feet (250') of the development;
   G.   The specific feature or features of the development that require a
variance;
   H.   The specific provision of this chapter from which a variance is sought
and the precise extent of the variance therefrom;
   I.   A statement of the characteristics of the development that prevent
compliance with the provisions of this chapter;
   J.   A statement that the variance requested is the minimum variance
necessary to permit the development;
   K.   A statement as to how the variance requested satisfies the standards
set forth in section
6-2I-4 of this article. (Ord. 947, 3-20-2007)
6-2I-2-2: APPLICATION FEE:
With the filing of the application for a variance, the applicant shall pay the
fee prescribed by the village. (Ord. 947, 3-20-2007)
6-2I-3: PUBLIC HEARING:
When the application is complete, the administrator will so notify the
applicant and will schedule a public hearing on the application before the
oversight committee as applicable. Not more than thirty (30) nor less than
fifteen (15) days before the hearing, notice of the hearing shall be sent by
first class mail, postage prepaid, to the applicant, to the director, to all
property owners within two hundred fifty feet (250') of the development as
disclosed in the application, and to each certified community within the same
watershed as the development and to the committee. Within the same time period,
notice of the hearing shall be published at least once in a newspaper published
within the certified community having jurisdiction over the application, or
within the county if the county has jurisdiction over the application. If no
newspaper is published within the certified community, then the notice shall be
published in a newspaper with a general circulation within the certified
community, which is published in the county. The notices given under this
section shall set forth the common name, address and legal description of the
development and a brief description of the variance requested. (Ord. 947, 3-20-
2007)
6-2I-4: GRANTING OF VARIANCES:
The oversight committee shall not recommend nor shall the village board grant a
variance for a project from the provisions of this chapter unless the variance
is consistent with the purpose provided in section
 6-2A-2 of this chapter and meets the following standards based upon
substantial evidence submitted at the hearing:
   A.   The variance will not increase measurably the probability of flood
damage to insurable structures.
   B.   The variance requested is the minimum required considering each of the
following statements of underlying intent of this chapter and there are no
means other than the requested variance by which the alleged hardships can be
avoided or remedied to a degree sufficient to permit the reasonable
continuation of the development:
      1.   Detention of storm water shall also contribute to the improvement of
the quality of storm water runoff.
      2.   The volume of detention storage provided in open air vegetated
facilities is maximized consistent with other land use site constraints
including zoning requirements essential for the proposed development.
      3.   Conveyance of storm water from the project shall not increase peak
discharges from existing off site conveyance facilities beyond design capacity
for any storm event from the 2-year to the 100-year flood frequency.
      4.   High quality natural areas shall be preserved on the site,
including, without limiting the generality of the foregoing, stands of native
trees, existing wetlands, natural floodplain storage or other valuable
environmental and biological resources.
   C.   The variance is not requested solely for the purpose of increasing the
density of the development nor impervious areas on the site.
   D.   The variance is not requested solely as a result of economic hardship.
   E.   If applicable, the variance is required due to unique, natural
topographical features of the site.
   F.   The applicant's circumstances are not self-imposed. (Ord. 947, 3-20-
2007)
6-2I-5: RECOMMENDATIONS:
The administrator or his or her designee shall review the application for a
variance and present his or her written recommendations to the oversight
committee at the public hearing.
Not more than forty five (45) days after the close of the hearing, the
oversight committee shall forward the application with its written
recommendations to the village board. The written recommendations of the
oversight committee, when forwarded, shall be accompanied by written findings
of fact with respect to each of the considerations set forth in section
6-2I-4 of this article with citations to the evidence taken at the public
hearing. (Ord. 947, 3-20-2007)
6-2I-6: DECISION:
The village board shall grant the variation, grant the variation with
modifications or conditions, or deny the variation in writing within forty five
(45) days after receipt of the written recommendations of the oversight
committee; but in the event the village board does not act as aforesaid then
the application is denied. (Ord. 947, 3-20-2007)
6-2I-7: CONDITIONS:
A variance less than or different from that requested may be granted when the
record supports the applicant's right to some relief, but not to the relief
requested.
In granting a variance, the village board may impose such specific conditions
and limitations concerning any matter relating to the purposes and objectives
of this chapter on the applicant as may be necessary or appropriate.
Whenever any variance is granted subject to any condition or limitation to be
met by the applicant, upon meeting such conditions, the applicant shall file
evidence to that effect with the administrator. (Ord. 947, 3-20-2007)
ARTICLE J. ADMINISTRATION
SECTION:
6-2J-1: Responsibility For Administration
6-2J-2: Duties Of Director
6-2J-3: Duties Of Administrator
6-2J-4: Representative Capacity
6-2J-5: Oversight Committee
6-2J-6: Reserved
6-2J-7: Service
6-2J-8: Publication
6-2J-1: RESPONSIBILITY FOR ADMINISTRATION:
   A.   The village board shall determine policy related to this chapter
subject to the requirements of the county board.
   B.   The director and administrator shall administer this chapter. In
performing their duties, the director and the administrator may delegate and
oversee enforcement of responsibilities to any named designee.
   C.   Each community shall remain solely responsible for its standing in the
national flood insurance program, including:
      1.   The maintenance of all records and the submission of all reports
required for eligibility in the program, including elevation certificates,
floodproofing certificates, and lowest floor elevations; and
      2.   The notification of the director, FEMA and IDNR/OWR of any proposed
amendment to this chapter. (Ord. 947, 3-20-2007)
6-2J-2: DUTIES OF DIRECTOR:
The director shall:
   A.   Supervise the enforcement of this chapter;
   B.   Supervise the development, revision and implementation of the plan for
approval by the committee and the county board;
   C.   Supervise the review of complex storm water management permits if the
village requests such assistance;
   D.   Notify all of the communities in the county, FEMA, IDNR/OWR, USACOE,
the Illinois environmental protection agency, and the United States
environmental protection agency of any amendments to the plan or to this
chapter;
   E.   Review variance requests for the committee. (Ord. 947, 3-20-2007)
6-2J-3: DUTIES OF ADMINISTRATOR:
The administrator shall:
   A.   Receive a listing of all required federal, state, regional and county
permit applications filed for the project prior to issuing a permit under this
chapter for areas covered by other storm water related jurisdictions. The
administrator may request copies of the storm water related permit
applications;
   B.   Ascertain whether any floodplains/floodways exist on any site that is
the subject of an application for a permit under this chapter and whether or
not any new development is within the SFHA;
   C.   Review permit applications and determine whether to issue or deny
permits;
   D.   Ensure that the required notice of an application for a variance has
been given in accordance with sections
6-2J-7 and
 6-2J-8 of this article;
   E.   Notify an applicant for a variance that such variance may result in
increased rates for flood insurance;
   F.   Notify the director of an application for a variance CLOMR or LOMR;
   G.   Provide for inspections of developments as required by this chapter;
   H.   Investigate complaints of violations of this chapter within the
village;
   I.   Notify violators within regulatory floodplains that failure to comply
with the provisions of the national flood insurance program could make them
ineligible to receive flood insurance;
   J.   Initiate any proceeding necessary to enforce this chapter within the
village;
   K.   Advise, consult and cooperate with other governmental agencies to
promote the purposes of this chapter;
   L.   Maintain copies of all applications and submittals, federal and state
permits, variances, CLOMR, LOMR, CLOMA, LOMA and all documentation associated
with any of the foregoing for public inspection;
   M.   Maintain documentation and data on the cost of any improvement to a
structure in the floodplain in order to enforce the provisions of this chapter
pertaining to substantial improvements to such structures;
   N.   Notify adjacent communities in writing thirty (30) days prior to
issuing a permit for the alteration or relocation of a watercourse. (Ord. 947,
3-20-2007)
6-2J-4: REPRESENTATIVE CAPACITY:
In all cases when any action is taken by the director or the administrator, or
his or her duly appointed designee, to enforce the provisions of this chapter,
such action shall be taken either in the name of the county or the village as
the case may be, and neither the director nor the administrator, nor his or her
designee, in so acting shall be rendered personally liable. (Ord. 947, 3-20-
2007)
6-2J-5: OVERSIGHT COMMITTEE:
The planning and zoning commission has been designated by the village board to
perform the duties assigned to the oversight committee in this chapter. (Ord.
947, 3-20-2007)
6-2J-6: RESERVED:
(Ord. 947, 3-20-2007)
6-2J-7: SERVICE:
Unless otherwise provided herein, service of any notice or instrument under
this chapter may be made upon any person in one of the following manners:
   A.   By certified mail, return receipt requested, postage prepaid and
addressed to the address then on file for such person, if any, or if none, to
such person's last known address; or
   B.   By any method prescribed under the Illinois code of civil procedure.
(Ord. 947, 3-20-2007)
6-2J-8: PUBLICATION:
Unless otherwise provided herein, publication of any notice or other instrument
under this chapter shall be made by publishing such notice or other instrument
once in a newspaper published within the village (or, if no newspapers are
published within the community, then a newspaper published in the county and
having a general circulation within the village), such publication being not
less than fifteen (15) nor more than thirty (30) days before the hearing or
other event to which the publication relates. (Ord. 947, 3-20-2007)
ARTICLE K. RESERVED
(Ord. 947, 3-20-2007)
ARTICLE L. PERFORMANCE SECURITY
SECTION:
6-2L-1: General Security Requirements
6-2L-2: Development Security
6-2L-3: Sediment And Erosion Control Security
6-2L-4: Letters Of Credit
6-2L-1: GENERAL SECURITY REQUIREMENTS:
Should the village of Manhattan subdivision and development regulations
ordinance not be applicable to the said development/improvement, then it shall
be required as security to the village for the performance by the developer of
the developer's obligations to complete the construction of any storm water
facilities required by the storm water management permit, to pay all costs,
fees and charges due from the developer pursuant to the permitting authorities
of this chapter and to otherwise faithfully perform the developer's
undertakings pursuant to this chapter or the applicable certified community
ordinance, the developer shall, prior to issuance of a storm water management
permit:
   A.   Post a development security as provided in section
6-2L-2 of this article; and
   B.   Post a sediment and erosion control security as provided in section
6-2L-3 of this article, if a sediment and erosion control plan is required
pursuant to section
6-2E-3 of this chapter.
The developer shall bear the full cost and responsibility of securing and
maintaining the securities required by this section. (Ord. 947, 3-20-2007)
6-2L-2: DEVELOPMENT SECURITY:
A development security shall be posted and shall include:
   A.   A schedule, agreed upon by the developer and the administrator, for the
completion of the construction of any storm water facilities required by the
permit; and
   B.   An irrevocable letter of credit, or such other adequate security as the
administrator may approve, in an amount equal to not less than one hundred
twenty five percent (125%) of the estimated probable cost to complete the
construction of any storm water facilities required by the storm water
management permit, which estimated probable cost shall be prepared by a
registered professional engineer and shall be approved by the administrator;
and
   C.   A statement signed by the applicant granting the director or the
administrator the right to draw on the security and the right to enter the
development site to complete required work in the event that work is not
completed according to the work schedule; and
   D.   A statement signed by the applicant that the applicant shall indemnify
the village and the department for any additional costs incurred attributable
to the concurrent activities of or conflicts between the applicant's contractor
and the village's or department's remedial contractor at the site.
The security required by this section shall be maintained and renewed by the
applicant, and shall be held in escrow by the administrator until the
conditions set forth in this section or other applicable provisions are
satisfied.
The administrator may approve periodic reductions in the letter of credit based
on progress of construction. However, not more than ninety percent (90%) of the
security provided for in this section may be released prior to approval of
record drawings and final inspection. A minimum of ten percent (10%) of the
security shall be retained for a period of time not less than one year after
completion of construction of all storm water facilities required by the
permit. (Ord. 947, 3-20-2007)
6-2L-3: SEDIMENT AND EROSION CONTROL SECURITY:
If a sediment and erosion control plan is required pursuant to section
6-2E-3 of this chapter, then a sediment and erosion control security shall be
required. Such a security shall include:
   A.   An irrevocable letter of credit, or such other adequate security as the
director or the administrator shall approve, in an amount equal to not less
than one hundred twenty five percent (125%) of the estimated probable cost to
install and maintain the sediment and erosion control measures, which estimated
probable cost shall be approved by the director or the administrator; and
   B.   A statement signed by the applicant granting the director or the
administrator, as applicable, the right to draw on the security and the right
to enter the development site to complete sediment and erosion control measures
in the event that such measures are not installed and/or maintained according
to the established schedule.
The security required by this section shall be maintained and renewed by the
applicant, and shall be held in escrow by the director or the administrator, as
applicable, until the conditions set forth in this section are satisfied.
After completion of construction, establishment of vegetation, removal of all
sediment from storm water facilities, and final inspection and approval by the
director or administrator, as applicable, one hundred percent (100%) of the
sediment and erosion control security shall be released. (Ord. 947, 3-20-2007)
6-2L-4: LETTERS OF CREDIT:
Letters of credit posted pursuant to sections
6-2L-1,
6-2L-2, and
6-2L-3 of this article shall be in a form satisfactory to the administrator.
Each letter of credit shall be from a lending institution: a) acceptable to the
administrator, as applicable; b) having capital resources of at least ten
million dollars ($10,000,000.00), or such other amount acceptable to the
director or the administrator; c) with an office in Will County, Illinois; and
d) insured by the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation.
Each letter of credit shall, at a minimum, provide that:
   A.   It shall not be canceled without the prior written consent of the
administrator; and shall not expire without written notification of the
administrator at least ninety (90) days prior to expiration; and
   B.   It shall not require the consent of the developer prior to any draw on
it by the director or the administrator; and
   C.   If at any time it will expire within ninety (90) or any lesser number
of days, and if it has not been renewed and the renewal submitted to the
administrator, and if any applicable obligation of the developer for which its
security remains uncompleted or is unsatisfactory, then the director or the
administrator may, without notice and without being required to take any
further action of any nature whatsoever, call and draw down the letter of
credit and thereafter either hold all proceeds as security for the satisfactory
completion of all such obligations or employ the proceeds to complete all such
obligations and reimburse the county or the village for any and all costs and
expenses, including legal fees and administrative costs, incurred by the county
or the village, as the director or the administrator shall determine.
If at any time the administrator determines that the funds remaining in the
letter of credit are not, or may not be, sufficient to pay in full the
remaining unpaid cost of all storm water facility construction or sediment and
erosion control measures, then, within ten (10) days following a demand by the
administrator, the developer shall increase the amount of the letter of credit
to an amount determined by the administrator to be sufficient to pay such
unpaid costs. Failure to so increase the amount of the security shall be
grounds for the director or the administrator to draw down the entire remaining
balance of the letter of credit.
If at any time the administrator determines that the bank issuing the letter of
credit is without capital resources of at least ten million dollars
($10,000,000.00), is unable to meet any federal or state requirement for
reserves, is insolvent, is in danger of becoming any of the foregoing, or is
otherwise in danger of being unable to honor such letter of credit at any time
during its term, or if the administrator otherwise reasonably deems the bank to
be insecure, then the administrator shall have the right to demand that the
developer provide a replacement letter of credit from a bank satisfactory to
the director or the administrator. Such replacement letter of credit shall be
deposited with the director or the administrator not later than ten (10) days
following such demand. Upon such deposit, the director or the administrator
shall surrender the original letter of credit to the developer.
If the developer fails or refuses to meet fully any of its obligations under
this chapter or the applicable certified community ordinance, then the director
or the administrator may, in his or her discretion, draw on and retain all or
any of the funds remaining in the letter of credit. The director or the
administrator thereafter shall have the right to take any action he or she
deems reasonable and appropriate to mitigate the effects of such failure or
refusal, and to reimburse the county or the certified community from the
proceeds of the letter of credit for all of its costs and expenses, including
legal fees and administrative expenses, resulting from or incurred as a result
of the developer's failure or refusal to fully meet its obligations under this
chapter or the applicable certified community ordinance. If the funds remaining
in the letter of credit are insufficient to repay fully the county or the
certified community for all such costs and expenses, and to maintain a cash
reserve equal to the required letter of credit during the entire time such
letter of credit should have been maintained by the developer, then the
developer shall, upon demand of the director or the administrator therefor,
immediately deposit with the director or the administrator such additional
funds as the director or the administrator determines are necessary to fully
repay such costs and expenses and to establish such cash reserve. (Ord. 947, 3-
20-2007)
ARTICLE M. FEE IN LIEU OF ON SITE DETENTION
SECTION:
6-2M-1: Requirements
6-2M-2: Procedures
6-2M-1: REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   All single-family residential developments under five (5) acres in size
and all other development under one acre in size may pay a fee of one hundred
thousand dollars ($100,000.00) for each acre-foot of detention which would be
required under this chapter rather than installing detention facilities on the
property, unless specifically directed to do otherwise by the village engineer.
The village of Manhattan also shall have the option for larger properties of
requiring a fee of one hundred thousand dollars ($100,000.00) for each acre-
foot of detention needed in lieu of the applicant building a basin on site
provided the property will discharge storm water to the village's storm sewer
system and the applicant can demonstrate that the redevelopment will not
increase the risk to downstream properties of flooding. Fee in lieu of on site
detention solely due to financial constraints is not allowed. In addition, a
redevelopment project requesting fee in lieu of detention must demonstrate a
net benefit in water quality will be realized. The one hundred thousand dollar
($100,000.00) fee may be adjusted yearly by the construction cost index (CCI).
   B.   The applicant may provide the village of Manhattan with a detailed,
verifiable cost estimate for actually providing the required storage. If the
village engineer concurs with the cost estimate, the fee set for fee in lieu of
detention will be determined by the lesser of the one hundred thousand dollars
($100,000,00) per acre-foot or part thereof or the verifiable cost of providing
the required storage.
   C.   To encourage redevelopment of properties that have been within the
village limits for a minimum of fifteen (15) years, the village manager may
allow a discount of up to ninety percent (90%) for projects if there is no
increase in impervious area between the existing development and the proposed
redevelopment.
   D.   In instances where regional benefits and economics of scale can be
achieved, it is encouraged for adjacent property owners to utilize a common
regional detention basin. Special fee districts may be established for areas
where a regional storm water management plan has been approved by the village
board. Fee in lieu of detention for the detention volume required for the 2-
year 24-hour storm shall require a variance for sites with aggregate
development or redevelopment greater than twenty (20) acres subsequent to the
effective date of the WCSMO unless tributary to a regional storm water
management system approved by the village board. (Ord. 947, 3-20-2007)
6-2M-2: PROCEDURES:
The following fee in lieu of detention procedures:
   A.   The administrator may require, or the applicant may submit, a written
request for the payment of a fee in lieu of on site detention to fulfill all or
part of the on site detention requirement in accordance with section
6-2B-1-2 of this chapter. A request for fee in lieu of on site detention shall
be either rejected or approved within forty five (45) days of the written
request unless additional engineering studies are required.
   B.   Approval of a request for fee in lieu of on site detention on a
development site shall be determined by the administrator.
   C.   A fund will be maintained by the village for each of the major
watersheds for the purpose of identifying and controlling all revenues and
expenses related to storm water drainage services resulting from fee in lieu of
on site detention approvals. All monies collected for fee in lieu of on site
detention shall be deposited in these funds and may only be used for purposes
related to storm water management as noted in subsection D of this section.
   D.   Fee in lieu of on site detention revenues from development site may be
used to plan, design or construct an upgrade to existing or future storm water
management systems if the upgrade is consistent with a basin plan, floodplain
study or storm water system improvement that has been approved by the village
board. (Ord. 947, 3-20-2007)
TITLE 7
HEALTH AND SANITATION
CHAPTER 1
NUISANCES
SECTION:
7-1-1: Watercourses; Pools
7-1-2: Refuse Deposits
7-1-3: Premises Kept Sanitary
7-1-4: Unlawful Acts
7-1-5: Smoke, Noise And Odor Emissions
7-1-6: Abatement Of Nuisances
7-1-7: Penalty
7-1-8: Graffiti
7-1-1: WATERCOURSES; POOLS:
   A.   It shall be unlawful and a nuisance for any person to obstruct or
pollute any watercourse or source of water supply in the village. (1928 Code
§208)
   B.   Any stagnant pool of water in the village is hereby declared to be a
nuisance. It shall be unlawful for any person to permit any such nuisance to
remain or exist on any property under his control. (1928 Code §209)
7-1-2: REFUSE DEPOSITS:
It shall be unlawful and a nuisance for any person to deposit anywhere in the
village any uncovered piles of refuse, garbage, offal or carcasses of dead
animals. Such refuse must be buried at least two feet (2') below the surface of
the ground, or burned in properly constructed incinerators or otherwise
properly disposed of. Any uncovered pile of refuse is declared to be a
nuisance. (1928 Code §210)
7-1-3: PREMISES KEPT SANITARY:
It shall be unlawful and a nuisance to permit any building, structure or place
to remain in such a condition as to be dangerous to the public health in any
way. Any such structure, building or place is hereby declared to be a nuisance.
(1928 Code §212)
7-1-4: UNLAWFUL ACTS:
It shall be unlawful and a nuisance to commit or do any act which endangers the
public health or results in annoyance or discomfort to the public. (1928 Code
§213)
7-1-5: SMOKE, NOISE AND ODOR EMISSIONS:
Because of the emission of harmful odors, gases, smoke and noise of certain
factories and manufacturing establishments; and as the board of trustees have
found that among others, anhydrous ammonia bulk plants, fertilizer factories,
paint manufacturing plants, slaughtering houses, and all factories and plants
of a similar nature emit odors and gases which are a detriment to the health
and general welfare of the people, such plants and factories are hereby
declared nuisances. It is hereby declared by the president and board of trustee
of the village that no factory or plant storing or manufacturing anhydrous
ammonia, fertilizers, slaughtering processes or any other plant so described as
a nuisance herein shall operate within the limits of the village; and before
any individual should desire or elect to establish a factory within the
village, he should first apply to the village clerk for a permit without charge
to be submitted to the president and board of trustees of the village granting
him the right and authority to operate said factory in accordance with the
principles laid down in this section and other ordinances of the village.
The term "nuisance" shall not be limited to the above named plants and
factories, but shall include any factory that emits gases, vapors, smoke or
noise that is detrimental to the health and general welfare of the citizens of
the community. (Ord. 371, 11-5-1963; amd. 1990 Code)
7-1-6: ABATEMENT OF NUISANCES:
It shall be unlawful for any person to permit or maintain the existence of any
nuisance on property under his control. The village chief of police and the
village board are hereby authorized to abate any nuisance existing in the
village, whether such nuisance is one specifically recognized by ordinance or
not. (1928 Code §214; amd. 1990 Code)
7-1-7: PENALTY:
Any person convicted of a violation of any section or provision of this chapter
shall be punished by a fine as established in section
1-4-1 of this code for any one offense. Each day such violation is committed or
permitted to continue shall constitute a separate offense and shall be
punishable as such hereunder. (Ord. 791, 8-5-2003; amd. Ord. 1061, 4-20-2010)
7-1-8: GRAFFITI:
   A.   Defined: For purposes of this section, "graffiti" shall be defined as
any sign, symbol, marking, drawing, name, initial, work, diagram, sketch,
picture or letter placed, without the express, written permission of the owner,
upon the real or personal property of said owner.
   B.   Nuisance: Graffiti in public view is hereby declared to be a nuisance
as set forth in this code and subject to the provisions of the village
ordinances regarding nuisances and abatement thereof.
   C.   Unlawful: It shall be unlawful for any person to place graffiti upon
the real or personal, public or private property of another.
   D.   Sign Permit: It shall be unlawful for the owner and/or occupant of
fixed real or personal property which is in public view to place or give
permission for the placement of any graffiti on such property without having
first obtained a properly issued sign permit.
   E.   Markers Unlawful: It shall be unlawful for any person to possess, while
in any public building or public facility or while on private property, a spray
paint container, paint, ink, marking pen which contains a nonwater soluble
fluid, brush, applicator, or any other material for marking, scratching or
etching with the intent to use such material in violation of subsection C and/
or D of this section. (Ord. 875, 11-15-2005)
   F.   Penalties:
      1.   The penalty for violation of subsection C of this section shall be a
fine as established in section
1-4-1 of this code. In addition to said fine, the offender may be ordered by
the court to pay restitution to the property owner for the costs of restoring
the property to its state prior to the application of graffiti.
      2.   The penalty for violation of subsection D of this section shall be a
fine as established in section
1-4-1 of this code and a separate offense shall be deemed committed on each day
during or on which a violation occurs or continues.
      3.   The penalty for violation of subsection E of this section shall be a
fine as established in section
1-4-1 of this code. (Ord. 875, 11-15-2005; amd. Ord. 1061, 4-20-2010)
   G.   Removal Of Graffiti:
      1.   Upon written notification by the village, the owner of the property
upon which graffiti has been illegally placed shall remove the graffiti within
forty eight (48) hours from the date and time of notice.
      2.   The village shall have the right but not the obligation to remove
graffiti from the exterior of private property if the owners inform the village
of the presence of such graffiti and their inability to remove it. The owner
will be required to pay the village for the reasonable cost of the removal.
Owners must sign a statement authorizing the removal by the village and must
sign a release holding the village harmless from any claims or suits brought
for damages pursuant to any adverse or injurious effects of such chemicals, or
from the actions taken by the village or its employees.
      3.   Property owners who do not request such removal or do not remove the
graffiti within the time specified, shall be subject to the penalties listed in
subsection F of this section, and the village shall proceed to remove the
graffiti. The owner shall be required to reimburse the village for the
reasonable cost of the removal and such costs shall constitute a lien, which
may be recorded with the county recorder of deeds, against the property upon
which such structure is located.
      4.   Any extension of time in which graffiti must be removed may be
granted by the village upon application of the property owner to the village of
Manhattan and a showing of cause. Cause shall include, but not be limited to,
temperature, weather, availability of chemicals, or physical limitations. (Ord.
875, 11-15-2005)
CHAPTER 2
GARBAGE DISPOSAL
SECTION:
7-2-1: Garbage Collection And Disposal
7-2-2: Rates
7-2-3: Collection Of Fees
7-2-4: Accumulation Of Refuse
7-2-5: Collection Of Refuse
7-2-6: Time Of Collection
7-2-7: Penalty
7-2-1: GARBAGE COLLECTION AND DISPOSAL:
The regular collection and disposal of garbage in the village shall be made at
public expense in the village, and such collection and disposal shall be made
by contract with said village by a suitable contractor to be hired by the
village.
The funds to liquidate the cost of such garbage collection and disposal shall
be paid out of the enterprise fund to be raised by the billing of residents for
this service. (Ord. 890, 2-21-2006)
7-2-2: RATES:
Effective for garbage bills issued on and after November 1, 2006, for services
rendered in the preceding one month, every occupant, person, or owner of a
single-family home, duplexes, townhome, and apartments with two (2) units or
less must pay monthly for the collection of garbage and refuse. The rates for
collection of garbage and refuse shall be as follows:
Effective For Bills Issued After Monthly Rate
Effective For Bills Issued After Monthly Rate
                                 
   October 31, 2006           $17.73
   October 31, 2007           18.44
   October 31, 2008           19.18
   October 31, 2009           19.94
   October 31, 2010           20.74
   October 31, 2011           21.57
   October 31, 2012           22.43
 
(Ord. 921, 10-17-2006)
7-2-3: COLLECTION OF FEES:
Effective for garbage bills issued on and after April 1, 2006, for services
rendered in the preceding one month, all fees shall be collected monthly as an
additional charge on regular monthly water and sewer bills. (Ord. 890, 2-21-
2006)
7-2-4: ACCUMULATION OF REFUSE:
No occupant, person, owner, owner's agent or tenant of any private or public
premises shall permit refuse to accumulate on such premises, except in covered
containers or as provided hereinafter; and all such refuse should be removed
once every seven (7) days or more often if necessary to protect the health of
the inhabitants of the village. (Ord. 677, 10-20-1998)
7-2-5: COLLECTION OF REFUSE:
All household garbage or refuse shall be so collected and removed from the
premises at least once every week.
All refuse shall be collected from alleys wherever possible and wherever the
person desiring to dispose of such refuse owns or inhabits property abutting a
passable alley, said refuse shall be deposited at said alley for collection.
When no alley abuts the premises where said refuse is to be collected, then
said collection shall be made from the curb immediately in front of said
premises, unless otherwise specified by the village. (Ord. 677, 10-20-1998)
7-2-6: TIME OF COLLECTION:
The subdividing or apportioning of the village into various zones or areas for
the collection of refuse by the operator or contractor performing the work for
the village shall be subject to the board of trustees, and also the specific
dates or days of the week upon which collection is to be made from each zone.
No refuse, which is to be deposited for collection at any curb, shall be so
placed prior to one minute after twelve o'clock (12:01) A.M. on the day before
pick up is scheduled. In addition, no empty refuse collection receptacles,
garbage cans or recycling bins shall be left at any curb or pick up site after
eleven fifty nine o'clock (11:59) P.M. the day after the garbage collection is
made. (Ord. 677, 10-20-1998)
7-2-7: PENALTY:
Any person violating the provisions for depositing refuse shall be fined
seventy five dollars ($75.00) for the first offense, one hundred fifty dollars
($150.00) for the second offense and two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) for
any additional offense plus the cost of any cleanup of any garbage or refuse.
Any person violating the provisions for leaving empty refuse receptacles shall
be fined seventy five dollars ($75.00) for each offense. (Ord. 677, 10-20-1998;
amd. Ord. 1061, 4-20-2010)
CHAPTER 3
WEED CONTROL
SECTION:
7-3-1: Nuisance Declared
7-3-2: Definitions
7-3-3: Height
7-3-4: Removal
7-3-5: Abatement
7-3-6: Weed Cutting Lien
7-3-7: Penalty
7-3-1: NUISANCE:
Any weeds as hereinafter defined found growing on any parcel of land in the
Village in violation of this Chapter are hereby declared a nuisance. (Ord. 494,
7-19-83)
7-3-2: DEFINITIONS:
   OWNER: Shall include the legal or equitable owner, his agent, tenant, lessee
or trustee, whether a natural person, corporation, association, partnership or
trust.
   WEEDS: Shall include but not be limited to: burdock, giant ragweed, common
ragweed, thistle, cocklebur, jimson, blue vervain, common milk weed, wild
carrot, poison ivy, wild mustard, rough pigweed, lambsquarter, wild lettuce,
curled dock, all varieties of smart weed, poison hemlock and wild hemp. (Ord.
494, 7-19-83)
7-3-3: HEIGHT:
It shall be unlawful for the owner of any lot, plot, place, parcel area or
acreage to permit any weeds, grass or plants, other than trees, bushes, flowers
or other ornamental plants to grow to a height exceeding eight inches (8")
anywhere in the City. (Ord. 494, 7-19-83)
7-3-4: REMOVAL:
It shall be the duty of the Chief of Police to serve or cause to be served a
notice upon the owner or occupant of any premises on which weeds or plants are
permitted to grow in violation of the provisions of this Chapter and to demand
the abatement of the nuisance within ten (10) days.
It shall be sufficient notice to the owner to publish in a newspaper of general
circulation in the Village any and all property that violates this Chapter
requiring removal within ten (10) days of publication. (Ord. 494, 7-19-83)
7-3-5: ABATEMENT:
If the person so served does not abate the nuisance within ten (10) days the
Village may proceed to abate such nuisance, keeping an account of the expense
of the abatement, and such expense shall be charged and paid by such owner or
occupant. (Ord. 494, 7-19-83)
7-3-6: WEED CUTTING LIEN:
   A.   Charges are a Lien: Charges for such weed removal shall be a lien upon
the premises. Whenever a bill for such charges remains unpaid for sixty (60)
days after it has been rendered, the Clerk any file with the Recorder of Deeds
of Will County a statement of lien claim. This statement shall contain a legal
description of the premises, the expenses and costs incurred and the date the
weeds were cut, and a notice that the Village claims a lien for this amount.
Notice of such lien claim shall be mailed to the owner of the premises if his
address is known.
Provided, however, that failure of the Clerk to record such lien claim or to
mail such notice, or the failure of the owner to receive such notice, shall not
affect the right to foreclose the lien for such charges as provided in the
following Section.
   B.   Foreclosure Of Lien: Property subject to a lien for unpaid weed cutting
charges shall be sold for nonpayment of the same and the proceeds of such sale
shall be applied to pay the charges after deducting costs, as is the case in
the foreclosure of statutory liens. Such foreclosure shall be in equity in the
name of the village.
The village attorney is hereby authorized and directed to institute such
proceedings, in the name of the village, in any court having jurisdiction over
such matter, against any property for which such bill has remained unpaid sixty
(60) days after it has been rendered. (Ord. 494, 7-19-1983)
7-3-7: PENALTY:
Any person convicted of a violation of any section or provision of this chapter
shall be punished by a fine as established in section
 1-4-1 of this code for any one offense. Each day such violation is committed
or permitted to continue shall constitute a separate offense and shall be
punishable as such hereunder. (Ord. 791, 8-5-2003; amd. Ord. 1061, 4-20-2010)
CHAPTER 4
JUNK STORAGE
SECTION:
7-4-1: Definition
7-4-2: Nuisance Declared
7-4-3: Penalty
7-4-4: Abatement Procedures
7-4-1: DEFINITION:
"Junk", "refuse" and "trash" are defined herein to include any and all waste
matter, whether reusable or not, which is offensive to the public health,
safety or to the aesthetics of the neighborhood, and is specifically intended
to include, but not be limited to, worn out, wrecked and/or abandoned
automobiles, trucks, tractors, machinery of any kind, any parts thereof, old
iceboxes, refrigerators and stoves. (Ord. 437, 2-19-1974)
7-4-2: NUISANCE DECLARED:
The storing of junk, trash and refuse on private property within the village is
hereby declared a nuisance. (Ord. 437, 2-19-1974)
7-4-3: PENALTY:
Any person convicted of a violation of any section or provision of this chapter
shall be punished by a fine as established in section
1-4-1 of this code for any one offense. Each day such violation is committed or
permitted to continue shall constitute a separate offense and shall be
punishable as such hereunder. (Ord. 791, 8-5-2003; amd. Ord. 1061, 4-20-2010)
7-4-4: ABATEMENT PROCEDURES:
   A.   Any policeman, upon observing any violation of this chapter, shall
issue a notice directed to the owner of record of the property on which said
nuisance occurs, as shown in the records of the recorder of deeds of Will
County or as shown in the records of the village clerk; or to the occupant of
said property, or to both, which said notice shall describe the violation and
shall provide for the abatement thereof by such owner or occupant within five
(5) days of service of such notice.
   B.   Any policeman of the village shall serve the notice herein provided for
upon the owner or occupant of the property where such nuisance exists, or upon
both of them, and shall make his return copy of such notice, showing the time
of service, the person upon whom it was served, or the manner in which it was
served.
   C.   Immediately upon the termination of the time allowed in any such notice
for the abatement of such nuisance, the policeman, or any individual so
designated by the village police department shall investigate to determine
whether or not such nuisance has been abated.
   D.   In the event the owner or occupant of the property where such nuisance
exists has failed within the prescribed time to abate such nuisance, then the
policeman who served such notice, or the citizen of the village who filed an
affidavit with the chief of police of the village, shall file a complaint
charging violation of this chapter with the circuit court of the twelfth
judicial circuit, or a magistrate thereof, charging violation of this chapter
and demanding that the owner of the property or the occupant thereof, or both,
be punished as herein provided. (Ord. 437, 2-19-1974)
CHAPTER 5
GARBAGE, REFUSE AND ASHES; OPEN BURNING; COMPOST STRUCTURES
SECTION:
7-5-1: Definitions
7-5-2: Open Burning Prohibited
7-5-3: Accumulation Of Materials Subject To Decay
7-5-4: Accumulation Of Materials That Can Be Blown Away
7-5-5: Deposit Onto Public Streets Or Alleys
7-5-6: Dumping On Private Property
7-5-7: Storing Or Depositing Of Combustible Material
7-5-8: Declaration Of Nuisance
7-5-9: Containers For Collection
7-5-10: Leaf And Yard Waste Collection
7-5-1: DEFINITIONS:
As used in this section:
   ASHES: Residue from fires which are used for cooking and for heating
buildings. The definition excludes ashes resulting from industrial processes.
   GARBAGE: Wastes resulting from the handling, preparation, cooking and
consumption of food, and wastes from the handling, storage and sale of produce.
It shall not include more than a minimum amount of free liquids. It shall not
include food processing wastes from canneries, packing plants or similar
industries.
   REFUSE: Combustible trash, including, but not limited to, paper, cartons,
boxes, barrels, wood, wood shavings, packing materials, tree branches, yard
trimmings, leaves, wood furniture and bedding; noncombustible trash, including,
but not limited to, metals, tin cans, metal furniture, dirt, small quantities
of rock and pieces of concrete, glass, crockery and other mineral wastes; and
street rubbish, including, but not limited to, street sweepings, dirt, leaves,
catch basin dirt and the contents of litter receptacles. However, "refuse"
shall not include earth and wastes from building operations, nor shall it
include solid wastes resulting from industrial processes and manufacturing
operations, such as food processing wastes, boilerhouse cinders, lumber, scraps
and shavings. (Ord. 1033, 9-15-2009)
7-5-2: OPEN BURNING PROHIBITED:
The open burning of yards and fields, herbage, shrubbery, leaves, grass, brush,
trimmings from trees or bushes, wood, paper, garbage, refuse, waste,
construction debris or other combustible material on any property, public or
private, from any source whatsoever, within the village is unlawful and is
hereby prohibited, with the following exceptions:
   A.   Fires set and supervised by the fire chief of the Manhattan fire
protection district for public safety, training, horticultural or wildlife
management, or similar purposes and have been approved by the state or local
governmental agency having jurisdiction which are being conducted under permit
issued by the police chief or his designee.
   B.   Bonfires which are being conducted under permit issued by the police
chief or his designee after review with the Manhattan fire protection district
for the following:
      1.   Bonfire location shall be an approved location.
      2.   The size and duration of a bonfire shall meet fire safety
requirements including, but not limited to, atmospheric and weather conditions,
proximity to structures, combustible materials, flammable liquids or vapors.
      3.   Bonfire materials shall be seasoned wood only.
      4.   All permits shall be requested by and issued to the property owner
of the land upon which the bonfire is to be kindled.
   C.   Recreational fires.
      1.   Fires for the express purpose to cook food for human consumption,
such fires shall be contained in grills, charcoal burners, or the like.
      2.   Fires within a dry stacked stone, masonry, or metal fire pit or ring
or within commercially manufactured portable fireplaces, but only if:
         a.   Location: The location of the stone, masonry, or metal fire pit
or ring or commercially manufactured portable fireplace shall be at a safe and
reasonable distance from any building, structure, or vehicle and from any
container or other source of flammable liquids or vapors. A metal fire ring or
commercially manufactured portable fireplace shall not be placed on any
combustible surface.
         b.   Fuel: The fuel shall be dry, seasoned wood or equal and no
household or landscape wastes or leaves shall be burned.
         c.   Attendance: No burning shall take place on private property
without the presence and oversight of an adult over eighteen (18) years of age.
No fires shall be left unattended until entirely extinguished.
   D.   Fires started and attended by village of Manhattan personnel or village
authorized contractors to burn materials collected within the corporate limits
of the village shall be authorized on any village owned property.
   E.   The provisions of this chapter shall not be exercised so as to impose
regulations or require permits with respect to land used or to be used for
agricultural purposes. In the event that the land ceases to be used solely for
agricultural purposes, then and only then shall the provisions of this chapter
apply.
   F.   Controlled burning of native grasses, upon receipt of permit from the
police chief or his designee and has been approved by the state or local
governmental agency having jurisdiction.
Any violation of the provisions of this section shall be considered a nuisance
and shall be subject to the penalty set forth in section
1-4-1 of this code. (Ord. 1033, 9-15-2009)
7-5-3: ACCUMULATION OF MATERIALS SUBJECT TO DECAY:
Excepting for compost piles, which shall remain subject to the nuisance
provisions of the village of Manhattan's codified ordinances, no person shall
permit or allow or cause to accumulate anywhere in the village any garbage or
refuse or other material subject to decay, other than leaves or grass. Compost
piles shall be placed in aesthetically acceptable compost structures and shall
be subject to the following regulations:
   A.   Definitions:
   COMPOST STRUCTURE(S): A structure or structures designed to hold composting
materials in such a way as to prevent material from being windblown and to
promote the composting process.
   COMPOSTING: Biological process by which microorganisms decompose the organic
fraction of waste, producing a humus like material that may be used as a soil
conditioner.
   B.   Regulations: It shall be unlawful to allow a compost structure to be
maintained on any part of any premises and parkway immediately adjacent to any
premises in violation of the following standards:
      1.   The minimum size for a compost structure shall be two feet (2') wide
by two feet (2') high by two feet (2') long. The maximum size of a compost
structure on a property shall not exceed a maximum of five feet (5') wide by
five feet (5') high by five feet (5') long.
      2.   Only the following organic materials shall be allowed in any such
compost structure:
         a.   Soil.
         b.   Landscape waste in which any woody materials and garden wastes
have been reduced in size to one-half (1/2) an inch in diameter and twelve
inches (12") long.
         c.   Cooked and uncooked fruits and vegetables.
         d.   Livestock manure.
         e.   Residential cardboard rolls.
         f.   Coffee grounds and filters.
         g.   Dryer and vacuum cleaner lint.
         h.   Eggshells.
         i.   Grass clippings.
         j.   Hay and straw.
         k.   Houseplants.
         l.   Leaves.
         m.   Nutshells.
         n.   Sawdust.
         o.   Tea bags.
         p.   Yard trimmings.
Provided, however, that small amounts of wood ash or fertilizer may be added to
provide nutrients.
      3.   The following materials shall not be allowed in any such compost
structure, including, but not limited to:
         a.   Construction and demolition debris, except sawdust.
         b.   Metal items.
         c.   Preservative treated wood products.
         d.   Petroleum products (gasoline, motor oil, paints, or solvents).
         e.   Pesticides or herbicides (except that which is already conveyed
as part of the organic materials described above).
         f.   Fish or animal feces.
         g.   Fish or animal carcasses.
         h.   Cooked meat scraps.
         i.   Human feces.
         j.   Paper.
         k.   Plastic or cardboard items.
      4.   Compost structures shall be maintained by turning the compost
material to permit aeration so as to prevent unpleasant odors and prevent the
attraction or harboring of rodents and pests.
      5.   Compost structures shall not be located in any front or side yard;
shall be set back at least twenty feet (20') from principal residential
structures on adjoining lots.
      6.   Compost structures shall not be located on any drainage easement.
      7.   Only materials generated by the residence located on the subject lot
may be placed in the compost structure located on the lot.
      8.   Only one compost structure shall be permitted on a lot.
      9.   Compost structures shall be permitted only on lots in residential
districts. (Ord. 1033, 9-15-2009)
7-5-4: ACCUMULATION OF MATERIALS THAT CAN BE BLOWN AWAY:
No person shall cause or permit to accumulate any dust, ashes or similar
materials that can be blown away by the wind, unless such materials are stored
in a covered or secure container. (Ord. 1033, 9-15-2009)
7-5-5: DEPOSIT ONTO PUBLIC STREETS OR ALLEYS:
No person shall deposit or permit to fall from any vehicle, or escape from any
property, any garbage, refuse or ashes onto any public street or alley in the
village. This subsection shall not be construed to prohibit the placing of
garbage, refuse or ashes in a container complying with the provisions of this
chapter in preparation to having such material collected and disposed of in a
manner provided for herein as long as no garbage, recycling material or
containers leave the property or parkway of the property generating the
garbage, refuse or ashes. (Ord. 1033, 9-15-2009)
7-5-6: DUMPING ON PRIVATE PROPERTY:
No person shall dump or place any garbage, refuse or ashes on any premises in
the village without the consent of the owner of such premises. (Ord. 1033, 9-
15-2009)
7-5-7: STORING OR DEPOSITING OF COMBUSTIBLE MATERIAL:
No person shall permit or store any combustible refuse in such a manner as may
create a hazard of fire, nor store or deposit any garbage, refuse or ashes of
any nature or kind whatever upon any alley, street or other public place within
the village, except as herein provided. (Ord. 1033, 9-15-2009)
7-5-8: DECLARATION OF NUISANCE:
No person shall deposit anywhere in the village any uncovered pile or
collection of refuse, garbage or ashes. Any uncovered piles of such refuse,
garbage or ashes are hereby declared to be a nuisance. (Ord. 1033, 9-15-2009)
7-5-9: CONTAINERS FOR COLLECTION:
No person shall dispose of any garbage, refuse or ashes anywhere in the village
except as herein provided. Such material shall be placed in covered or secure
containers, as herein provided, for collection by a licensed garbage and refuse
collector. No container shall be placed so as to constitute a nuisance to
adjacent property or to the occupants thereof. (Ord. 1033, 9-15-2009)
7-5-10: LEAF AND YARD WASTE COLLECTION:
A property owner, his or her tenant, agent(s) of the owner or tenant,
contractor(s), or landscaper(s) may place leaves and yard waste in a closed
biodegradable bag or maximum thirty (30) gallon cans labeled "Yard Waste Only"
curbside along public streets and on the public parkway for pick up by the
village licensed garbage collector at any time from the first Monday of April
to the second Monday of December. Closed biodegradable leaf bags or cans shall
not be placed less than ten feet (10') from any storm drain inlet, nor shall
they create a safety hazard for vehicles, bicyclists or pedestrians.
(Ord. 1033, 9-15-2009; amd. Ord. 1466-24, 7-2-2024)
CHAPTER 6
MANDATORY RECYCLING PROGRAM
SECTION:
7-6-1: Definition
7-6-2: Recycling Program
7-6-3: Recycling Containers
7-6-4: Separation Of Recyclables And Placement For Recyclables Removal
7-6-5: Mandatory Recycling
7-6-6: Collection By Unauthorized Persons
7-6-7: Penalty
7-6-1: DEFINITION:
   RECYCLABLES: Materials having an economic value in the secondary materials
market, acceptable for collection by the village's recycling contractor, which
currently include newsprint, cardboard, paper products, bottle glass (all
colors), aluminum cans, HDPE plastic (i.e., no. 1 and 2), PET plastic (2 liter
pop bottles), tin cans, aluminum trays (i.e., TV dinner type trays). (Ord. 581,
4-6-1993)
7-6-2: RECYCLING PROGRAM:
There is hereby established a recycling program for the mandatory separating of
recyclables from garbage and rubbish for residents in the village. (Ord. 581,
4-6-1993)
7-6-3: RECYCLING CONTAINERS:
All residents shall use recycling containers which will be issued by the
village and owned by the village. The initial distribution of recycling
containers to the village residents shall be of no cost to each resident due to
the fact that the village obtained a recycling grant to purchase the recycling
containers. Thereafter, replacement containers will be available for rental by
village residents from the village. The rental amounts will be fixed from time
to time by the village board and will be billed on the combined water and sewer
bill. No container other than those initially issued by the village or rented
from the village may be used for recycling. In the event a village resident
ceases to be a village resident, he will return the recycling containers to the
village. Upon the failure to do so, the cost of the container will be assessed
to the final combined water and sewer bill, or assessed as a lien on the
property. (Ord. 581, 4-6-1993)
7-6-4: SEPARATION OF RECYCLABLES AND PLACEMENT FOR RECYCLABLES REMOVAL:
All products the village designates as recyclable shall be prepared and
separated from all other refuse by residents and placed in village approved and
issued containers, as required, and shall be collected by the village's
curbside recycling contractor. Recyclables shall be placed in recycling
containers at curbside to be collected at times designated by the village.
(Ord. 581, 4-6-1993)
7-6-5: MANDATORY RECYCLING:
It shall be unlawful for any person to place for collection, removal or
disposal, any residential, household or solid waste, refuse or garbage which
also contains recyclable materials. (Ord. 581, 4-6-1993)
7-6-6: COLLECTION BY UNAUTHORIZED PERSONS:
From time of placement of acceptable recyclables at the curb for collection in
accordance with the terms hereof, said acceptable "recyclables", as defined
herein, shall be and become the property of the village's curbside recycling
contractor. It shall be a violation of this chapter for any person unauthorized
by the village to collect or pick up or cause to be collected recycling
containers in violation hereof from one or more locations. Each act described
in this section shall constitute a separate and distinct offense punishable as
hereinafter provided. (Ord. 581, 4-6-1993)
7-6-7: PENALTY:
Any person(s) who violates this chapter is subject to the penalties set out in
this section: (Ord. 581, 4-6-1993)
   A.   Any person convicted of a violation of any section or provision of this
chapter shall be punished by a fine as established in section
1-4-1 of this code for any one offense. (Ord. 791, 8-5-2003; amd. Ord. 1061, 4-
20-2010)
   B.   The penalties prescribed in this section are in addition to, and not in
lieu of, any other rights, remedies and penalties which the village may
otherwise seek to impose and may be available at law or in equity. (Ord. 581,
4-6-1993)
TITLE 8
PUBLIC WAYS AND PROPERTY
CHAPTER 1
STREETS AND SIDEWALKS
SECTION:
8-1-1: Supervision Over Streets
8-1-2: Streets and Alleys
8-1-3: Sidewalks
8-1-4: Driveways Across Sidewalks
8-1-5: Injury to Streets, Sidewalks
8-1-6: Obstructing Streets, Sidewalks
8-1-7: Private Use
8-1-8: Encroachments
8-1-9: Barricades
8-1-10: Overhanging Signs
8-1-11: Depositing of Snow and Slush Upon Public Streets and Sidewalks
Prohibited
8-1-12: Penalty
8-1-1: SUPERVISION OVER STREETS:
The Superintendent of Public Works shall have control and supervision over all
the streets, sidewalks and other public places in the Village unless otherwise
provided by ordinance of the Village, and he shall superintend all paving and
repair work unless otherwise provided. He shall remove all obstructions, and
shall report to the Village Board any encroachments of any building or
structure onto the street line. (1928 Code §91)
8-1-2: STREETS AND ALLEYS:
   A.   Construction: No new pavement shall be laid, nor shall any repairs to
pavements in the streets or alleys be made by anyone other than the
Superintendent of Public Works without a permit from the Board of Trustees. All
new pavements and repairs shall be made in accordance with the specifications
laid down by ordinance. (1928 Code §92)
   B.   Drains: It shall be unlawful for anyone to injure or obstruct any drain
in or on any street, alley or other public place. (1928 Code §93)
   C.   Excavations: No person shall make any excavation in any street, alley
or other public place without having first obtained a permit therefor from the
Village Clerk. Excavations shall be refilled and the pavement restored as
promptly as possible. Every person making any excavation in any such place
shall give a bond, with sureties to be approved by the Clerk or the President,
to insure the prompt re-laying of the pavement, in the sum of one thousand
dollars ($1,000.00). (1928 Code §93; amd. 1990 Code)
   D.   Surface Drains: It shall be unlawful for any person to obstruct or
deposit material in any surface drain along any street in the Village.
Any person desiring to construct a driveway across any such drain shall first
secure a permit therefor from the Board of Trustees; and all work on the
driveway must be done subject to the directions of the Board, and in the manner
prescribed by the Board. (1928 Code §95)
8-1-3: SIDEWALKS:
   A.   Construction: All sidewalks in the Village shall be built and
maintained by order of the President and Board of Trustees, in such manner and
of such width and material as may be directed by them. All walks, bridges and
culverts in any public place shall be laid and constructed under the
supervision of the Superintendent of Public Works, subject to supervision by
the Committee on Streets of the Board of Trustees. (1928 Code §96)
   B.   Specifications: No sidewalk in any public place shall be constructed of
materials other than cement or brick. The specifications for the construction
of the walk, and the amount to be allowed any owner who furnished labor or
material shall be determined by Village ordinance at the time of providing for
such sidewalk. (1928 Code §97)
   C.   Ownership: All sidewalks on a public street shall belong to the
Village, and all repair work thereon shall be done by the Village. (1928 Code
§98)
   D.   Accessibility to Handicapped: All new sidewalks shall be accessible to
the handicapped. (1990 Code)
8-1-4: DRIVEWAYS ACROSS SIDEWALKS:
It shall be unlawful to construct any driveway across any public sidewalk in
the village without having first obtained a permit therefor. Applications for
such permits shall be made in writing to the clerk and shall state thereon the
location of the proposed driveway and the purpose thereof.
All such driveways shall be constructed under the supervision of the
superintendent of public works, and he shall see to the enforcement of this
section.
No such driveway shall be constructed of any material other than cement; the
grade shall be as close to that of the adjacent sidewalk as is practicable, and
the driveway shall be so constructed that it will not interfere with the
pedestrians on the walk in any way. (1928 Code §99; amd. 1990 Code)
8-1-5: INJURY TO STREETS, SIDEWALKS:
It shall be unlawful for any person to cause or in any manner do any injury to
any sidewalk, street, alley or other public place in the village. (1928 Code
§106)
8-1-6: OBSTRUCTING STREETS, SIDEWALKS:
It shall be unlawful for any person to obstruct in any way any street, alley or
sidewalk. The superintendent of public works is authorized to remove any
obstructions in any such place. (1928 Code §107)
8-1-7: PRIVATE USE:
It shall be unlawful for any person to use any street, sidewalk or other public
place as a place for the display or sale of goods or merchandise of any kind.
(1928 Code §108)
8-1-8: ENCROACHMENTS:
It shall be unlawful to erect or maintain any building or structure which
encroaches on any public street or property. (1928 Code §109)
8-1-9: BARRICADES:
Any person laying or repairing any pavement on any street, sidewalk or other
public place, or making an excavation in any such place shall maintain suitable
barricades to prevent injury to any person by reason of the work, and shall
have the barricades lighted at night. (1928 Code §110)
8-1-10: OVERHANGING SIGNS:
No person shall erect or maintain any sign or signboard extending over any
street, alley, sidewalk or other public place without having first obtained a
permit therefor. Permits for such signs shall be issued by the clerk and shall
state the location of the proposed sign.
All signs extending over any sidewalk, street, alley or other public place must
be securely fastened and constructed so that there will be no danger of the
same being dislodged by ordinary winds or falling from any other cause.
The lowest part of any sign or its support which extends over any public way
shall be at least eight feet (8') above the level of the walk or public way
over which it extends; but no sign shall be maintained over any public way used
by vehicles if any part of its support or of the sign is less than fifteen feet
(15') above the level of such public way. (1928 Code §111)
8-1-11: DEPOSITING OF SNOW AND SLUSH UPON PUBLIC STREETS AND SIDEWALKS
PROHIBITED:
No snow or slush removed from private property by way of shoveling, plowing or
blowing shall be deposited upon any village sidewalk or the paved section of
any public road, street or highway within the village. (Ord. 611, 1-17-1995)
8-1-12: PENALTY:
Any person convicted of a violation of any section or provision of this chapter
shall be punished by a fine as established in section
1-4-1 of this code for any one offense. Each day such violation is committed or
permitted to continue shall constitute a separate offense and shall be
punishable as such hereunder. (Ord. 791, 8-5-2003; amd. Ord. 1061, 4-20-2010)
CHAPTER 2
TREES AND SHRUBBERY
SECTION:
8-2-1: Planting
8-2-2: Maintenance
8-2-3: Condition Of Life And Replacement Program
8-2-4: Injury To Trees, Shrubs
8-2-5: Dangerous Trees
8-2-6: Removal
8-2-7: Interference With Lights
8-2-8: Penalty
8-2-1: PLANTING:
It shall be unlawful to plant any trees or shrubs in any parkway outside of the
sidewalk line on any street or public way in the village.
(Ord. 1465-24, 7-2-2024)
8-2-2: MAINTENANCE:
Parkways are the property of the village however, if a new tree is planted,
there is a tree watering bag placed around the tree's trunk for about one (1)
month that public works will fill. Once the water bag is removed, it is the
homeowner's responsibility to continue to water the tree. Proper maintenance of
parkway trees should include but are not limited to watering the tree every ten
(10) days from the months of May - September to ensure proper growth.
(Ord. 1465-24, 7-2-2024)
8-2-3: CONDITION OF LIFE AND REPLACEMENT PROGRAM:
We want to hear from you regarding any unhealthy parkway trees in front of your
homes. Please call public works at (815) 418-2083 to request a service request
be filled out for your tree. A member of the public works department will come
and evaluate your parkway tree for the condition of the tree. We look to see if
it is still budding, declining, dead or hazardous. We will determine if we need
to place your tree on our removal/replacement list or if it will be added to
our watch list. Because of the high volume of calls we have been receiving for
parkway trees, we ask our residents to be patient with the removal and
replacement process. At this time we are taking service requests for parkway
tree inspections and have no set time schedule for removal and/or replacements.
For those residents that prefer not to wait for a parkway tree, you can bypass
the scheduled process and plant one on your own, at your cost or take advantage
of the village's parkway tree replacement program. If the tree is approved by
the superintendent of public works for the parkway tree replacement program,
the village will reimburse homeowners up to one hundred fifty dollars ($150.00)
for the purchase of two (2) parkway trees or three hundred dollars ($300.00)
for homeowners on a corner lot (up to 4 trees in the parkway). **Reimbursement
is only for the purchase of the tree not the removal or installation.
(Ord. 1465-24, 7-2-2024)
8-2-4: INJURY TO TREES, SHRUBS:
It shall be unlawful to injure any tree or shrub planted in any such parkway.
(1928 Code §101; amd. Ord. 1465-24, 7-2-2024)
8-2-5: DANGEROUS TREES:
Any tree or shrub which overhangs any public sidewalk or street in such a way
as to impede traffic or travel on such sidewalk or street shall be trimmed by
the owner of the abutting premises so that the obstruction shall cease. Any
tree or limb of a tree which shall become likely to fall on or across any
public walk or way shall be moved by the owner of the abutting premises. The
superintendent of public works and public works department is hereby authorized
to trim any such tree or shrub in any parkway, or to remove any shrub or tree
which obstructs traffic or travel or which endangers persons traveling on such
parkway.
(1928 Code §102; amd. Ord. 1465-24, 7-2-2024)
8-2-6: REMOVAL:
It shall be unlawful to remove or cut down any such tree without having
permission from the village prior to.
(Ord. 1465-24, 7-2-2024)
8-2-7: INTERFERENCE WITH LIGHTS:
All trees and shrubs in such parkways shall be kept trimmed by the owner of
abutting premises so that they shall not interfere with streetlights or wires
strung over the streets.
(1928 Code §104; amd. Ord. 1465-24, 7-2-2024)
8-2-8: PENALTY:
Any person convicted of a violation of any section or provision of this chapter
shall be punished by a fine as established in section
1-4-1 of this code for any one offense.
(Ord. 791, 8-5-2003; amd. Ord. 1061, 4-20-2010; Ord. 1465-24, 7-2-2024)
CHAPTER 3
RAILROADS
SECTION:
8-3-1: Crossing Lights
8-3-2: Sewers And Drains
8-3-3: Penalty
8-3-1: CROSSING LIGHTS:
It shall be the duty of every person owning or operating any railroad or tracks
through the corporate limits of the village to properly illuminate, with an
adequate lighting system, every place along such tracks or right of way where
any street or highway of the village crosses such tracks or right of way within
the village limits. Such lights shall be placed not less than fifteen feet
(15') above the grade center of such streets or highways at the crossing, and
all such lights shall be kept burning every night from dusk until dawn. (1928
Code §263; amd. 1990 Code)
8-3-2: SEWERS AND DRAINS:
It shall be the duty of every person owning or operating any railroad or tracks
through the corporate limits of the village to properly construct, maintain and
keep open sufficient drains, sewers, culverts and waterways along and under
such right of way to prevent the accumulation of water or filthy or stagnant
pools, and to permit the natural drainage of adjacent property to continue
unimpeded. (1928 Code §266)
8-3-3: PENALTY:
Any person convicted of a violation of any section or provision of this chapter
shall be punished by a fine as established in section
1-4-1 of this code for any one offense. Each day such violation is committed or
permitted to continue shall constitute a separate offense and shall be
punishable as such hereunder. (Ord. 791, 8-5-2003; amd. Ord. 1061, 4-20-2010)
CHAPTER 4
WATER AND SEWER REGULATIONS
ARTICLE A. COMBINED WATER AND SEWER SYSTEM
SECTION:
8-4A-1: Connection To System
8-4A-2: User Rates And Charges
8-4A-2-1: Basis For Service Charges
8-4A-2-2: Rates And Charges Established
8-4A-2-3: Bills For Service; Delinquencies
8-4A-2-4: Changes Of Rates And Charges
8-4A-2-5: Liability For And Availability Of Rates And Charges; Appeals
8-4A-2-6: Disposition Of Revenues
8-4A-2-7: Books And Accounts
8-4A-2-8: Effective Date Of Rates And Charges (Rep. by Ord. 1060, 4-20-2010,
eff. 5-1-2010)
8-4A-2-9: Penalties
8-4A-1: CONNECTION TO SYSTEM:
   A.   Permit Required: No connection shall be made to the water or sewer
system of the Village, without the signed permit from the Village. Any
connection or opening made to the Village's water or sewer system, without a
signed permit from the Village, or in any manner different from the mode
prescribed for such opening or connection shall subject the maker to a penalty
as hereinafter provided.
   B.   Application For Permit: No person shall make any connection to the
water or sewer system of the Village, except upon written application to the
Village and the issuance of a permit by the Village for such connection. Each
application shall state the name of the applicant, the permit desired, the
location to be used and the fee to be paid. Each application shall also contain
such additional information as may be required by the Village.
   C.   Connection Fees: Any person, prior to making any connection to the
water or sewer system of the Village, shall, upon proper application to the
Village, pay to the Village a connection fee for each such connection. Any
person having previously paid a connection fee, but not having applied for
connection shall pay the difference between the amount paid and the amount
currently due for said connection at the time of application. Payment shall be
due and payable for connection in the amounts and time as set forth in the
following schedules:
      1.   Single family residential units shall pay the following amounts at
time of occupancy permit:
 
Occupancy Permit Date      Water     Sewer
Prior to December 31, 2019 $3,500.00 $5,000.00
Effective January 1, 2020  5,500.00  9,000.00
 
      2.   Multi-family residential units with dedicated individual service
connections shall pay the following amounts per unit at time of occupancy
permit:
 
Occupancy Permit Date      Water     Sewer
Prior to December 31, 2019 $3,500.00 $5,000.00
Effective January 1, 2020  5,500.00  9,000.00
 
      3.   Multi-family residential units with a single shared service
connection shall pay at time of building permit, the single family tap on rate
specified above time the rate factor applicable to the size of the service line
required to meet the building demand per Illinois Plumbing Code in accordance
with the following schedule. Said fee shall be for building permits issued on
or before January 1, 2020:
 
Occupancy Permit Date      Water     Sewer
Prior to December 31, 2019 $3,500.00 $5,000.00
 
Diameter Of Service Line Water Rate Factor Sewer Rate Factor
Diameter Of Service Line Water Rate Factor Sewer Rate Factor
   1 inch             1.00              1.00
   1.5 inches         2.25              2.25
   2 inches           4.00              4.00
   2.5 inches         6.25              6.25
   3 inches           9.00              9.00
   3.5 inches         12.25             12.25
   4 inches           16.00             16.00
   4.5 inches         20.25             20.25
   5 inches           25.00             25.00
   5.5 inches         30.25             30.25
   6 inches           36.00             36.00
 
      4.   Hotels and motels shall pay the following amounts per room at the
time of building permit:
 
Occupancy Permit Date      Water     Sewer
Prior to December 31, 2019 $1,475.00 $1,475.00
Effective January 1, 2020  2,500.00  5,000.00
 
      5.   Commercial, industrial, and all other connections shall pay the
following amount at the time of building permit effective January 1, 2020:
   PE - Population equivalent
 
Occupancy Permit Date      Water          Sewer
Prior to December 31, 2019 $575.00 per PE $1,000.00 per PE
 
Diameter Of Service Line Water Rate Factor Sewer Rate Factor
Diameter Of Service Line Water Rate Factor Sewer Rate Factor
   1 inch or less     1.00              1.00
   1.5 inches         2.25              2.25
   2 inches           4.00              4.00
   2.5 inches         6.25              6.25
   3 inches           9.00              9.00
   3.5 inches         12.25             12.25
   4 inches           16.00             16.00
   4.5 inches         20.25             20.25
   5 inches           25.00             25.00
   5.5 inches         30.25             30.25
   6 inches           36.00             36.00
 
   D.   Annual Increase: Beginning January 1, 2021, the aforementioned tap on
fees shall increase by five percent (5%) annually on January 1 of every year.
   E.   Penalty: Any person violating any provisions of this section shall be
punished by a fine as established in section
1-4-1 of this Code. Each and every day such violation, neglect, or refusal to
comply with the provision of this section shall constitute a separate offense
and shall be punishable as such hereunder. (Ord. 1285-19, 1-15-2019)
8-4A-2: USER RATES AND CHARGES:
8-4A-2-1: BASIS FOR SERVICE CHARGES:
The wastewater service charge for the use of and for service supplied by the
water and sewer facilities of the Village shall consist of a basic user charge
for operation and maintenance plus replacement, a debt service charge and a
surcharge, if applicable. (Ord. 496, 9-20-1983)
   A.   Capital Improvement Charge: The capital improvement charge shall be
computed by determining the major maintenance and/or improvements to the
existing water and sewer systems, including, without limitation: repair or
replacement of water main, repair or replacement of sewer pipe, radium removal,
water storage maintenance, lift station maintenance, water well maintenance,
sewer plant maintenance and upgrades, and water meter replacement program.
(Ord. 891, 2-21-2006)
      1.   Temporary Infrastructure Fee: The temporary debt fee shall be
computed by determining the amount of major maintenance and/or improvements to
the water and sewer systems, including, without limitation: construction,
repair, and/or replacement of water main, sewer pipe, radium removal treatment
facility, water storage, lift station, water well, sewer plant, and water meter
replacement program. (Ord. 1060, 4-20-2010, eff. 5-1-2010)
   B.   Basic User Charge:
      1.   The basic user charge shall be based on water usage as recorded by
water meters and/or sewage meters for wastes having the following normal
concentrations:
         a.   A five (5) day, twenty degree centigrade (20°C) biochemical
oxygen demand (BOD) of two hundred milligrams per liter (200 mg/L).
         b.   A suspended solids (SS) content of two hundred fifty milligrams
per liter (250 mg/L).
      2.   It shall consist of operation and maintenance costs plus
replacement, along with the current rate for water service, and shall be
computed as follows:
         a.   Estimate the projected annual revenue required to operate and
maintain the wastewater facilities, including a Replacement Fund for the year,
for all works categories.
         b.   Proportion the estimated costs to wastewater facility categories
by volume, suspended solids and BOD, if possible.
         c.   Estimate wastewater volume, pounds of SS and pounds of BOD to be
treated.
         d.   Proportion the estimated costs to users by volume, suspended
solids and BOD.
         e.   Compute costs per one thousand (1,000) gallons for normal sewage
strength.
         f.   Compute surcharge costs per one thousand (1,000) gallons per
milligrams per liter in excess of normal sewage strength for BOD and SS.
         g.   Include the current rate for water service for users of the
Village's water system.
   C.   Surcharge: A surcharge will be levied to all users whose waters exceed
the normal concentrations for BOD (200 milligrams per liter) and SS (250
milligrams per liter). The surcharge will be based on water usage as recorded
by water meters and/or sewage meters for all wastes which exceed the two
hundred milligrams per liter (200 mg/L) and two hundred fifty milligrams per
liter (250 mg/L) concentration for BOD and SS respectively. Subsection
8-4A-2-2C of this article specifies the procedure to compute a surcharge.
   D.   Measurement Of Flow: The volume of flow used for computing basic user
charges and surcharges for users of the water and sewer facilities shall be the
metered water consumption read to the lowest even increments of one hundred
(100) gallons. Users of the sewer facilities who are not users of the Village's
water system shall be charged on a basis of a computed average flat rate user
charge. (Ord. 496, 9-20-1983)
8-4A-2-2: RATES AND CHARGES ESTABLISHED:
   A.   Capital Improvement Charge: A capital improvement charge of nine
dollars ninety five cents ($9.95) monthly to each user of the water and sewer
facilities of the village. The capital improvement charge shall be used for
major maintenance or improvements to the existing water or sewer facilities.
The rates for the capital improvement charge billed monthly shall automatically
increase by the lesser of five percent (5%) or the percentage increase in the
Chicago metropolitan statistical area consumer price index for the preceding
calendar year plus 1.5 percent effective for bills issued on and after May 1 of
each year. In the event the Chicago metropolitan statistical area consumer
price index is negative, the annual increase shall be 1.5 percent.
   B.   Basic User Rates:
      1.   Generally:
         a.   Metered Rates: There shall be and there is hereby established a
basic user rate for the use of and for service supplied by the combined water
and sewer facilities of the village as follows:
 
Water:                
   Per 1,000 gallo$4.55
Sewer:                
   Per 1,000 gallo4.05
 
         b.   Nonmetered Rates: All nonmetered residential users of the
wastewater facilities, and/or users of the wastewater facilities who are not
users of the village's water system shall be charged a minimum flat rate charge
based on the discharge of five thousand (5,000) gallons monthly at the sewer
only metered rate and the capital improvement charge as defined in subsection A
of this section.
The flat rate charge will allow a maximum of five thousand (5,000) gallons
monthly.
In the event use of the wastewater facilities is determined by the village to
be in excess of five thousand (5,000) gallons monthly, the village may require
such flat rate user to install metering devices on the water supply or sewer
main to measure the amount of water supplied.
         c.   Annual Increase: The rates for water and/or sewer service and
fees billed monthly shall automatically increase the lesser of five percent
(5%) or the percentage increase in the Chicago metropolitan statistical area
consumer price index for the preceding calendar year plus 1.5 percent effective
for bills issued on and after May 1 of each year for services rendered in the
preceding one month. In the event the Chicago metropolitan statistical area
consumer price index is negative, the annual increase shall be 1.5 percent.
         d.   Sewer Rate Cap: During the months of May, June, July, August, and
September, every user of the Village's sewer system shall be charged for the
first ten thousand (10,000) gallons discharged in each such month at the normal
rate, as set forth in this chapter. Any additional discharge in any such month
beyond the first ten thousand (10,000) gallons shall be billed at a rate of
zero dollars ($0.00).
      2.   Rates For Special Uses:
         a.   Water used in any construction work or for other temporary
purposes upon premises upon which no water meter is installed shall be paid for
by the contractor on said premises, and the contractor shall be required to
place a deposit with the water collector as estimated by the water department
for the full amount of the cost of such water as estimated by them before water
is supplied for such use.
         b.   For extraordinary uses and for purposes not hereinabove specified
and for other extraordinary or peculiar uses, rates and conditions for use of
water shall be subject to special permit and contract with the village board of
trustees. (Ord. 496, 9-20-1983)
         c.   Rates for bulk water sales will be a flat rate of fifty dollars
($50.00) plus two (2) times the current water rate per one thousand (1,000)
gallons. The water will be metered and supplied under the direct supervision of
the public works department. (Ord. 1178, 6-3-2014)
         d.   Effective July 31, 2007, separately metered lawn sprinkling
systems located on non one-family residential properties including apartment
buildings, commercial, industrial, governmental, and community open spaces;
shall be billed for water only service as defined in subsection B1a of this
section. (Ord. 968, 6-17-2007)
   C.   Surcharge Rate: The rates of surcharges for BOD5 and SS shall be as
follows:
      BOD5    = $0.2647 per pound
      SS   = 0.2250 per pound
The concentration of wastes used for computing surcharges shall be established
by waste sampling. Waste sampling shall be performed as often as may be deemed
necessary by the village and shall be binding as a basis for surcharges.
   D.   Computation Of Wastewater Service Charge: The wastewater service charge
shall be computed by the following formula:
      CW = CD + CM + (Vu - X)CU + CS
   Where CW    =   Amount of wastewater service charge ($) per billing period.
   CD   =   Debt service charge (subsection A of this section).
   CM   =   Minimum charge for operation, maintenance and replacement.
   Vu   =   Wastewater volume for the billing period.
   X   =   Allowable consumption in gallons for the minimum charge.
   CU   =   Basic user rate for operation, maintenance and replacement.
   CS   =   Amount of surcharge (subsection C of this section).
(Ord. 496, 9-20-1983; amd. Ord. 1172, 1-7-2014; Ord. 1386-22, 2-1-2022)
8-4A-2-3: BILLS FOR SERVICE; DELINQUENCIES:
   A.   Rendition Of Bills; Payment:
      1.   Bills: Rates or charges for service shall be payable monthly. The
owner of the premises, the occupant thereof and the user of the service shall
be jointly and severally liable to pay for service to such premises, and the
service is furnished to the premises by the village only upon the condition
that the owner of the premises, occupant and user of the services are jointly
and severally liable therefor.
Bills for service shall be sent out by the village by the tenth day of the
month succeeding the period for which the service is billed. All water and
sewer bills are due and payable on the last day of the month succeeding the
period for which the service is billed. A penalty of ten percent (10%) shall be
added to all bills not paid by the last day of the month succeeding the period
for which the service is billed.
   B.   Delinquencies:
      1.   Termination Of Service: If charges for sewer and/or water services
are not paid in full within fifteen (15) calendar days from the due date of the
billing and/or if the utility customer is in violation of any village
ordinance, regulation or law, the utility customer may be notified in writing
of the village's intent to terminate water or sewer service prior to any such
termination. In the event charges for water/sewer services are not paid within
fifteen (15) days after the due date of the bill for such services, such water/
sewer services shall be discontinued as hereinafter provided and shall not be
reinstated until such time as all violations are corrected and all outstanding
utility bills are paid in full in addition to the payment of a fifty dollar
($50.00) reinstatement fee.
      2.   Statement Of Lien: The village shall have a continuing lien upon the
premises and real estate upon or for which water is used or supplied for all
water rates or benefits accruing by reason of the provisions of this chapter.
Every such lien shall, upon compliance with the conditions set forth in this
chapter, become and be prior and superior to the rights and interest of
creditors, encumbrances, purchasers and other parties in interest in the
premises and real estate. Liens shall be filed following three (3) consecutive
months of nonpayment for water service charges to the village. A release of
lien shall be provided to the customer upon payment of all charges and fees;
such release may be recorded by the customer.
If the user whose bill is unpaid is not the owner of the premises and the
village clerk, or his/her designee, has notice of this, notice shall be mailed
to the owner of the premises, if his address be known to the clerk, whenever
such bill remains unpaid for fifteen (15) days after it has been due.
The failure of the village clerk to record such lien or to mail such notice or
the failure of the owner to receive such notice shall not affect the right to
foreclose the lien for unpaid bills as mentioned herein. (Ord. 891, 2-21-2006)
      3.   Foreclosure Of Lien: Property subject to a lien for unpaid charges
shall be sold for nonpayment of the same, and the proceeds of the sale shall be
applied to pay the charges, after deducting costs, as is the case in the
foreclosure of statutory liens. Such foreclosure shall be by bill in equity in
the name of the village. The village attorney is hereby authorized and directed
to institute such proceedings in the name of the village in any court having
jurisdiction over such matters against any property for which the bill has
remained unpaid three hundred sixty five (365) days after it has been rendered.
(Ord. 496, 9-20-1983)
8-4A-2-4: CHANGES OF RATES AND CHARGES:
   A.   The rates for water service prescribed in this chapter may be changed
by the board of trustees at any time, and the village shall not be deemed to
have contracted with any consumer to maintain such rates for any period of time
whatsoever. Other charges prescribed by this chapter may be changed at any
time.
   B.   The adequacy of the wastewater service charge shall be reviewed
annually by certified public accountants for the village in their annual audit
report. The wastewater service charge shall be revised periodically to reflect
a change in debt service or a change in operation and maintenance costs
including replacement costs. (Ord. 496, 9-20-1983)
8-4A-2-5: LIABILITY FOR AND AVAILABILITY OF RATES AND CHARGES; APPEALS:
A copy of this article properly certified by the village treasurer, shall be
filed in the office of the recorder of deeds of Will County and shall be deemed
notice to all owners of real estate of the charges of the sewerage system of
the village on their properties.
The method for computation of rates and service charges established for user
charges under section
8-4A-2-2 of this article shall be made available to a user within five (5)
working days of receipt of a written request for such. Any disagreement over
the method used or in the computations thereof shall be remedied by the village
engineer within thirty (30) days after notification of a formal written appeal
outlining the discrepancies. (Ord. 496, 9-20-1983)
8-4A-2-6: DISPOSITION OF REVENUES:
All revenues and monies derived from the operation of the combined water and
sewer system shall be deposited in the water and sewerage account of the water
and sewerage fund. All such revenues and monies shall be held by the village
treasurer separate and apart from all other funds of the village, and all of
said sum, without any deductions whatever, shall be delivered to the village
treasurer not more than ten (10) days after receipt of the same, or at such
more frequent intervals as may from time to time be directed by the president
and board of trustees. The village treasurer shall receive all such revenues
from the sewerage system and all other funds and monies incident to the
operation of such system as the same may be delivered to him and deposit the
same in the account of the fund designated as the "water and sewerage fund of
the village of Manhattan". The treasurer shall administer such fund in every
respect in the manner provided by statute of the "revised cities and villages
act", effective January 1942. (Ord. 496, 9-20-1983)
8-4A-2-7: BOOKS AND ACCOUNTS:
   A.   The village treasurer shall establish a proper system of accounts and
shall keep proper books, records and accounts in which complete and correct
entries shall be made of all transactions relative to the combined water and
sewerage system, and at regular annual intervals, he shall cause to be made an
audit by an independent auditing concern of the books to show the receipts and
disbursements of the sewerage system.
In addition to the customary operating statements, the annual audit report
shall also reflect the revenues and operating expenses of the wastewater
facilities, including a replacement cost, to indicate that water and sewer
service charges under the waste cost recovery system do in fact meet these
regulations. In this regard, the financial information to be shown in the audit
report shall include the following:
      1.   Flow data showing total gallons received at the wastewater plant for
the current fiscal year.
      2.   Billing data to show total number of gallons billed.
      3.   Debt service for the next succeeding fiscal year.
      4.   Number of users connected to the system.
      5.   Number of nonmetered users.
   B.   The Illinois environmental protection agency or its authorized
representative shall have access to any books, documents, papers and records of
the village which are applicable to the village's system of user charges for
the purpose of making audit, examination, excerpts and transcriptions thereof
to ensure compliance with the terms of the special and general conditions to
any state grant. (Ord. 496, 9-20-1983)
8-4A-2-8: EFFECTIVE DATE OF RATES AND CHARGES:
(Rep. by Ord. 1060, 4-20-2010, eff. 5-1-2010)
8-4A-2-9: PENALTIES:
Any person convicted of a violation of any section or provision of this article
shall be punished by a fine as established in section
1-4-1 of this code. Each day such violation is committed or permitted to
continue shall constitute a separate offense and shall be punishable as such
hereunder. In addition to any other penalty authorized by this section, the
village may discontinue water service to any customer, building or premises for
violation of any provision of this article until the violation is cured. (Ord.
791, 8-5-2003; amd. Ord. 1061, 4-20-2010)
ARTICLE B. WATER USE AND SERVICE
SECTION:
8-4B-1: Water Service Connections
8-4B-2: Permit For Water Service
8-4B-3: Authority To Turn On Water
8-4B-4: Service Pipes
8-4B-5: Water Meters
8-4B-6: Plumbing Requirements
8-4B-7: Wasting Water
8-4B-8: Lawn Sprinkling Restrictions
8-4B-9: Prohibited Acts And Conditions
8-4B-10: Entry Powers; Obstructing Village Officials
8-4B-11: Rules And Regulations
8-4B-12: Penalty
8-4B-1: WATER SERVICE CONNECTIONS:
   A.   Permit Required; Supervision And Inspection: No connections with a
water main shall be made without a permit being issued and twenty four (24)
hours' notice having been given to the superintendent of public works or other
person designated by the president and board of trustees. All such connections
shall be made and all such work done at the expense of the applicant who shall
also furnish materials necessary for such work; all such connections shall be
made under the supervision of the superintendent and no connections shall be
covered until the work has been inspected by him. (Ord. 496, 9-20-1983)
   B.   Abandonment Of Wells Before Connection:
      1.   Abandonment Of Wells: No water from the village water supply shall
be turned on for service into any premises which is tapped on to the village
water mains, unless or until any and all existing water wells located on the
premises being served shall have been abandoned and properly sealed according
to the requirements propounded by the state and the Will County health
department. Such premises shall be subject to visual inspection by the village
to assure that the well has been sealed and properly abandoned.
      2.   Transfer Of Property And/Or Water Billing Accounts: Existing private
wells active on sites connected to the village water system shall be abandoned
and properly sealed according to the requirements propounded by the state and
the Will County health department at the time of transfer of property ownership
and/or transfer of water billing accounts. Such premises shall be subject to
visual inspection by the village to assure compliance with this subsection.
      3.   Construction Of New Wells Prohibited: No water well shall be
constructed, drilled, sunk or otherwise provided for in any manner or on any
parcel of land within the corporate limits of the village where connection to
the village water system is feasible as declared herein.
      4.   Nonresidential Structure: Every existing nonresidential structure,
place of business, public building or other premises to which the supply of
water would be necessary, convenient or desirable within the corporate limits
of the village to which the supply of public water is feasible as herein
declared, shall, within ninety (90) days after such water service becomes
feasible, tie into such public water supply and discontinue the use of any
private well. Such well to be abandoned and properly sealed according to the
requirements propounded by the state and the Will County health department.
Such premises shall be subject to visual inspection by the village to assure
compliance with this subsection.
      5.   Residential Structure: Every existing residential structure,
dwelling or other premises to which the supply of water would be necessary,
convenient or desirable within the corporate limits of the village to which the
supply of public water is feasible as herein declared, shall upon transfer of
property ownership, tie into such public water supply and discontinue the use
of any private well. Such well to be abandoned and properly sealed according to
the requirements propounded by the state and the Will County health department
at the time of transfer of property ownership. Such premises shall be subject
to visual inspection by the village to assure compliance with this subsection.
      6.   Definition: That connection to the village water system is hereby
found and declared to be "feasible" whenever any village water main, line,
pipe, gate or valve appropriate for connection to the system is located within
two hundred fifty feet (250') of any dwelling, residence, structure, place of
business, public building or other premises to which the supply of water would
be necessary, convenient or desirable.
      7.   Water Usage: It shall be unlawful to use water from any well
drilled, dug or installed in violation of this subsection. (Ord. 603, 9-6-1994)
      8.   Penalty: Any person violating or failing to comply with any of the
terms or provisions of this subsection shall be guilty of a petty offense and,
on conviction thereof, shall be subject to a fine as established in section
1-4-1 of this code, and a separate offense shall be deemed committed on each
and every day on which a violation continues or is permitted to exist. (Ord.
603, 9-6-1994; amd. Ord. 1061, 4-20-2010)
8-4B-2: PERMIT FOR WATER SERVICE:
   A.   Permit Required; Restriction On Issuance: No person shall take any
water from any main hydrant or other part or portion of the village waterworks
system except upon application to the village and the issuance by the village
of a permit in accordance with the provisions of this ordinance, and no permit
shall be issued unless said water shall be measured through a meter in
accordance with the provisions of this ordinance.
   B.   Application For Permit; Fee: Application to have the water turned on
shall be made in writing to the village clerk and shall contain an agreement by
the applicant to abide by and accept all of the provisions of this ordinance as
conditions governing the use of the village water supply by the applicant. A
fee of thirty five dollars ($35.00) shall be paid for turning on the water.
(Ord. 538, 11-21-1989)
8-4B-3: AUTHORITY TO TURN ON WATER:
No water from the village water supply shall be turned on for service into any
premises by any person but the superintendent of public works or some person
authorized by him to perform this service. (Ord. 538, 11-21-1989)
8-4B-4: SERVICE PIPES:
   A.   Installation: All service pipes from the mains to the premises served
shall be installed by and at the cost of the owner of the property to be served
or the applicant for the service. Such installation shall be under the
inspection of the building inspector or such other person as designated by the
president of the board of trustees.
   B.   Pipe Specifications: No service shall be installed unless it conforms
to specifications drawn up by the board of trustees and approved thereby, a
copy of which specifications shall be kept on file by the clerk and shall be
open to inspection by any person interested.
   C.   Repairs: All repairs for service pipes and plumbing systems of
buildings shall be made by and at the expense of the owners of the premises
served. The village may, in case of an emergency, repair any service pipe, and
if this is done, the cost of such repair work shall be repaid to the village by
the owner of the premises served.
   D.   Excavations: Excavations for installing service pipes or repairing the
same shall be made in compliance with the village ordinance provisions relating
to making excavations in streets 1 ; provided, that it shall be unlawful to
place any service pipe in the same excavation with, or directly over, any drain
pipe or sewer pipe.
   E.   Shutoff Boxes: Shutoff boxes or service boxes shall be placed on every
service pipe and shall be located between the curb line and the sidewalk line,
where this is practicable. Such boxes shall be so located that they are easily
accessible and shall be protected from frost.
   F.   Installation Of Stop: A separate stop shall be placed on the service
pipe just inside the building wall on the influent side of the water meter.
Such stop shall be equal in quality to the service cock. (Ord. 496, 9-20-1983)
 
Notes
1 1. See subsection
  8-1-2C of this title for excavations in streets and alleys.
8-4B-5: WATER METERS:
All premises using the Village water supply must be equipped with a water meter
furnished and owned by the Village.
   A.   Installation of Meters: Upon proper application to the Village and
payment of the water meter installation fee, as outlined in section
8-4B-5 (B) of this chapter, the Village shall furnish every consumer a water
meter and a Meter Transceiver Unit (MXU). The Village shall be solely
responsible for the installation of the water meter and the MXU.
      1.   A proper meter connection shall be provided upon each property
supplied with water in a readily accessible location and in a manner
satisfactory to the Superintendent of Public Works or his authorized
representative. Similarly, all such meters shall be so placed and unobstructed
so that it will not be necessary for the meter reader to move boxes, cabinets,
appliances, tables or other objects obscuring the meter.
      2.   The meter shall be installed in a horizontal plane with the dial
face up and as near to the shut-off valve where the service pipe enters the
building as is practicable. There shall not be any bypass or connection around
the meter.
      3.   The meter shall be installed inside of the building unless prior
authorization is received from the Water Department to install the meter in an
outside meter pit. Such pit shall be built at the owner's expense, shall
provide adequate protection against freezing and shall be built as directed by
the Superintendent of Public Works or his authorized representative and to his
entire satisfaction.
      4.   Each meter must be installed with an outside remote meter reader
unless prior authorization is received from the Water Department which waives
the installation of an outside remote meter reader. Where required, the meter
shall be located on the building a minimum of three feet (3') above the ground
and easily accessible and readable. It shall not be installed on a building in
a fenced-in area nor any other area blocked to the Village employee reading the
meter.
      5.   Whenever meters are placed on pipe connected by boilers or other hot
water apparatus, a check valve must be placed between said meter and such
boiler or other hot water apparatus to protect such meter from back pressure of
steam or hot water. (Ord. 496, 9-20-83)
   B.   Water Meter Installation Fee: There is a one-time installation fee for
the installation of each meter and Meter Transceiver Unit (MXU) by the Village
in accordance with the following table of meter sizes:
 
METER SIZES INSTALLATION FEE
5/8 x 3/4"  $345.00
3/4 x 3/4"  $355.00
1"          $414.00
1 1/2"      $710.00
2" R2       $890.00
2" C2       $1,540.00
 
The meter fee shall be payable prior to the installation of the water meter and
MXU unit.
   C.   Number of Meters Required: Each residence, dwelling, structure, mobile
home, school, business or commercial establishment which is supplied water by
the Village shall have a separate meter for each water service pipe entering
the premises.
   D.   Maintenance and Repair:
      1.   The Water Department reserves the right at any time to enter any
premises supplied by Village water and to exchange any meter, for repairs or
otherwise, as may be deemed necessary by the Department.
      2.   All meters installed shall be maintained and repaired by the Water
Department when rendered unserviceable through reasonable wear and tear;
provided, however, that where replacements, repairs or adjustments of any
meters are rendered necessary by any act, neglect or carelessness of the owner
or occupant of any premises or where meters are damaged by freezing, hot water,
etc., any expense caused the Water Department thereby shall be charged against
and be collected from the owner or occupant of the premises.
      3.   In case of breakage, stoppage or any other irregularity in the
meter, the owner or occupant is to notify the Water Department immediately, and
any necessary repairs will be made by the department, as hereinbefore provided.
(Ord. 496, 9-20-1983)
   E.   Testing Meters; Faulty Meters:
      1.   The accuracy of the meter on any premises will be tested by an
independent party selected by the water department upon written request of the
owner who shall pay in advance a fee of seventy five dollars ($75.00) to cover
the cost of the test. If, on such test, the meter shall be found to register
more than five percent (5%) more water than actually passes through it, another
meter will be substituted or proper repairs made and the fee of seventy five
dollars ($75.00) will be refunded to the owner.
No deduction shall be made for leakage after the water has passed through and
has been registered by the meter. (Ord. 1115, 8-21-2012)
      2.   If a meter fails at any time to register the quantity of the water
or becomes defective so that said meter does not give the true reading of the
quantity of water passing through the same, then such quantity of water shall
be reasonably estimated and the charge to be made to the customer shall be
based upon the average quantity registered through said meter during a
reasonably comparable period of time prior to the date of the failure of said
meter as the village shall direct. (Ord. 496, 9-20-1983; amd. Ord. 538, 11-21-
89; Ord. 1387-22, 2-1-2022)
8-4B-6: PLUMBING REQUIREMENTS:
No water shall be turned on for service in premises in which the plumbing does
not comply with the provisions of this chapter; provided, that water may be
turned on for construction work in unfinished buildings, subject to the
provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 496, 9-20-1983)
8-4B-7: WASTING WATER:
If it shall be found that there is an unreasonable or unnecessary waste of
water in any building, structure or premises to which water is supplied from
the waterworks system of the village through or by means of the leak located in
any such building or structure, or in or on any such premises, or if there is a
waste of water by any other means, then the village may cause the water supply
to be cut off from that building, structure or premises, unless such water leak
shall be stopped or repaired. Any other waste which is unreasonable and
unnecessary shall result in a cessation of water to the user by the village.
The village shall give to the owner, tenant or water user who is perpetrating
the water waste at least twenty four (24) hours' notice of the intention of the
village to shut off the water. The water supply shall not again be turned on
until the water leak or water waste has been corrected and until the village
has been paid the cost and expense of shutting off and again turning on the
water supply to said building, structure or premises by the owner, occupant or
person in possession. The cost for turning the water off and on shall be twelve
dollars ($12.00). (Ord. 496, 9-20-1983)
8-4B-8: LAWN SPRINKLING RESTRICTIONS:
Between the dates of May 15 and September 15, the sprinkling/watering of lawns
with water from the village public water supply is hereby limited to even
numbered sides of the street on even numbered calendar days and odd numbered
sides of the street on odd numbered calendar days during the hours of four
o’clock (4:00) A.M. to eleven o’clock (11:00) A.M. or seven o’clock (7:00) P.M.
to eleven o’clock (11:00) P.M. each day.
The use of any water from the village public water supply shall be further
limited or not permitted for nonhealth essential purposes when it has been
determined by the Village President that an adequate supply of water or water
pressure is not available for drinking and health related purposes, fire
protection and other emergency uses. Notice of such water use or restriction
shall be disseminated through reasonable communication media throughout the
Village, including, but not limited to, posted on a sign at each subdivision/
street entrance. (Ord. 969, 6-17-2007; amd. Ord. 1397-22, 6-7-2022; Ord. 1463-
24, 6-18-2024)
8-4B-9: PROHIBITED ACTS AND CONDITIONS:
   A.   Resale Of Water: No water shall be resold or distributed by the
recipient thereof from the village supply to any premises other than that for
which application has been made and the meter installed, except in case of
emergency.
   B.   Tampering With System: It shall be unlawful for any person not
authorized by the village to tamper with, alter or injure any part of the
village waterworks or supply system or break the seal of any meter or in any
way tamper with the same. A fee of twelve dollars ($12.00) shall be charged to
reseal a meter. (Ord. 496, 9-20-1983)
8-4B-10: ENTRY POWERS; OBSTRUCTING VILLAGE OFFICIALS:
No person shall in any manner obstruct or cause to be obstructed the free
access of any officer, agent or employee of the village to any stopcock, water
meter, shutoff box or connection with any water main or service pipe whenever
such officer, agent or employee shall desire access thereto. The officers of
the village and any and all persons delegated or authorized by the village for
such purpose shall have free access to all or any part of the building,
structure or premises into which any such officer or employee shall desire to
make entry or to have access for the purposes herein specified who shall refuse
to permit such entry or access or who shall do or cause to be done any act or
thing for the purpose of preventing such entry or access shall be deemed to be
guilty of a violation of this article and shall be punished as herein provided.
(Ord. 496, 9-20-1983)
8-4B-11: RULES AND REGULATIONS:
The water committee of the board of trustees shall have the right to enact
reasonable rules and regulations concerning the operation, maintenance and use
of the waterworks system of the village, and the water department shall be
charged with the responsibility of enforcing said rules and regulations. Said
rules and regulations shall be in compliance with this article; provided,
however, that said rules and regulations must be on file in the village hall
and when they are changed, notice of such change must be published in a
newspaper having general circulation. (Ord. 496, 9-20-1983)
8-4B-12: PENALTY:
Any person convicted of a violation of any section or provision of this article
shall be punished by a fine as established in section
1-4-1 of this code for any one offense. (Ord. 791, 8-5-2003; amd. Ord. 1061, 4-
20-2010)
ARTICLE C. SEWER USE AND SERVICE
SECTION:
8-4C-1: Definitions
8-4C-2: Use Of Public Sewers Required
8-4C-3: Private Wastewater Disposal Systems
8-4C-4: Connection Permit
8-4C-5: Building Sewers And Connections
8-4C-6: Use Restrictions
8-4C-6-1: Discharge Of Effluent
8-4C-6-2: Prohibited Discharges
8-4C-6-3: Materials Under Special Review
8-4C-6-4: Fat, Oil And Grease Traps/Interceptors
8-4C-6-5: Preliminary Treatment
8-4C-6-6: Industrial Users
8-4C-6-7: Measurements, Tests And Analyses
8-4C-6-8: Special Agreements
8-4C-7: Extensions To The Public Sewer
8-4C-8: Protection From Damage
8-4C-9: Powers And Authority Of Inspectors
8-4C-10: Violations And Penalties
8-4C-1: DEFINITIONS:
Unless the context specifically indicates otherwise, the meanings of terms used
in this ordinance shall be as follows:
   ADMINISTRATOR: The administrator of the United States environmental
protection agency.
   BOD (Denoting BIOCHEMICAL OXYGEN DEMAND): That amount of oxygen, expressed
in milligrams per liter, utilized in five (5) days at twenty degrees Celsius
(20°C) for biochemical oxidation of the organic material present in wastewater.
   BASIC USER CHARGE: The basic assessment levied on all users of the public
sewer system.
   BUILDING DRAIN: That part of the lowest horizontal piping of a drainage
system which receives the wastewater discharge from soil, waste and other
wastewater drainage pipes inside the walls of the building and conveys it to
the building sewer, beginning five feet (5') outside the inner face of the
building wall.
   BUILDING SEWER: The extension from the building drain to the public sewer or
other place of disposal; also called house connection.
   CHEMICAL OXYGEN DEMAND (COD): The quantity of oxygen utilized in the
chemical oxidation of organic matter under standard laboratory procedures.
   COMBINED SEWER: A sewer intended to receive both "wastewater", as defined
herein, and storm or surface water.
   COMBINED WATER AND SEWER CHARGE: The charge bimonthly levied on all users of
the combined water and sewer system. The service charge shall be computed as
outlined in section
8-4A-2 of this chapter and shall consist of the total or the basic user charge,
the debt service charge and a surcharge, if applicable.
   COMPATIBLE POLLUTANT: Biochemical oxygen demand, suspended solids, pH and
fecal coliform bacteria, plus additional pollutants identified in the NPDES
permit if the publicly owned treatment works was designed to treat such
pollutants and in fact does remove such pollutants to a substantial degree.
   CONSTRUCTION DRAINAGE: Water accumulated in excavations, water taken from
the ground through a well-point, underdrain or other dewatering system, water
accumulated as a result of grading and all other drainage associated with
construction operation.
   CONTROL MANHOLE: A structure located on a site from which industrial wastes
are discharged. Where feasible, the manhole shall have an interior drop. The
purpose of a "control manhole" is to provide access for the sanitary district
representative to sample and/or measure discharges.
   COOLING WATER: The unpolluted water from any system for condensing, air
conditioning, cooling, refrigeration or other use, and shall be free from odor
and oil.
   DEBT SERVICE CHARGE: The amount to be paid each billing period for payment
of interest, principal and coverage of outstanding loans, bonds, etc., and
shall be computed by dividing the annual debt service by the number of users
connected to the wastewater facilities.
   DIRECTOR: The Director of the Illinois Environmental Protection Agency.
   EASEMENT: An acquired legal right for the specific use of land owned by
others.
   EFFLUENT CRITERIA: As defined in any applicable NPDES permit.
   FEDERAL GRANT: The United States government participation in the financing
of the construction of treatment works as provided for by the Title II - Grants
for Construction of Treatment Works of the Act and implementing regulations.
   FLOTABLE OIL: Oil, fat or grease in a physical state such that it will
separate by gravity from wastewater shall be considered free of flotable fat if
it is properly pretreated and the wastewater does not interfere with the
collection system.
   GARBAGE: The animal and vegetable waste resulting from the handling,
preparation, cooking and serving of foods.
   INCOMPATIBLE POLLUTANT: Any pollutant not listed as a compatible pollutant.
   INDUSTRIAL USER: The definition of "industrial user", defined under section
35.905 of title 40 of the Federal Register and published in Volume 43, No. 183
of the Federal Register dated September 27, 1978, is hereby adopted and, in
addition thereto, shall include those users whose flow rates bear
characteristics which are abnormal from the standards set forth herein.
Any user may be excluded from this industrial user class if it is determined
that such user will introduce primarily segregated domestic wastes or wastes
from sanitary conveniences.
   INDUSTRIAL WASTES: Any solid, liquid or gaseous substance discharged,
permitted to flow or escaping from any industrial, manufacturing, commercial or
business establishment or process or from the development, recovery or
processing of any natural resource as distinct from sanitary sewage.
   INFILTRATION: The water, other than wastewater, that enters a sewerage
system (including sewer service connections) from the ground through such means
as, but not limited to, defective pipes, pipe joints, connections or manholes.
Infiltration does not include and is distinguished from inflow.
   INFILTRATION/INFLOW: The total quantity of water from both infiltration and
inflow without distinguishing the source.
   INFLOW: The water, other than wastewater, that enters a sewerage system
(including service connections) from sources such as, but not limited to, roof
leaders, cellar drains, yard and area drains, foundation drains, cooling
towers, drains from springs and swampy areas, manhole covers, cross-
connections between storm sewers and sanitary sewers, catch basins,
stormwaters, surface runoff, street wash waters or drainage. Inflow does not
include, and is distinguished from infiltration.
   INTERCEPTOR SEWER: A sewer whose primary purpose is to transport wastewater
from collector sewers to a treatment facility.
   MAJOR CONTRIBUTING INDUSTRY: An industrial user of the publicly-owned
treatment works that has: (A) a flow greater than 25.000 gpd per average
workday; or (B) has a flow greater than five percent (5%) of the flow carried
by the municipal system receiving its wastes; or (C) has in its waste, a toxic
pollutant in amount as defined in standards issued under section 307(a) of the
Act; or (D) Is found by the permit issuance authority, in connection with the
issuance of an NPDES permit to the publicly-owned treatment works receiving the
waste, to have significant impact, either singly or in combination with other
contributing industries, on that treatment works or upon the quality of
effluent from that treatment works.
   MAY: Is permissive (see also "Shall").
   MILLIGRAMS PER LITER: A unit of the concentration of water or wastewater
constituent. It is 0.001 g of the constituent in 1,000 ml of water. It has
replaced the unit formerly used commonly, parts per million, to which it is
approximately equivalent, in reporting the results of water and wastewater
analysis.
   MUNICIPALITY: The Village of Manhattan.
   NATURAL OUTLET: Any outlet, including storm sewers, in a watercourse, pond,
ditch, lake or other body or surface or ground water.
   NORMAL DOMESTIC SEWAGE: All household-type discharges from places of human
habitation including sanitary conveniences, kitchen and laundry wastes.
Discharge waste strength shall be considered to average 200 mg/l BOD and 250
mg/l suspended solids at a discharge rate of 100 gallons per capita per day.
This loading equates to .17 pounds of BOD and .20 pounds of suspended solids
per capita per day.
   NPDES PERMIT: The National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System permit
that is issued by the USEPA setting the limits on constituents that the
permittee may legally discharge. The limits are set in both concentration and
quantity.
   PERSON: Any individual, firm, company, association, society, corporation or
group.
   pH: The logarithm of the reciprocal of the hydrogen ion concentration. The
concentration is the molecular weight of hydrogen ions in grams per liter of
solution.
   POPULATION EQUIVALENT: A term used to evaluate the impact of industrial or
other waste on a treatment works or streams. One population equivalent is 100
gallons of sewage per day, containing 0.17 pounds of BOD and 0.20 pounds of
suspended solids.
ppm: Parts per million by weight.
   PRETREATMENT: The treatment of wastewaters from sources before introduction
into the wastewater treatment works.
   PROPERLY SHREDDED GARBAGE: The wastes from the preparation, cooking and
dispensing of food that have been shredded to such a degree that all particles
will be carried freely under the flow conditions normally prevailing in public
sewers, with no particle greater than one-half inch (1/2") in any dimension.
   PUBLIC SEWER: A sewer provided by or subject to the jurisdiction of the
Village. It shall also include sewers within or outside the Village boundaries
that serve one or more persons and ultimately discharge into the Village
sanitary sewer system, even though those sewers may not have been constructed
with Village funds.
   PUBLIC BUILDING: Is hereby determined to be a building to be used by the
public for religious, educational, charitable or governmental purposes.
Classification of said building to be made solely by the Board of Trustees.
   REPLACEMENT: Expenditures for obtaining and installing equipment,
accessories or appurtenances which are necessary during the service life of the
treatment works to maintain the capacity and performance for which such works
were designed and constructed. The term "operation and maintenance" includes
replacement.
   SANITARY SEWER: A sewer intended to carry only sanitary or sanitary and
industrial wastewaters from residences, commercial buildings industrial plants
and institutions.
   SEWAGE: The spent water of a community. The preferred term is "wastewater"
as defined herein.
   SEWAGE COLLECTION SYSTEM: All of the common lateral sewers within a
publicly-owned treatment system which are primarily installed to receive
wastewaters directly from facilities which convey wastewater from individual
structures or from private property and which includes service connection "Y"
fittings designed for connection with those facilities. The facilities which
convey wastewater from individual structures, from private property to the
public lateral sewer, or its equivalent, are specifically excluded from the
definition with the exception of pumping units and pressurized lines for
individual structures or groups of structures, when such units are cost-
effective and are owned and maintained by the District.
   SEWAGE FUND: The principal accounting designation for all revenues received
in the operation of the sewerage system.
   SEWER: A pipe or conduit that carries wastewater or drainage water.
   SEWERAGE: The system of sewers and appurtenances for the collection,
transportation and pumping of sewage.
   SHALL: Is mandatory (see also "May").
   SLUG: Any discharge of water or wastewater which in concentration of any
given constituent or in quantity of flow, exceeds, for any period of duration
longer than fifteen (15) minutes more than five (5) times the average twenty
four (24) hour concentration of flows during normal operation and shall
adversely affect the collection system and/or performance of the wastewater
treatment works.
   STANDARD METHODS: The examination and analytical procedures set forth in the
most recent edition of "Standard Methods for the Examination of Water and
Wastewater" published jointly by the American Public Health Association, the
American Water Works Association and the Water Pollution Control Federation.
   STATE ACT: The Illinois Anti-Pollution Bond Act of 1970.
   STATE GRANTS: The State of Illinois participation in the financing of the
construction of treatment works as provided for by the Illinois Anti-Pollution
Bond Act and for making such grants as filed with the Secretary of State of the
State of Illinois.
   STORM SEWER: A sewer intended to carry only storm waters, surface runoff,
street wash waters and drainage water, ground water, subsurface water or
unpolluted water from any source.
   STORM WATER RUNOFF: That portion of the precipitation that is drained into
the sewers.
   SURCHARGE: The assessment, in addition to the basic user charge and debt
service charge, which is levied on those persons whose waters are greater in
strength than the concentration values established in Section
8-4A-2 of this Chapter.
   SUSPENDED SOLIDS: Filterable solids, expressed in milligrams per liter,
contained in wastewater.
   THE ACT: The Clean Water Act (33 U.S.C. 1251 et seq., as amended).
   UNPOLLUTED WATER: Water of quality equal to or better than the effluent
criteria in effect, or water that would not cause violation of receiving water
quality standards and would not be benefited by discharging to the sanitary
sewers and wastewater treatment facilities provided.
   USEFUL LIFE: The estimated period during which the collection system and/or
treatment works will be operated and shall be twenty (20) years from the date
of startup of any wastewater facilities constructed with a State grant.
   USER CHARGE: A charge levied on users of treatment works for the cost of
operation and maintenance.
   USER TYPES:
Commercial User: Includes transit lodging, retail and wholesale establishments
or places engaged in selling merchandise or rendering service.
Industrial User: Any nongovernmental user of publicly owned treatment works
identified in the Standard Industrial Classification Manual, 1972, Office of
Management and Budget, as amended and supplemented, under the following
divisions:
   A.   Division A--Agriculture, Forestry Fishing.
   B.   Division B--Mining.
   C.   Division D--Manufacturing.
   D.   Division E--Transportation, Communications, Electric, Gas and Sanitary
Services.
   E.   Division I--Services.
Residential User: All dwelling units such as houses, mobile homes, apartments,
permanent multi-family dwellings.
User Class: The type of user either "residential", "commercial" (non-
industrial) or "industrial" as defined herein.
A user in the divisions listed may be excluded if it is determined by the
Village that it will introduce primarily segregated domestic wastes or wastes
from sanitary conveniences.
   VILLAGE: The Village of Manhattan, Will County, Illinois and the President
and Board of Trustees thereof.
   WASTEWATER: The spent water of a community. From the standpoint of source,
it may be a combination of the liquid- and water-carried wastes from
residences, commercial buildings, industrial plants and institutions, together
with any ground water, surface water and storm water that may be present.
   WASTEWATER FACILITIES: The structures, equipment and processes required to
collect, carry away, and treat domestic and industrial wastes and dispose of
the effluent.
   WASTEWATER TREATMENT WORKS: An arrangement of devices and structures for
treating wastewater, industrial wastes and sludge. Sometimes used as synonymous
with "waste treatment plant" or "wastewater treatment plant" or "water
pollution control plants" or "sewage treatment plant".
   WATER QUALITY STANDARDS: As defined in the Water Pollution Regulations of
Illinois.
   WATERCOURSE: A naturel or artificial channel for the passage of water either
continuously or intermittently. (Ord. 496, 9-20-83)
8-4C-2: USE OF PUBLIC SEWERS REQUIRED:
   A.   It shall be unlawful for any person to place, deposit or permit to be
deposited in any unsanitary manner on public or private property within the
Village or in any area under the jurisdiction of the Village any human or other
objectionable waste.
   B.   It shall be unlawful to discharge to any natural outlet within the
Village or in any area under the jurisdiction of the Village any wastewater or
other polluted waters, except where suitable treatment has been provided in
accordance with subsequent provisions of this Ordinance.
   C.   Except as hereinafter provided, it shall be unlawful to construct or
maintain any privy or privy vault, septic tank, cesspool or other facility
intended or used for the disposal of wastewater.
   D.   The owner(s) of all houses, buildings or properties used for human
occupancy, employment, recreation or other purposes situated within the
Village, and abutting on any street, alley or right of way in which there is
now located or may in the future be located a public sanitary sewer of the
Village, is hereby required, at the owner(s) expense, to install suitable
toilet facilities therein and to connect such facilities directly with the
proper public sewer in accordance with the provisions of this Ordinance within
ninety (90) days after date of official notice to do so; provided, that said
public sewer is within two hundred feet (200') of the property line as long as
the residence is within the Village. (Ord. 496, 9-20-83)
8-4C-3: PRIVATE WASTEWATER DISPOSAL SYSTEMS:
   A.   Private System Required: Where a public sanitary sewer is not available
under the provisions of subsection
 8-4C-2D of this Article, the building sewer shall be connected to a private
wastewater disposal system complying with the provisions of this Section.
   B.   Permit Requirements:
      1.   Permit Required; Application: Before commencement of construction of
a private wastewater disposal system within the limits of the Village, the
owner shall first obtain a written permit signed by the President of the
Village Board of Trustees. The application for such permit shall be made on the
form furnished by the Village and described as follows:
   APPLICATION FOR
   PRIVATE WASTEWATER DISPOSAL
   PLEASE PRINT ANSWERS
   THE UNDERSIGNED, being the    
            (Owner, Owner's Agent)
of the property described as    
   (Lot No. - Block - Subdivision)
                                             also known as    
(Section - Township - Range)   (Number - Street)
does hereby request a Village of Manhattan permit to install a private
wastewater disposal facility to serve the    
   (Residential, Commercial, etc.)
building at said location.
1. Will County, Illinois permit No.       has been issued.
2. Proposed facilities include:    
to be constructed in complete accordance with the plans and
specifications attached hereto as Exhibit "A".
3. Area of described property                   square feet.
4. Number of structures         and persons        to be served.
5. Name and address of person performing work:
   
   
6. Attached hereto as Exhibit "B" is a plat showing all private    
   
or public water supply sources located within one hundred (100) feet of the
described property.
   THE UNDERSIGNED AGREES: That this permit will be issued only if (a) the
above requirements are satisfied, (b) it is not possible to connect to a public
sanitary sewer, (c) the owner agrees to abandon the facility if a public sewer
becomes available, (d) the owner will abide by all Village Ordinances, (e) and
the facility will be operated and maintained in a sanitary manner at no expense
to the Village.
DATE:                      SIGNED:    
            (Applicant)
            
         (Address of Applicant)
$                          Permit and inspection fee paid.
            
   (Certification by Village Treasurer)
DATE:                     SIGNED:    
            (Village President)
The applicant shall supplement with any plans, specifications and other
information as are deemed necessary by the Village.
      2.   Permit and Inspection Fee: A permit and inspection fee of fifty
dollars ($50.00) shall be paid to the Village at the time the application is
filed.
      3.   Permit and Requirements Are Additional: This written permit from the
Village shall be required in addition to any information required by the Will
County Health Department.
   C.   Inspection: A permit for a private wastewater disposal system shall not
become effective until the installation is completed to the satisfaction of the
Village. The Village shall be allowed to inspect the work at any stage of
construction, and in any event, the applicant for the permit shall notify the
Village when the work is ready for final inspection and before any underground
portions are covered. This inspection shall be made within seventy two (72)
hours of the receipt of notice by the Village.
   D.   Construction Specifications: The type, capacities, location and layout
of a private sewage disposal system shall comply with the recommendations of
the County and State authorities. No septic tank or cesspool shall be permitted
to discharge to any public sewer or natural outlet.
   E.   Connection to Public Sewer:
      1.   At such a time as a public sewer becomes available to a property
served by a private wastewater disposal system, a direct connection shall be
made to the sewer within sixty (60) days, in compliance with this Ordinance,
and any septic tanks, cesspools and similar private wastewater disposal
facilities shall be cleaned of sludge and filled with gravel or sand.
   F.   Responsibility Of Owner: The owner(s) shall operate and maintain the
private wastewater disposal facilities in a sanitary manner at all times, at no
expense to the Village. The discharge from septic tanks shall not be allowed
into public sewers.
   G.   Provisions Are Additional: The requirements of this Section shall be in
addition to any requirements that may be imposed by the Will County Health
Department and the Illinois Environmental Protection Agency. (Ord. 496, 9-20-
83)
8-4C-4: CONNECTION PERMIT:
No person shall make or cause to be made any connection to the sewage works of
the Village, direct or indirect, except under written permit for the work by
the Village and upon payment of all fees. (Ord. 496, 9-20-83)
8-4C-5: BUILDING SEWERS AND CONNECTIONS:
   A.   Permit Requirements:
      1.   Village Permit:
         a.   Permit Required: No unauthorized person(s) shall uncover, make
any connections with or opening into, use, alter or disturb any public sewer or
appurtenance thereof without first obtaining a written permit from the Village.
         b.   Classes of Permits: There shall be two (2) classes of building
sewer permits:
            (1)   For residential and commercial service; and
            (2)   For service to establishments producing industrial wastes.
         c.   Application for Permit: In either of the above cases, the owner
or his agent shall make application on a special form furnished by the Village
and described as follows:
   APPLICATION FOR
   RESIDENTIAL OR COMMERCIAL BUILDING SEWER
   PLEASE PRINT ANSWERS
   THE UNDERSIGNED, being the    
            (Owner, Owner's Agent)
of the property described as    
   (Lot No. - Block - Subdivision)
                    also known as    
(Section - Township - Range)   (Number - Street)
does hereby request a Village of Manhattan permit to install and connect a
building to serve the    
   (Residence - Commercial Building, etc.)
at said location.
1. The name and address of the person or firm who will perform the proposed
work is    
2. Plans and specifications for the proposed building sewer are attached
hereunto as exhibit "A".
   THE UNDERSIGNED AGREES:
1. To accept and abide by all provisions of the Sewer Use Ordinance of the
Village of Manhattan, and all other pertinent Ordinances or regulations that
may be adopted in the Future.
2. To maintain the building sewer at no expense to the Village of Manhattan.
3. To notify the Village when the building sewer is ready for inspection and
connection to the public sewer, but before any portion of the work is covered.
DATE:              SIGNED:    
            (Applicant)
            
            (Address of Applicant)
      
   (Certification by Village Treasurer)
$                     Permit and inspection fee paid.
Application approved and permit issued:
DATE:                          SIGNED:    
            (Village President)
The permit application shall be supplemented by any plans, specifications or
other information considered pertinent in the judgement of the Village.
         d.   Permit Inspection Fee: A permit and inspection fee of twenty
dollars ($20.00) for a residential or commercial building sewer permit shall be
paid to the Village at the time the application is filed.
         e.   Condition of Permit:
            (1)   The industry, as a condition of permit authorization, must
provide information describing its wastewater constituents, characteristics and
type of activity.
            (2)   A building sewer permit will only be issued and a sewer
connection shall only be allowed if it can be demonstrated that the downstream
sewerage facilities, including sewers, pump stations and wastewater treatment
facilities, have sufficient reserve capacity to adequately and efficiently
handle the additional anticipated waste load.
      2.   State Permit: In addition to the Village permit, any building sewer
which is designed or intended to serve a single building and eventually treat
or discharge more than one thousand five hundred (1,500) gallons per day of
domestic sewage or that population equivalent must obtain an Illinois
Environmental Protection Agency construction permit.
   B.   Bond: At the discretion of the Village, a bond may be required in any
amount not less than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00).
   C.   Separate Sewer Required: A separate and independent building sewer
shall be provided for every building; except, where one building stands at the
rear of another on an interior lot and no private sewer is available or can be
constructed to the rear building through an adjoining alley, court, yard or
driveway, the front building sewer may be extended to the rear building and the
whole considered as one building sewer, but the Village does not and will not
assume any obligation or responsibility for damage caused by or resulting from
any such single connection aforementioned. A separate tap-on fee shall be paid
for the building to the rear of the first building serviced.
   D.   Use of Old Building Sewers: Old building sewers may be used in
connection with new buildings only when they are found, on examination and test
by the Village, to meet all requirements of this Ordinance.
   E.   Construction Specifications and Regulations:
      1.   The specifications as outlined in the book, "Standard Specifications
for Water and Sewer Main Construction in Illinois", latest edition, are hereby
adopted as the regulations for selecting the size, slope, alignment, materials
of construction of a building sewer and the methods to be used in excavating,
placing of the pipe, jointing, testing and backfilling the trench.
      2.   The type and quality of sewer pipe and fittings used for building
sewers shall conform to the respective specifications indicated or the latest
designation thereof as follows:
         a.   A.B.S. solid wall pipe conforming to the latest requirements of
ASTM Standard Specifications for Acrylonitrile-Butadiene-Styrene solid wall
piping and shall be SDR 23.5. All joints shall be Type SC with a seven inch
(7") coupling length in accordance with ASTM Standard Specification D2751; or
         b.   Polyvinyl Chloride (PVC) Sewer Pipe conforming to the latest
requirements of ASTM Standard Specifications for Polyvinyl Chloride Sewer
Piping D-2241 and shall be SDR 21. All joints shall consist of a rubber ring in
accordance with ASTM Standard Specifications D-1869 and F-477.
      3.   No building sewer shall be less than six inches (6") in diameter.
Building sewers for commercial, industrial or multiple-family buildings shall
be not less than six inches (6") in diameter.
      4.   The minimum grade for all building sewers shall be one- eighth inch
(1/8") per foot, but wherever possible, one-fourth inch (1/4") per foot shall
be used.
      5.   Whenever possible, the building sewer shall be brought to the
building at an elevation below the basement floor. In all buildings in which
any building drain is too low to permit gravity flow to the public sewer,
sanitary sewage carried by such building drain shall be lifted by an approved
means and discharged to the building sewer.
      6.   Whenever construction of a building sewer is in progress, access
shall be provided to allow inspection and observation by representatives of the
Village. All newly constructed joints shall be left exposed for approval by a
representative of the Village prior to backfilling.
   F.   Connections to Public Sewers:
      1.   The specifications as outlined in the book, "Standard Specifications
for Water and Sewer Main Construction in Illinois", latest edition, are hereby
adopted as regulations for the connection of the building sewer into a public
sewer. All such connections shall be made gastight and watertight and verified
by proper testing. Any deviation from the prescribed procedures and materials
must be approved by the Village before installation.
      2.   The applicant for the building sewer permit shall notify the Village
when the building sewer is ready for inspection and connection to the public
sewer. The connection and testing shall be made under the observation of the
Village.
      3.   The connection of the building sewer into the public sewer shall be
made with a branch if such branch is available at a suitable location. If no
way branch is available, an opening may be mechanically cut into the public
sewer and the connection made with a way saddle specifically made for this type
of connection and the entire connection encased in concrete. No building sewer
shall connect to a manhole unless approved by the Village.
   G.   Excavation: All excavations for the building sewer installation shall
be adequately guarded with barricades and lights so as to protect the public
from hazard. Streets, sidewalks, parkways and other public property disturbed
in the course of the work shall be restored in a manner satisfactory to the
Village.
   H.   Surface Runoff:
      1.   No person(s) shall make connection of roof downspouts, foundation
drains, areaway drains or other sources of surface runoff or ground water and
other sources of uncontaminated water to a building sewer or building drain
which in turn is connected directly or indirectly to a public sanitary sewer.
It shall be illegal for any person to allow uncontaminated water to drain into
any source of contaminated water emptying into the public sewer.
      2.   The Village reserves the right to visually inspect the building
plumbing both inside and outside of the house, so as to determine that there is
no direct or indirect connection of any drains or other sources of surface
runoff or ground water, as discussed and prohibited herein, with the building
sewer.
   I.   Liability of Owner: All costs and expenses incidental to the
installation and connection of the building sewer shall be borne by the owner
(s). The owner(s) shall indemnify the District from any loss or damage that may
directly or indirectly be occasioned by the installation of the building sewer.
   J.   Discharge Into Sewers: All disposal by any person into the sewer system
is unlawful except those discharges in compliance with Federal standards
promulgated pursuant to the Federal Act and more stringent State and local
standards. (Ord. 496, 9-20-83)
8-4C-6: USE RESTRICTIONS:
8-4C-6-1: DISCHARGE OF EFFLUENT:
No person(s) shall discharge or cause to be discharged any unpolluted waters
such as storm water, ground water, roof runoff, subsurface drainage, foundation
drainage or cooling water to any sanitary sewer.
Storm water and all other unpolluted drainage shall be discharged to such
sewers as are specifically designed as storm sewers. Unpolluted industrial
cooling water or process water may be discharged to a storm sewer or natural
outlet. Any water discharging into a natural outlet shall be subject to the
temperature requirements of State and County regulations. (Ord. 496, 9-20-83)
8-4C-6-2: PROHIBITED DISCHARGES:
No person(s) shall discharge or cause to be discharged any of the following
described waters or wastes to any public sewers:
   A.   Any gasoline, benzene, naphtha, fuel oil or other flammable or
explosive liquid, solid or gas.
   B.   Any waters containing toxic or poisonous solids, liquids or gases in
sufficient quantity, either singly or by interaction with other wastes, to
injure or interfere with any waste treatment process, constitute a hazard to
humans or animals, create a public nuisance or create any hazard in the
receiving waters of the wastewater treatment plant.
   C.   Any waters or wastes having pH lower than five and five tenths (5.5) or
having any other corrosive property capable of causing damage or hazard to
structures, equipment and personnel of the wastewater works.
   D.   Solid or viscous substances in quantities or of such size capable of
causing obstruction to the flow in sewers or other interferences with the
proper operation of the wastewater facilities such as, but not limited to,
ashes, bones, cinders, sand, mud, straw, shavings, metal, glass, rags,
feathers, tar, plastics, wood, unground garbage, whole blood, paunch manure,
hair and fleshings, entrails and paper dishes, cups, milk containers, either
whole or ground by garbage grinders. (Ord. 496, 9-20-83)
8-4C-6-3: MATERIALS UNDER SPECIAL REVIEW:
   A.   No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged the following
described substances, materials, waters or wastes if it appears likely, in the
opinion of the Village, that such wastes can harm either the sewers, sewage
treatment process or equipment, have an adverse effect on the receiving stream
or can otherwise endanger life, limb, public property or constitute a nuisance.
In forming its opinion as to the acceptability of these wastes, the Village
will give consideration to such factors as the quantities of subject wastes in
relation to flows and velocities in the sewers, materials of construction of
the sewers, nature of the sewage treatment process, capacity of the sewage
treatment plant, degree of treatability of wastes in the sewage treatment plant
and maximum limits established by regulatory agencies. The substances
prohibited are:
      1.   Any liquid or vapor having a temperature higher than one hundred
fifty degrees (150°) Fahrenheit, (65°) Celsius.
      2.   Any waters or wastes containing toxic or poisonous materials or
oils, whether emulsified or not, in excess of one hundred (100) mg/l or
containing substances which may solidify or become viscous at temperatures
between thirty two degrees and one hundred fifty degrees (32° and 150°)
Fahrenheit, (0 and 65 degrees Celsius).
      3.   Any garbage that has not been properly shredded. The installation
and operation of any garbage grinder equipped with a motor of three-fourths (3/
4) horsepower (0.75 hp metric) or greater shall be subject to the review and
approval of the Village.
      4.   Any waters or wastes containing strong acid, iron pickling wastes or
concentrated plating solutions whether neutralized or not.
      5.   Any waters or wastes containing iron, chromium, copper, zinc or
similar objectionable or toxic substances, or wastes exerting an excessive
chlorine requirement, to composite sewage at the sewage treatment works exceed
the limits established by the Village for such materials.
      6.   Any waters or wastes containing phenols or other taste- or odor-
producing substances in such concentrations exceeding limits which may be
established by the Village as necessary, after treatment of the composite
sewage, to meet the requirements of the State, Federal or other public agencies
of jurisdiction for such discharge to the receiving waters.
      7.   Any radioactive wastes or isotopes of such half-life or
concentration as may exceed limits established by the Village in compliance
with applicable State or Federal regulations.
      8.   Any waters or wastes having a pH in excess of nine and five tenths
(9.5).
      9.   Any mercury or any of its compounds in excess of 0.0005 mg/l as Hg
at any time except as permitted by the Village in compliance with applicable
State and Federal regulations.
      10.   Any cyanide in excess of 0.026 mg/l at any time except as permitted
by the Village in compliance with applicable State and Federal regulations.
      11.   Materials which exert or cause:
         a.   Unusual concentration of inert suspended solids (such as, but not
limited to, fuller's earth, lime slurries and lime residues) or of dissolved
solids (such as, but not limited to, sodium chloride and sodium sulfate);
         b.   Excessive discoloration (such as, but not limited to, dye wastes
and vegetable tanning solutions);
         c.   Unusual BOD, chemical oxygen demand or chlorine requirements in
such quantities as to constitute a significant load on the sewage treatment
works;
         d.   Unusual volume of flow or concentrations of wastes constituting
"slugs" as defined in section
8-4C-1 of this article.
      12.   Waters or wastes containing substances which are not amenable to
treatment or reduction by the sewage treatment process employed or are amenable
to treatment only to such degree that the sewage treatment plant effluent
cannot meet the requirements of agencies having jurisdiction over discharge.
   B.   If any waters or wastes are discharged or are proposed to be discharged
to the public sewers, which waters contain the substances or possess the
characteristics enumerated in subsection A of this section, and which have a
deleterious effect upon the wastewater facilities, processes, equipment or
receiving waters or which otherwise create a hazard to life or constitute a
public nuisance, the village may:
      1.   Reject the wastes;
      2.   Require pretreatment to an acceptable condition for discharge to the
public sewers;
      3.   Require control over the quantities and rates of discharge; and/or
      4.   Require payment to cover added cost of handling and treating the
wastes not covered by existing taxes or sewer charges. If the village permits
or requires the pretreatment or equalization of waste flows, the design and
installation of the plants and equipment shall be subject to the review and
approval of the village and subject to the requirements of all applicable
codes, ordinances and laws. (Ord. 496, 9-20-1983)
8-4C-6-4: FAT, OIL AND GREASE TRAPS/INTERCEPTORS:
   A.   Installation Of Grease Interceptors: Plumbing systems for institutions
or commercial establishments in which fats, oils or grease (FOG), or similar
waste products from kitchens or food processing areas are wasted, or in which
grease, fats, or culinary oils are wasted in connection with utensil, vat,
dish, or floor cleaning processes, shall include grease interceptors installed
in accordance with part 890, Illinois plumbing code.
      1.   All required grease interceptors shall comply with the following:
         a.   Grease interceptors shall be constructed of durable, corrosion
resistant materials and shall have watertight covers securely fastened in
place.
         b.   Minimum size. A grease interceptor installed on the same floor as
the fixture shall have one-half (1/2) the liquid holding capacity of the
fixture. A grease interceptor located on a floor below the fixture shall have
sixty percent (60%) of the liquid holding capacity of the fixture. To determine
the liquid holding capacity in gallons of a plumbing fixture, multiply the
length by the width by the height in inches, and divide by two hundred thirty
one (231). Where two (2) or more sinks or receptacles are connected to an
interceptor the liquid holding capacity shall be based on the combined volume
of the fixtures served.
         c.   No grease interceptor shall receive the discharge from a food
waste disposal or a commercial dishwashing machine.
         d.   The flow rate of the interceptor shall be sufficient to handle
the maximum demand of the connected system.
         e.   All interceptors shall be installed in an accessible location to
permit the convenient removal of the lid and internal contents.
         f.   All interceptors shall be designed and installed with proper
venting so that they do not become air bound.
   B.   Oil Interceptors: Commercial vehicle repair garages, gasoline stations
with grease racks or pits, and oil change facilities shall be provided with
floor drains or trench drains connected to a gas and oil interceptor. When
these facilities are connected to a private sewage disposal system, the floor
or trench drains shall be connected to a holding tank in lieu of a gas and oil
interceptor in accordance with the private sewage disposal act and USEPA
regulations. Where trench drains are used to carry wastes to a gas and oil
interceptor, the trench drain shall either extend the entire length of the work
area or shall be installed in each working stall. For all facilities specified
in this section in which floor drains are installed, a minimum of one floor
drain per working stall or one floor drain for each five hundred (500) square
feet shall be installed.
   C.   Vehicle Storage Areas: Commercial and residential vehicle storage areas
greater than one thousand (1,000) square feet with floor or trench drains
installed shall comply with subsection D1, D2 or D3 of this section. Exception:
Residential garages with fewer than five (5) vehicle bays are exempted from
this requirement.
   D.   Facilities That Generate Fuel Oil: All facilities, other than those
specified in subsection B of this section, that generate fuel oil or flammable
waste shall meet one of the following requirements:
      1.   Provide floor drains or trench drains connected to a gas and oil
interceptor.
      2.   Provide floor or trench drains connected to a holding tank in lieu
of a gas and oil interceptor when these drains are connected to a private
sewage disposal system.
      3.   Provide an alternative system approved by the Illinois department of
public health (i.e., an oil reclamation system or containment area).
   E.   Operation And Maintenance:
      1.   Operation And Maintenance Responsibilities:
         a.   Grease traps, interceptors, separators and holding tanks shall be
operated in a safe and secure manner at all times.
         b.   Areas surrounding grease traps, interceptors, separators and
holding tanks shall be maintained to facilitate immediate access to the unit
for cleaning and for inspection by the village at all times.
         c.   Grease traps, interceptors and separators shall be maintained in
continuously efficient operation by the owner or operator at his expense and
shall produce an effluent in compliance with this section or other applicable
ordinance.
         d.   User shall not remove any downpipes or otherwise alter a grease
trap, interceptor or separator in any way which may allow oil, grease, sand, or
other objectionable materials to pass through the device into the sanitary
sewer.
         e.   Where the utilities must clean associated public sewers caused by
inappropriate operation or maintenance, inadequate design or installation, or
inappropriate alteration of a grease trap, interceptor or separator, costs of
such cleaning shall be billed to the user.
            (1)   In a case where several users are discharging to the same
sewer line, all the users shall be equally liable except where the user
provides written proof his discharge could not have been a contributing factor.
            (2)   Proof shall consist of demonstration of adequate sizing and
installation, appropriate cleaning (as documented by manifests and inspection
documentation) and valid analysis of a sample of the discharge collected within
one week of the sewer cleaning activities. Analysis of samples collected after
sewer line cleaning will be accepted only where the grease trap, interceptor or
separator has been properly maintained and was not cleaned within thirty (30)
days of the sewer cleaning activities.
         f.   User shall not increase the use of water or in any other way
attempt to dilute the waste stream in lieu of adequate treatment.
         g.   The addition of hot water or the use of emulsifiers, chemicals,
or other agents or devices that may cause oil, grease, or sand to pass through
a treatment facility or into the sanitary sewer collection system is strictly
prohibited. Areas surrounding a grease trap, interceptor, separator or holding
tank shall be kept clean and free of grease and odors and other materials at
all times.
            (1)   Materials shall not be splashed, spilled, allowed to
overflow, or otherwise placed on the area surrounding a grease trap,
interceptor or separator.
            (2)   In the event materials are spilled, splashed, overflowed, or
otherwise placed on the surrounding area, the generator or owner shall assure
the materials are cleaned from the area and properly disposed.
         h.   Grease traps, interceptors, separators and holding tanks shall be
fully evacuated of all contents during cleaning. If the capacity of the trap,
interceptor, separator or holding tank is greater than the capacity of the
transport vehicle where full evacuation is not possible in a single load, then
the transporter and the generator shall assure the contents are fully evacuated
within twenty four (24) hours.
            (1)   No liquid waste shall be returned to the trap, interceptor,
separator or holding tank after or during cleaning, either from the same or
other trap, interceptor, separator or holding tank.
            (2)   During cleaning, grease residue shall be removed from piping
and walls and the piping and walls shall be inspected to assure the integrity
of the device is maintained.
         i.   Materials removed from traps, interceptors, separators and
holding tanks shall be utilized by industry, recycled, or disposed at a
facility designated by or acceptable to the generator where the owner or
operator agrees to receive the wastes and the disposal facility has
documentation showing the facility meets all requirements of the state. All
wastes shall be disposed in a suitable manner in accordance with applicable
federal, state, and local laws.
         j.   Users required to maintain grease traps, interceptors,
separators, or holding tanks shall establish a system of training designed to
provide employees with appropriate instruction on the proper use of such
facilities.
            (1)   Such training system shall provide employees at all levels of
responsibility with a complete understanding of the operation and maintenance
of the pretreatment device and the relation between appropriate waste disposal
and efficient operation of the pretreatment device. Such system should include:
               (A)   The importance and methods of good housekeeping practices;
               (B)   Acceptable waste disposal practices including proper
disposal of different types of wastes;
               (C)   Procedures for preventing prohibited discharges; and
               (D)   The proper response to and notifications in case of spills
or other accidental discharges.
            (2)   Periodic training sessions shall be conducted to assure the
employee understands the essential elements of the system. New employees shall
be trained immediately upon employment.
      2.   Inspection And Cleaning Schedules:
         a.   Inspection, cleaning, and other necessary maintenance of such
facilities shall be conducted as often as needed to assure the discharge is in
compliance with the provisions of this section or other applicable ordinance,
but not less than once per ninety (90) days.
            (1)   The trap, interceptor or separator shall be cleaned as often
as necessary, up to and including daily, to assure compliance with this section
or other applicable ordinance.
            (2)   In no case shall the accumulated grease, oil, or sand be
allowed to occupy more than twenty five percent (25%) of the capacity of the
first stage.
            (3)   The physical condition of the trap, interceptor, or separator
(piping, internal walls, sidewalls, etc.) shall be inspected by the user each
time the facility is cleaned. Repairs, if needed, shall be made prior to
further use.
               (A)   Repairs or modifications shall be approved by the plumbing
inspector and shall not be made without the appropriate city permits.
               (B)   Inspection shall be conducted by the plumbing inspector
after repair and prior to refilling or use. A copy of the inspection tag issued
by the plumbing inspector shall be maintained on site by the user and a copy
shall be sent to the village.
               (C)   Documentation of repairs shall be submitted to the village
within thirty (30) days of the date of repair or earlier if specified in a
notice of deficiency or other village issued document.
            (4)   Grease traps, interceptors, and separators shall produce an
effluent in compliance with this section. Schedules inadequate to produce such
effluent shall be upgraded to as often as necessary, up to and including daily,
or the trap, separator, or interceptor shall be upgraded. Upgraded traps,
separators, or interceptors shall meet all requirements set forth in this
section or other applicable ordinance.
            (5)   Food service users shall maintain a written record on site of
all maintenance performed upon a grease trap/interceptor for three (3) years
after the date of such maintenance. Such maintenance record shall be available
for inspection at the request of the public works department. For any owner who
causes or is responsible, entirely or in part, for a backup, obstruction,
overflow or failure of the village's wastewater system, due in part or in
whole, to an accumulation of FOG, shall be required to file a copy of such
maintenance record with the public works department of the village on a monthly
basis for a period of one year.
            (6)   User shall have any trap, interceptor, or separator cleaned
when ordered to do so by the village. Failure to comply within forty eight (48)
hours after the request shall be cause for the village to precipitate the
cleaning and the expense for which shall be the responsibility of the user.
   F.   Penalty: It shall be unlawful for any person, firm, or corporation to
violate any provisions of this section, and, except as otherwise provided, any
person, firm, or corporation guilty of violating any of the provisions of this
section shall be punishable as provided under section
1-4-1 of this code. Each day that a violation continues shall be deemed a
separate offense.
Any establishment that is identified, in whole or in part, as the source of a
backup, obstruction, overflow or failure of the village of Manhattan wastewater
system due, in part or in whole, to an accumulation of FOG will be assessed the
costs of inspection, sampling or remediation for cleanup and repair of the
wastewater system as a result of the backup, obstruction, overflow or failure,
in addition to any fines and remedies provided in this chapter or dispensed
from the state of Illinois or federal government. (Ord. 1065, 6-15-2010)
8-4C-6-5: PRELIMINARY TREATMENT:
Where pretreatment or flow equalizing facilities are provided or required for
any waters or wastes, they shall be maintained continuously in satisfactory and
effective operation by the owner(s) at his expense. (Ord. 496, 9-20-1983)
8-4C-6-6: INDUSTRIAL USERS:
   A.   Control manholes shall be required on all industrial plant building
sewers, as determined by the village, in a location which will prove to be
accessible for the board to inspect and monitor. Control manholes are to be
constructed at the sole cost of the property owner(s) and/or user, pursuant to
plans and specifications approved by the board, and the property owner(s) and/
or user shall comply within sixty (60) days after receiving notice from the
board requesting installation of the control manholes. The board shall send the
notice to the property owner(s) and/or user by certified mail.
   B.   The village may further require the installation of housed flow
metering and sampling equipment in the building sewers of specific industrial
users. Sample testing procedures shall be the direct responsibility of each
industrial user. It shall be the sole responsibility of the industrial user to
perform all sampling procedures in accordance with the requirements of the
village and to submit the results of the samplings to the village on a periodic
basis, said period to be determined by the village. The samplings shall be
performed and certified by an independent testing laboratory. The property
owner(s) and/or user shall comply within one hundred twenty (120) days after
receiving notice from the Board of said request for installation of flow meters
and sampling equipment. The Board shall send the notice to the property owner
(s) and/or user by certified mail.
   C.   All costs of the above construction, sample testing, plan review and
construction inspection shall be borne by the owner(s) and/or user and charged
to the owner(s) and/or user by the Board.
   D.   The control manhole and flow-metering and sampling equipment shall be
maintained by the owner(s) and/or user so as to be safe and accessible at all
times.
   E.   In the event that no special manhole is available, the control manhole
shall be considered to be the nearest downstream manhole in the public sewer to
the point at which the building sewer is connected. (Ord. 496, 9-20-83)
8-4C-6-7: MEASUREMENTS, TESTS AND ANALYSES:
All measurements, tests and analyses of the characteristics of waters and
wastes to which reference is made in this Ordinance shall be determined in
accordance with the latest edition of "Standard Methods for the Examination of
Water and Wastewater", published by the American Public Health Association, and
shall be determined at the control manhole provided or upon suitable samples
taken at said control manhole. In the event that no special manhole has been
required, the control manhole shall be considered to be the nearest downstream
manhole in the public sewer to the point at which the building sewer is
connected. Sampling shall be carried out by customarily accepted methods to
reflect the effect of constituents upon the sewage works and to determine the
existence of hazards to life, limb and property. (The particular analyses
involved will determine whether a twenty four (24) hour composite of all
outfalls of a premises is appropriate or whether a grab sample or samples
should be taken. Normally, but not always, BOD and suspended solids analyses
are obtained from twenty four (24) hour composites of all outfalls whereas pH's
are determined from periodic grab samples.) Sampling and testing shall be the
responsibility of the user, but the Village shall be allowed to take check
samples to verify results. (Ord. 496, 9-20-83)
8-4C-6-8: SPECIAL AGREEMENTS:
No statement contained in this Section
8-4C-6 shall be construed as preventing any special agreement or arrangement
between the Village and any industrial concern whereby an industrial waste of
unusual strength may be accepted by the Village for treatment, subject to
payment therefor, in accordance with Section
8-4A-2 of this Chapter, by the industrial concern, provided such payments are
in accordance with Federal and State guidelines for user charge system. (Ord.
496, 9-20-83)
8-4C-7: EXTENSIONS TO THE PUBLIC SEWER:
   A.   Permit Requirements:
      1.   Permit Required: Each sewer which is designed and is to be
constructed so as to constitute an integral part of the system of sanitary
sewers within the boundaries of this Village, as such boundaries are now
defined and limited or which may hereafter be defined and limited, shall not be
constructed without a written permit issued by the Village.
      2.   Application for Permit: The application for permission to construct
and connect sewers or sewer systems to the sewerage works of the Village,
either direct or indirect, shall be accompanied by a copy of the permit issued
by the Illinois Environmental Protection Agency for the proposed sewer
construction and two (2) sets of plans and specifications of the proposed
sewer. The application shall contain a description of the work to be done, the
location of the proposed connection, the character of sewage to be discharged
and a basis of design for the sewers or sewer system.
      3.   Restrictions on Issuance of Permit: No new sewer connections shall
be allowed unless there is capacity available in all downstream sewers, life
stations, force mains and the wastewater treatment plant, including capacity
for BOD and suspended solids.
   B.   Plans and Specifications: Plans and specifications for all sewers to be
constructed within the Village shall be prepared by a registered engineer. The
plans and specifications shall be reviewed in accordance with accepted
engineering practice by the Village. All costs of review shall be paid by the
applicant.
   C.   Construction of Sewer Extensions:
      1.   The specifications as outlined in the book, "Standard Specifications
for Water and Sewer Main Construction in Illinois", latest edition, are hereby
adopted as the regulations for selecting the size, slope, alignment and the
methods to be used in excavating, placing of the pipe, jointing, testing and
backfilling the trench for construction of sanitary sewers within the Village.
      2.   The type and quality of sanitary sewer pipe and fittings used shall
conform to the respective specifications indicated on the latest designation
thereof as follows:
         a.   A.B.S. Composite Sewer Pipe conforming to the latest requirements
of ASTM Standard Specifications for Acrylonitrile-Butadiene-Styrene Composite
Sewer Piping D-2680. All joints shall be Type SC with a seven inch (7")
coupling length, as described in said ASTM Standard Specification D-2680. Pipe
ends shall be sealed with A.B.S. cement to eliminate false testing results; or
         b.   Polyvinyl Chloride (PVC) Sewer pipe conforming to the latest
requirements of ASTM Standard Specifications of Polyvinyl Chloride Sewer Piping
D-2241 and shall be SDR21. All joints shall consist of a rubber ring in
accordance with ASTM Standard Specifications D-1869 and F477.
      3.   Manholes shall be installed at all changes in grade or direction and
at distances not greater than four hundred feet (400') apart. Manhole covers
shall be at such an elevation as to prevent surface water from entering.
Manholes shall be constructed of precast concrete sections, with cast iron
frame and lid, and manhole steps, all as specified in the latest edition of the
"Standard Specifications for Water and Sewer Main Construction in Illinois".
The precast sections shall be joined together with mastic materials. The
exterior of the entire manhole shall be waterproofed with a suitable material.
   D.   Tests: All newly constructed sanitary sewers shall be tested by a
method described in the applicable section of the "Standard Specifications for
Water and Sewer Main Construction in Illinois", unless otherwise approved or
directed by the Village. All costs of testing shall be paid by the applicant.
   E.   Provisions Are Additional: The requirements of this Section shall be in
addition to any requirements that may be imposed by the Illinois Environmental
Protection Agency. (Ord. 496, 9-20-83)
8-4C-8: PROTECTION FROM DAMAGE:
No unauthorized person shall maliciously, wilfully or negligently break, damage
or tamper with any structure, appurtenance or equipment which is a part of the
sewage works. Any person violating this provision shall be subject to immediate
arrest under charge of disorderly conduct. (Ord. 496, 9-20-83)
8-4C-9: POWERS AND AUTHORITY OF INSPECTORS:
   A.   Any person duly authorized by the Village, the Illinois Environmental
Protection Agency, the United States Environmental Protection Agency and the
Village of Manhattan and bearing proper credentials and identification shall be
permitted to enter all properties for the purposes of inspection, observation,
measurement, sampling and testing pertinent to discharge to the community
system in accordance with the provisions of this Ordinance.
   B.   Any person duly authorized by the Village, the Illinois Environmental
Protection Agency, the United States Environmental Protection Agency and the
Village of Manhattan shall be authorized to obtain information concerning
industrial processes which have a direct bearing on the kind and source of
discharge to the wastewater collection system. The industry may withhold
information considered confidential. The industry must establish that
revelation to the public of the information in question might result in an
advantage to competitors.
   C.   While performing the necessary work on private properties referred to
in subsection A above, the Village Board or its duly authorized employees, the
Illinois Environmental Protection Agency, the United States Environmental
Protection Agency and the Village of Manhattan shall reserve all safety rules
applicable to the premises established by the company. The company shall be
held liable for injury or death to Village employees caused by negligence or
failure of the company to maintain safe conditions in accordance with Federal,
State and local regulations.
   D.   Any person duly authorized by the Village, the Illinois Environmental
Protection Agency, the United States Environmental Protection Agency and the
Village of Manhattan, bearing proper credentials and identification, shall be
permitted to enter all private properties through which the Village holds a
duly negotiated easement for the purposes of, but not limited to, inspection,
observation, measurement, sampling, repair and maintenance of any portion of
the wastewater facilities lying within said easement. All entry and subsequent
work, if any, on said easement shall be done in accordance with the terms of
the duly negotiated easement pertaining to the private property involved. (Ord.
496, 9-20-1983)
8-4C-10: VIOLATIONS AND PENALTIES:
   A.   Penalty: Any person convicted of a violation of any section or
provision of this article shall be punished by a fine as established in section
1-4-1 of this code for any one offense. Each day such violation is committed or
permitted to continue shall constitute a separate offense and shall be
punishable as such hereunder. (Ord. 791, 8-5-2003; amd. Ord. 1061, 4-20-2010)
   B.   Notice Of Violations; Revocation Of Permit: Any person found to be
violating any provision of this article, except section
8-4C-8 of this article, shall be served by the village with written notice
setting the nature of the violation and providing a reasonable time limit for
the satisfactory correction thereof. The offender shall, within the period of
time stated in such notice, permanently cease all violations. The village may
revoke any permit for sewage disposal as a result of any violation of this
article.
   C.   Liability For Violations: Any person violating any of the provisions of
this article shall become liable to the village by reason of such violation.
   D.   Suits And Actions: The village attorney is hereby authorized and
empowered to institute and prosecute any and all fines and penalties herein
provided for and is also hereby authorized and empowered to institute and
prosecute any and all suits at law or in equity as may be appropriate or
necessary to prevent unlawful connection to the village system in violation of
the provisions of this article. (Ord. 496, 9-20-1983)
ARTICLE D. CROSS-CONNECTION CONTROL
SECTION:
8-4D-1: Approved Backflow Prevention Device
8-4D-2: Connection to Other Water Supply Prohibited
8-4D-3: Surveys, Investigations and Records
8-4D-4: Right of Entry
8-4D-5: Disconnection of Water Service
8-4D-6: Cost of Cleanup
8-4D-7: Rules and Regulations
8-4D-8: Penalty
8-4D-1: APPROVED BACKFLOW PREVENTION DEVICE:
All plumbing installed within the Village shall be installed in accordance with
the Illinois Plumbing Code, 77 Illinois Administrative Code 890. That, if in
accordance with the Illinois Plumbing Code or in the judgment of the
Superintendent of Public Works, an approved backflow prevention device is
necessary for the safety of the public water supply system, the Superintendent
of Public Works will give notice to the water customer to install such an
approved device immediately. The water customer shall, at their own expense,
install such an approved device at a location and in a manner in accordance
with the Illinois Plumbing Code, Illinois Environmental Protection Agency and
all applicable local regulations, and shall have inspections and tests made of
such approved devices upon installation and at least annually after initial
inspection as required by the State of Illinois Plumbing Code 890.1130b (https:
//www.ilga.gov/commission/jcar/admincode_/077/077008900I11300R.html), Illinois
Environmental Protection Agency (https://epa.illinois.gov/topics/drinking-
water/field-operations/cross-connection-_control.html) and local regulation.
(Ord. 602, 9-6-94; amd. Ord. 1455-24, 4-16-2024)
8-4D-2: CONNECTION TO OTHER WATER SUPPLY PROHIBITED:
No person, firm or corporation shall establish or permit to be established or
maintain or permit to be maintained any connection whereby a private, auxiliary
or emergency water supply other than the regular public water supply of the
Village may enter the supply or distribution system of said municipality,
unless such private, auxiliary or emergency water supply and the method of
connection and use of such supply shall have been approved by the
Superintendent of Public Works and the Illinois Environmental Protection
Agency. (Ord. 602, 9-6-94; amd. Ord. 1455-24, 4-16-2024)
8-4D-3: SURVEYS, INVESTIGATIONS AND RECORDS:
It shall be the duty of the Superintendent of Public Works to cause surveys and
investigations to be made of commercial, industrial and other properties served
by the public water supply to determine whether actual or potential hazards to
the public water supply may exist. Per the Illinois Plumbing Code 35, Section
604.1505 (https://www.ilga.gov/commission/jcar/admincode/035/
035006040O15050R.html), such surveys and investigations shall be made a matter
of public record and shall be repeated at least every three (3) years, or as
often as the Superintendent of Public Works shall deem necessary. Records of
such surveys shall be maintained and available for review for a period of at
least five (5) years. (Ord. 602, 9-6-94; amd. Ord. 1455-24, 4-16-2024)
8-4D-4: RIGHT OF ENTRY:
The approved cross-connection control device inspector shall have the right to
enter at any reasonable time any property served by a connection to the public
water supply or distribution system of the Village for the purpose of verifying
the presence or absence of cross-connections, and that the Superintendent of
Public Works or his authorized agent shall have the right to enter at any
reasonable time any property served by a connection to the public water supply
or distribution system of the Village for the purpose of verifying information
submitted by the customer regarding the required cross-connection control
inspection. On demand the owner, lessees or occupants of any property so served
shall furnish to the Superintendent of Public Works any information which he
may request regarding the piping system or systems, or water use on such
property. The refusal of such information, when demanded, shall, within the
discretion of the Superintendent of Public Works, be deemed evidence of the
presence of improper connections as provided in this Chapter. (Ord. 602, 9-6-
94; amd. Ord. 1455-24, 4-16-2024)
8-4D-5: DISCONNECTION OF WATER SERVICE:
The Superintendent of Public Works of the Village is hereby authorized and
directed to discontinue, after reasonable notice to the occupant thereof, the
water service to any property wherein any connection in violation of the
provisions of this Chapter is known to exist, and to take such other
precautionary measures as he may deem necessary to eliminate any danger of
contamination of the public water supply distribution mains. If an inspection
record is not received by July 1, water service to such property shall not be
restored until such conditions have been eliminated or corrected in compliance
with the provisions of this chapter, and until a reconnection fee of one
hundred dollars ($100.00) is paid to the village. Immediate disconnection with
verbal notice can be effected when the Superintendent of Public Works is
assured that imminent danger of harmful contamination of the public water
supply system exists. Such action shall be followed by written notification of
the cause of disconnection. Immediate disconnection without notice to any party
can be effected to prevent actual or anticipated contamination or pollution of
the public water supply, provided, that, in the reasonable opinion of the
Superintendent of Public Works or the Illinois Environmental Protection Agency,
such action is required to prevent actual or potential contamination or
pollution of the public water supply. Neither the public water supply, the
Superintendent of Public Works, or its agents or assigns shall be liable to any
customer for any injury, damages or lost revenues which may result from
termination of said customer's water supply in accordance with the terms of
this chapter, whether or not said termination was with or without notice. (Ord.
602, 9-6-1994; amd. Ord. 1455-24, 4-16-2024)
8-4D-6: COST OF CLEANUP:
The consumer responsible for back siphoned or back pressured material or
contamination through backflow, if contamination of the potable water supply
system occurs through an illegal cross connection or an improperly installed,
maintained or repaired device, or a device which has been bypassed, must bear
the cost of cleanup of the potable water supply system. (Ord. 602, 9-6-1994;
amd. Ord. 1455-24, 4-16-2024)
8-4D-7: RULES AND REGULATIONS:
Rules and regulations concerning cross connection control, attached as exhibit
A to the ordinance codified herein, are hereby adopted, and made a part of this
chapter by reference, as if fully set forth herein. (Ord. 602, 9-6-1994; amd.
Ord. 1455-24, 4-16-2024)
8-4D-8: PENALTY:
Any person convicted of a violation of any section or provision of this article
shall be punished by a fine as established in section
1-4-1  of this code for any one offense. Each day such violation is committed
or permitted to continue shall constitute a separate offense and shall be
punishable as such hereunder. (Ord. 791, 8-5-2003; amd. Ord. 1061, 4-20-2010;
Ord. 1455-24, 4-16-2024)
CHAPTER 5
MAILBOXES
SECTION:
8-5-1: Installation; Standards; Damage And Replacement
8-5-1: INSTALLATION; STANDARDS; DAMAGE AND REPLACEMENT:
   A.   Mailboxes and their installation shall conform to the specifications of
the United States postal service. The mailbox shall be mounted six inches (6")
to eight inches (8") back from the curb. If you do not have a raised curb,
contact the local postmaster for guidance. Position your mailbox forty-one to
forty-five inches (41" - 45") high from the road surface to the bottom of the
mailbox or point of mail enetry.
   B.   Address numbers must be inscribed in contrasting color in neat letters
and numerals not less than one inch (1") high on the side of the box visible to
the carrier's regular approach, or in the door if boxes are grouped.
   C.   It is recommended that mailboxes conform to the "U.S. mail" and
"approved by the postmaster general" standards and that they be installed on a
four inch by four inch (4" x 4") wood post or no greater than a two inch (2")
diameter standard strength steel or aluminum pipe. Posts must be installed no
more than twenty-four inches (24") deep in the ground.
   D.   The local postmaster may approve a curbside mailbox constructed by a
customer who, for aesthetic or other reasons, does not want to use an approved
manufactured box. The custom built box must generally meet the same standards
as approved manufactured boxes for flag, size, strength and quality of
construction. If masonry mailbox stands are installed no portion of the masonry
may be closer than eight inches (8") from the back of the curb.
   E.   If any mailbox is damaged or knocked down by the village's snow removal
or other village maintenance activities, the village will attempt to repair the
box and if it is deemed that repair is not an option, the village will replace
the mailbox with a standard mailbox and post as described in subsection C of
this section. If a decorator type mailbox and/or post, as described in
subsection D of this section, is damaged and requires replacement, the village
will reimburse the resident for the cost of materials for the standard type
mailbox and post and it shall be the responsibility of the resident to purchase
and install the decorative mailbox and/or post. The village's liability per
occurrence is limited to the actual cost of a standard mailbox as set out above
or a cash settlement not to exceed fifty dollars ($50.00). It is recommended by
the USPS that homeowners should perform an annual mailbox checkup to avoid
damage to your mail or difficulty identifying your address by: (1) tightening
loose hinges on the door; (2) take care of rusty or loose parts; (3) replace
missing or faded house numbers; (4) keep the path to your mailbox clear; and
(5) make sure your post is straight and not leaning or rotted out. (Res. 384-
07, 5-15-2007; amd. Ord. 1460-24, 5-23-2024)
CHAPTER 6
CONSTRUCTION OF UTILITY FACILITIES IN PUBLIC RIGHTS OF WAY
SECTION:
8-6-1: Purpose And Scope
8-6-2: Definitions
8-6-3: Annual Registration Required
8-6-4: Permit Required; Applications And Fees
8-6-5: Action On Permit Applications
8-6-6: Effect Of Permit
8-6-7: Revised Permit Drawings
8-6-8: Insurance
8-6-9: Indemnification
8-6-10: Security
8-6-11: Permit Suspension And Revocation
8-6-12: Change Of Ownership Or Owner's Identity Or Legal Status
8-6-13: General Construction Standards
8-6-14: Traffic Control
8-6-15: Location Of Facilities
8-6-16: Construction Methods And Materials
8-6-17: Vegetation Control
8-6-18: Removal, Relocation, Or Modifications Of Utility Facilities
8-6-19: Cleanup And Restoration
8-6-20: Maintenance And Emergency Maintenance
8-6-21: Variances
8-6-22: Penalties
8-6-23: Enforcement
8-6-1: PURPOSE AND SCOPE:
   A.   Purpose: The purpose of this chapter is to establish policies and
procedures for constructing facilities on rights of way within the village's
jurisdiction, which will provide public benefit consistent with the
preservation of the integrity, safe usage, and visual qualities of the village
rights of way and the village as a whole.
   B.   Intent: In enacting this chapter, the village intends to exercise its
authority over the rights of way in the village and, in particular, the use of
the public ways and property by utilities, by establishing uniform standards to
address issues presented by utility facilities, including, without limitation:
      1.   Prevent interference with the use of streets, sidewalks, alleys,
parkways and other public ways and places;
      2.   Prevent the creation of visual and physical obstructions and other
conditions that are hazardous to vehicular and pedestrian traffic;
      3.   Prevent interference with the facilities and operations of the
village's utilities and of other utilities lawfully located in rights of way or
public property;
      4.   Protect against environmental damage, including, but not limited to,
damage to trees, from the installation of utility facilities;
      5.   Protect against increased stormwater runoff due to structures and
materials that increase impermeable surfaces;
      6.   Preserve the character of the neighborhoods in which facilities are
installed;
      7.   Preserve open space, particularly the tree lined parkways that
characterize the village's residential neighborhoods;
      8.   Prevent visual blight from the proliferation of facilities in the
rights of way; and
      9.   Assure the continued safe use and enjoyment of private properties
adjacent to utility facilities locations.
   C.   Facilities Subject To This Chapter: This chapter applies to all
facilities on, over, above, along, upon, under, across, or within the public
rights of way within the jurisdiction of the village. A facility lawfully
established prior to the effective date of this chapter may continue to be
maintained, repaired and operated by the utility as presently constructed and
located, except as may be otherwise provided in any applicable franchise,
license or similar agreement.
   D.   Franchises, Licenses, Or Similar Agreements: The village, in its
discretion and as limited by law, may require utilities to enter into a
franchise, license or similar agreement for the privilege of locating their
facilities on, over, above, along, upon, under, across, or within the village
rights of way. Utilities that are not required by law to enter into such an
agreement may request that the village enter into such an agreement. In such an
agreement, the village may provide for terms and conditions inconsistent with
this chapter.
   E.   Effect Of Franchises, Licenses, Or Similar Agreements:
      1.   Utilities Other Than Telecommunications Providers: In the event that
a utility other than a telecommunications provider has a franchise, license or
similar agreement with the village, such franchise, license or similar
agreement shall govern and control during the term of such agreement and any
lawful renewal or extension thereof.
      2.   Telecommunications Providers: In the event of any conflict with, or
inconsistency between, the provisions of this chapter and the provisions of any
franchise, license or similar agreement between the village and any
telecommunications provider, the provisions of such franchise, license or
similar agreement shall govern and control during the term of such agreement
and any lawful renewal or extension thereof.
   F.   Conflicts With Other Chapters: This chapter supersedes all chapters or
parts of chapters adopted prior hereto that are in conflict herewith, to the
extent of such conflict.
   G.   Conflicts With State And Federal Laws: In the event that applicable
federal or state laws or regulations conflict with the requirements of this
chapter, the utility shall comply with the requirements of this chapter to the
maximum extent possible without violating federal or state laws or regulations.
   H.   Sound Engineering Judgment: The village shall use sound engineering
judgment when administering this chapter and may vary the standards,
conditions, and requirements expressed in this chapter when the village so
determines. Nothing herein shall be construed to limit the ability of the
village to regulate its rights of way for the protection of the public health,
safety and welfare. (Ord. 987, 12-18-2007)
8-6-2: DEFINITIONS:
As used in this chapter, and unless the context clearly requires otherwise, the
words and terms listed shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this
section. Any term not defined in this section shall have the meaning ascribed
to it in 92 Illinois administrative code section 530.30, unless the context
clearly requires otherwise.
   AASHTO: American Association of State Highway and Transportation Officials.
   ANSI: American National Standards Institute.
   ASTM: American Society for Testing and Materials.
   APPLICANT: A person applying for a permit under this chapter.
   BACKFILL: The methods or materials for replacing excavated material in a
trench or pit.
   BORE OR BORING: To excavate an underground cylindrical cavity for the
insertion of a pipe or electrical conductor.
   CABLE OPERATOR: That term as defined in 47 USC 522(5).
   CABLE SERVICE: That term as defined in 47 USC 522(6).
   CABLE SYSTEM: That term as defined in 47 USC 522(7).
   CARRIER PIPE: The pipe enclosing the liquid, gas or slurry to be
transported.
   CASING: A structural protective enclosure for transmittal devices such as
carrier pipes, electrical conductors, and fiber optic devices.
   CLEAR ZONE: The total roadside border area, starting at the edge of the
pavement, available for safe use by errant vehicles. This area may consist of a
shoulder, a recoverable slope, a nonrecoverable slope, and a clear run out
area. The desired width is dependent upon the traffic volumes and speeds, and
on the roadside geometry. Distances are specified in the AASHTO "Roadside
Design Guide".
   COATING: Protective wrapping or mastic cover applied to buried pipe for
protection against external corrosion.
   CODE: The municipal code of the village of Manhattan.
   CONDUCTOR: Wire carrying electrical current.
   CONDUIT: A casing or encasement for wires or cables.
   CONSTRUCTION OR CONSTRUCT: The installation, repair, maintenance, placement,
alteration, enlargement, demolition, modification or abandonment in place of
facilities.
   COVER: The depth of earth or backfill over buried utility pipe or conductor.
   CROSSING FACILITY: A facility that crosses one or more right of way lines of
a right of way.
   DISRUPT THE RIGHT OF WAY: For the purposes of this chapter, any work that
obstructs the right of way or causes a material adverse effect on the use of
the right of way for its intended use. Such work may include, without
limitation, the following: excavating or other cutting; placement (whether
temporary or permanent) of materials, equipment, devices, or structures; damage
to vegetation; and compaction or loosening of the soil, and shall not include
the parking of vehicles or equipment in a manner that does not materially
obstruct the flow of traffic on a highway.
   EMERGENCY: Any immediate maintenance to the facility required for the safety
of the public using or in the vicinity of the right of way or immediate
maintenance required for the health and safety of the general public served by
the utility.
   ENCASEMENT: Provision of a protective casing.
   EQUIPMENT: Materials, tools, implements, supplies, and/or other items used
to facilitate construction of facilities.
   EXCAVATION: The making of a hole or cavity by removing material, or laying
bare by digging.
   EXTRA HEAVY PIPE: Pipe meeting ASTM standards for this pipe designation.
   FACILITY: All structures, devices, objects, and materials (including, but
not limited to, track and rails, wires, ducts, fiber optic cable, antennas,
vaults, boxes, equipment enclosures, cabinets, pedestals, poles, conduits,
grates, covers, pipes, cables, and appurtenances thereto) located on, over,
above, along, upon, under, across, or within rights of way under this chapter.
For purposes of this chapter, the term "facility" shall not include any
facility owned or operated by the village.
   FREESTANDING FACILITY: A facility that is not a crossing facility or a
parallel facility, such as an antenna, transformer, pump, or meter station.
   FRONTAGE ROAD: Roadway, usually parallel, providing access to land adjacent
to the highway where it is precluded by control of access to a highway.
   HAZARDOUS MATERIALS: Any substance or material which, due to its quantity,
form, concentration, location, or other characteristics, is determined by the
right of way manager to pose an unreasonable and imminent risk to the life,
health or safety of persons or property or to the ecological balance of the
environment, including, but not limited to, explosives, radioactive materials,
petroleum or petroleum products or gases, poisons, etiology (biological)
agents, flammables, corrosives or any substance determined to be hazardous or
toxic under any federal or state law, statute or regulation.
   HIGHWAY: A specific type of right of way used for vehicular traffic
including rural or urban roads or streets. "Highway" includes all highway land
and improvements, including roadways, ditches and embankments, bridges,
drainage structures, signs, guardrails, protective structures and appurtenances
necessary or convenient for vehicle traffic.
   HIGHWAY CODE: The Illinois highway code, 605 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/1-
101 et seq., as amended from time to time.
   HOLDER: A person or entity that has received authorization to offer or
provide cable or video service from the ICC pursuant to the Illinois cable and
video competition law, 220 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/21-401.
   ICC: Illinois commerce commission.
   IDOT: Illinois department of transportation.
   JULIE: The joint utility locating information for excavators utility
notification program.
   JACKING: Pushing a pipe horizontally under a roadway by mechanical means
with or without boring.
   JETTING: Pushing a pipe through the earth using water under pressure to
create a cavity ahead of the pipe.
   JOINT USE: The use of pole lines, trenches or other facilities by two (2) or
more utilities.
   MAJOR INTERSECTION: The intersection of two (2) or more collector roads,
minor arterial highways, major arterial highways, or combination thereof.
   OCCUPANCY: The presence of facilities on, over or under right of way.
   PARALLEL FACILITY: A facility that is generally parallel or longitudinal to
the centerline of a right of way.
   PARKWAY: Any portion of the right of way not improved by street or sidewalk.
   PAVEMENT CUT: The removal of an area of pavement for access to facility or
for the construction of a facility.
   PERMITTEE: That entity to which a permit has been issued pursuant to
sections
8-6-4 and
8-6-5 of this chapter.
   PETROLEUM PRODUCTS PIPELINES: Pipelines carrying crude or refined liquid
petroleum products including, but not limited to, gasoline, distillates,
propane, butane, or coal slurry.
   PRACTICABLE: That which is performable, feasible or possible, rather than
that which is simply convenient.
   PRESSURE: The internal force acting radially against the walls of a carrier
pipe expressed in pounds per square inch gauge (psig).
   PROMPT: That which is done within a period of time specified by the village.
If no time period is specified, the period shall be thirty (30) calendar days.
   PUBLIC ENTITY: A legal entity that constitutes or is part of the government,
whether at local, state or federal level.
   RESTORATION: The repair of a right of way, easement, highway, roadway, or
other area disrupted by the construction of a facility.
   RIGHT OF WAY MANAGER: As determined by the village administrator.
   RIGHT OF WAY OR RIGHTS OF WAY: Any street, alley, other land or waterway,
dedicated or commonly used for pedestrian or vehicular traffic or other similar
purposes, including utility and/or drainage easements, in which the village has
the right and authority to authorize, regulate or permit the location of
facilities other than those of the village. Right of way or rights of way shall
not include any real or personal village property that is not specifically
described in the previous two (2) sentences and shall not include village
buildings, fixtures and other structures or improvements, regardless of whether
they are situated in the right of way.
   ROADWAY: That part of the highway that includes the pavement and shoulders.
   SALE OF TELECOMMUNICATIONS AT RETAIL: The transmitting, supplying, or
furnishing of telecommunications and all services rendered in connection
therewith for a consideration, other than between a parent corporation and its
wholly owned subsidiaries or between wholly owned subsidiaries, when the gross
charge made by one such corporation to another such corporation is not greater
than the gross charge paid to the retailer for their use or consumption and not
for sale.
   SECURITY FUND: That amount of security required pursuant to section
8-6-10 of this chapter.
   SHOULDER: A width of roadway, adjacent to the pavement, providing lateral
support to the pavement edge and providing an area for emergency vehicular
stops and storage of snow removed from the pavement.
   SOUND ENGINEERING JUDGMENT: Decision(s) consistent with generally accepted
engineering principles, practices and experience.
   TELECOMMUNICATIONS: This term includes, but is not limited to, messages or
information transmitted through use of local, toll and wide area telephone
service, channel services, telegraph services, teletypewriter service, computer
exchange service, private line services, mobile radio services, cellular mobile
telecommunications services, stationary two-way radio, paging service and any
other form of mobile or portable one-way or two- way communications, and any
other transmission of messages or information by electronic or similar means,
between or among points by wire, cable, fiber optics, laser, microwave, radio,
satellite, or similar facilities. "Private line" means a dedicated nontraffic
sensitive service for a single customer that entitles the customer to exclusive
or priority use of a communications channel, or a group of such channels, from
one or more specified locations to one or more other specified locations.
"Telecommunications" shall not include value added services in which computer
processing applications are used to act on the form, content, code, and
protocol of the information for purposes other than transmission.
"Telecommunications" shall not include purchase of telecommunications by a
telecommunications service provider for use as a component part of the service
provided by such provider to the ultimate retail consumer who originates or
terminates the end to end communications. "Telecommunications" shall not
include the provision of cable services through a cable system as defined in
the cable communications act of 1984 (47 USC section 521 and following), as now
or hereafter amended, or cable or other programming services subject to an open
video system fee payable to the village through an open video system as defined
in the rules of the federal communications commission (47 CFR section 76.1500
and following), as now or hereafter amended.
   TELECOMMUNICATIONS PROVIDER: Any person that installs, owns, operates or
controls facilities in the right of way used or designed to be used to transmit
telecommunications in any form.
   TELECOMMUNICATIONS RETAILER: Means and includes every person engaged in
making sales of telecommunications at retail as defined herein.
   TRENCH: A relatively narrow open excavation for the installation of an
underground facility.
   UTILITY: The individual or entity owning or operating any "facility" as
defined in this chapter.
   VENT: A pipe to allow the dissipation into the atmosphere of gases or vapors
from an underground casing.
   VIDEO SERVICE: That term as defined in section 21-201(v) of the Illinois
cable and video competition law of 2007, 220 Illinois Compiled Statutes 21-201
(v).
   VILLAGE: The village of Manhattan.
   WATER LINES: Pipelines carrying raw or potable water.
   WET BORING: Boring using water under pressure at the cutting auger to soften
the earth and to provide a sluice for the excavated material. (Ord. 987, 12-18-
2007)
8-6-3: ANNUAL REGISTRATION REQUIRED:
Every utility that occupies right of way within the village shall register on
January 1 of each year with the right of way manager, providing the utility's
name, address and regular business telephone and telecopy numbers, the name of
one or more contact persons who can act on behalf of the utility in connection
with emergencies involving the utility's facilities in the right of way and a
twenty four (24) hour telephone number for each such person, and evidence of
insurance as required in section
8-6-8 of this chapter, in the form of a certificate of insurance. (Ord. 987,
12-18-2007)
8-6-4: PERMIT REQUIRED; APPLICATIONS AND FEES:
   A.   Permit Required: No person shall construct (as defined in this chapter)
any facility on, over, above, along, upon, under, across, or within any village
right of way which: 1) changes the location of the facility, 2) adds a new
facility, 3) disrupts the right of way (as defined in this chapter), or 4)
materially increases the amount of area or space occupied by the facility on,
over, above, along, under, across or within the right of way, without first
filing an application with the right of way manager and obtaining a permit from
the village therefor, except as otherwise provided in this chapter. No permit
shall be required for installation and maintenance of service connections to
customers' premises where there will be no disruption of the right of way.
   B.   Permit Application: All applications for permits pursuant to this
chapter shall be filed on a form provided by the village clerk and shall be
filed in such number of duplicate copies as the village may designate. The
applicant may designate those portions of its application materials that it
reasonably believes contain proprietary or confidential information as
"proprietary" or "confidential" by clearly marking each page of such materials
accordingly.
   C.   Minimum General Application Requirements: The application shall be made
by the utility or its duly authorized representative and shall contain, at a
minimum, the following:
      1.   The utility's name and address and telephone and telecopy numbers;
      2.   The applicant's name and address, if different than the utility, its
telephone and telecopy numbers, e-mail address, and its interest in the work;
      3.   The names, addresses and telephone and telecopy numbers and e-mail
addresses of all professional consultants, if any, advising the applicant with
respect to the application;
      4.   The names, addresses, e-mail addresses, telephone and telecopy
numbers of all contractors and subcontractors, if any, performing construction
work on behalf of the applicant;
      5.   A general description of the proposed work and the purposes and
intent of the facility and the uses to which the facility will be put. The
scope and detail of such description shall be appropriate to the nature and
character of the work to be performed, with special emphasis on those matters
likely to be affected or impacted by the work proposed;
      6.   Evidence that the utility has placed on file with the village clerk:
         a.   A written traffic control plan demonstrating the protective
measures and devices that will be employed consistent with the latest edition
of the "Illinois Manual On Uniform Traffic Control Devices", to prevent injury
or damage to persons or property and to minimize disruptions to efficient
pedestrian and vehicular traffic; and
         b.   An emergency contingency plan which shall specify the nature of
potential emergencies, including, without limitation, construction and
hazardous materials emergencies, and the intended response by the applicant.
The intended response shall include notification to the right of way manager
and shall promote protection of the safety and convenience of the public.
Compliance with ICC regulations for emergency contingency plans constitutes
compliance with this section unless the right of way manager finds that
additional information or assurances are needed;
      7.   Drawings, plans and specifications showing the work proposed,
complete from the point of origin to terminus regardless if a portion of the
work is to be performed outside the right of way. Such plans and specifications
shall bear the certification of an Illinois registered professional engineer
that such drawings, plans, and specifications comply with applicable codes,
rules, and regulations. Such plans shall at a minimum address the construction
standards described in section
8-6-16 of this chapter, and including, but not limited to, the following:
         a.   Sufficient detail of existing right of way and easements
dimensioned from a section corner, lot corners or other known survey
monumentation;
         b.   As may be required by the village, sufficient topographic
information identifying all existing physical features along and near the
proposed utility site(s), including, but not limited to, the edge of roadway
pavement, existing utilities, trees and bushes, streetlights, roadway signage,
drainage ditches/swales, etc. Grading information shall be provided for all
proposed utility sites where existing drainage problems exist;
         c.   Proposed permanent and temporary easements as may be required to
construct proposed utilities. Plats of easement shall be provided as necessary;
         d.   Detail drawings depicting the width, length, height, color and
materials for all utility structures proposed to protrude above the ground
surface; and
         e.   Sufficient notes describing construction methods, proposed depth
of facilities, separation from existing utilities, proposed final grading plan,
ground restoration specifications, and erosion control plans as may be
required.
      8.   Evidence of insurance as required in section
8-6-8 of this chapter;
      9.   Evidence of posting of the security fund as required in section
8-6-10 of this chapter;
      10.   Any request for a variance from one or more provisions of this
chapter (see section
 8-6-21 of this chapter); and
      11.   Such additional information or a preconstruction meeting as may be
reasonably required by the village.
   D.   Supplemental Application Requirements For Specific Types Of Utilities:
In addition to the requirements of subsection C of this section, the permit
application shall include the following items as applicable to the specific
utility that is the subject of the permit application:
      1.   In the case of the installation of a new electric power,
communications, telecommunications, cable television service, video service or
natural gas distribution system, evidence that any "certificate of public
convenience and necessity" or other regulatory authorization that the applicant
is required by law to obtain, or that the applicant has elected to obtain, has
been issued by the ICC or other jurisdictional authority;
      2.   In the case of natural gas systems, state the proposed pipe size,
design, construction class, and operating pressures;
      3.   In the case of water lines, indicate that all requirements of the
Illinois environmental protection agency, division of public water supplies,
have been satisfied;
      4.   In the case of sewer line installations, indicate that the land and
water pollution requirements of the Illinois environmental protection agency,
division of water pollution control or other local or state entities with
jurisdiction, have been satisfied; or
      5.   In the case of petroleum products pipelines, state the type or types
of petroleum products, pipe size, maximum working pressure, and the design
standard to be followed.
   E.   Applicant's Duty To Update Information: Throughout the entire permit
application review period and the construction period authorized by the permit,
any amendments to information contained in a permit application shall be
submitted by the utility in writing to the village clerk within thirty (30)
days after the change necessitating the amendment.
   F.   Application Fees: Unless otherwise provided by franchise, license, or
similar agreement, all applications for permits pursuant to this chapter shall
be accompanied by a fee of one hundred dollars ($100.00). No application fee is
required to be paid by any electricity utility that is paying the municipal
electricity infrastructure maintenance fee pursuant to the electricity
infrastructure maintenance fee act. (Ord. 987, 12-18-2007)
8-6-5: ACTION ON PERMIT APPLICATIONS:
   A.   Village Review Of Permit Applications: Completed permit applications,
containing all required documentation, shall be examined by the right of way
manager within a reasonable time after filing. If the application does not
conform to the requirements of all applicable ordinances, codes, laws, rules,
and regulations, the right of way manager shall reject such application in
writing, stating the reasons therefor. If the right of way manager is satisfied
that the proposed work conforms to the requirements of this chapter and
applicable ordinances, codes, laws, rules, and regulations, the right of way
manager shall issue a permit therefor as soon as practicable. In all instances,
it shall be the duty of the applicant to demonstrate, to the satisfaction of
the right of way manager, that the construction proposed under the application
shall be in full compliance with the requirements of this chapter.
   B.   Additional Village Review Of Applications Of Telecommunications
Retailers:
      1.   Pursuant to section 4 of the telephone company act, 220 Illinois
Compiled Statutes 65/4, a telecommunications retailer shall notify the village
clerk that it intends to commence work governed by this chapter for facilities
for the provision of telecommunications services. Such notice shall consist of
plans, specifications, and other documentation sufficient to demonstrate the
purpose and intent of the facilities, and shall be provided by the
telecommunications retailer to the village clerk not less than ten (10) days
prior to the commencement of work requiring no excavation and not less than
thirty (30) days prior to the commencement of work requiring excavation. The
right of way manager shall specify the portion of the right of way upon which
the facility may be placed, used and constructed.
      2.   In the event that the right of way manager fails to provide such
specification of location to the telecommunications retailer within either: a)
ten (10) days after service of notice to the village clerk by the
telecommunications retailer in the case of work not involving excavation for
new construction or b) twenty five (25) days after service of notice by the
telecommunications retailer in the case of work involving excavation for new
construction, the telecommunications retailer may commence work without
obtaining a permit under this chapter. The ten (10) day and twenty five (25)
day time frames established herein shall commence on the date of service of
notice on the village clerk. Should any applicant intend to commence work on
the basis of this subsection, the applicant shall first notify the village
clerk of such intent and to verify the date of service.
   C.   Additional Village Review Of Applications Of Holders Of State
Authorization Under The Cable And Video Competition Law Of 2007: Applications
by a utility that is a holder of a state issued authorization under the cable
and video competition law of 2007 shall be deemed granted forty five (45) days
after submission to the village clerk, unless otherwise acted upon by the
village, provided the holder has complied with applicable village codes,
ordinances, and regulations. Any holder intending to commence work on the basis
of this subsection shall first notify the village clerk of such intent and to
verify the actual date of the submission of the application. (Ord. 987, 12-18-
2007)
8-6-6: EFFECT OF PERMIT:
   A.   Authority Granted; No Property Right Or Other Interest Created: A
permit from the village authorizes a permittee to undertake only certain
activities in accordance with this chapter on village rights of way, and does
not create a property right or grant authority to the permittee to impinge upon
the rights of others who may have an interest in or adjacent to the public
rights of way.
   B.   Duration: No permit issued under this chapter shall be valid for a
period longer than six (6) months unless construction is actually begun within
that period and is thereafter diligently pursued to completion.
   C.   Preconstruction Meeting Required: No construction shall begin pursuant
to a permit issued under this chapter prior to attendance by the permittee and
all major contractors and subcontractors who will perform any work under the
permit at a preconstruction meeting. The preconstruction meeting shall be held
at a date, time and place designated by the village with such village
representatives in attendance as the village deems necessary. The meeting shall
be for the purpose of reviewing the work under the permit, and reviewing
special considerations necessary in the areas where work will occur, including,
without limitation, presence or absence of other utility facilities in the area
and their locations, procedures to avoid disruption of other utilities, use of
rights of way by the public during construction, and access and egress by
adjacent property owners.
   D.   Business License Required: All contractors and subcontractors
performing construction activities authorized under a permit issued by the
village shall be properly licensed and bonded in accordance with the
requirements of the village. Issuance of a permit by the village does not
excuse all contractors and subcontractors of the applicant from obtaining the
proper license to do business in the village.
   E.   Compliance With All Laws Required: The issuance of a permit by the
village does not excuse the permittee from complying with other requirements of
the village and all applicable statutes, laws, ordinances, rules, and
regulations. (Ord. 987, 12-18-2007)
8-6-7: REVISED PERMIT DRAWINGS:
In the event that the actual locations of any facilities deviate in any
material respect from the locations identified in the plans, drawings and
specifications submitted with the permit application, the permittee shall
submit a revised set of "as built" drawings or plans to the village clerk
within ninety (90) days after the completion of the permitted work. The revised
drawings or plans shall specifically identify where the locations of the actual
facilities deviate from the locations approved in the permit. If any deviation
from the permit also deviates from the requirements of this chapter, it shall
be treated as a request for variance in accordance with section
 8-6-21 of this chapter. If the village denies the request for a variance, then
the permittee shall either remove the facility from the right of way or modify
the facility so that it conforms to the permit and submit revised drawings or
plans therefor. (Ord. 987, 12-18-2007)
8-6-8: INSURANCE:
   A.   Required Coverages And Limits: Unless otherwise provided by franchise,
license, or similar agreement, each utility occupying right of way or
constructing any facility in the right of way shall secure and maintain the
following liability insurance policies insuring the utility as named insured
and naming the village, and its elected and appointed officers, officials,
consultants, agents, representatives, and employees as additional insureds on
the policies listed in subsections A1 and A2 of this section:
      1.   Commercial general liability insurance, including premises-
operations, explosion, collapse, and underground hazard (commonly referred to
as "X", "C", and "U" coverages) and products- completed operations coverage
with limits not less than:
         a.   Five million dollars ($5,000,000.00) for bodily injury or death
to each person;
         b.   Five million dollars ($5,000,000.00) for property damage
resulting from any one accident; and
         c.   Five million dollars ($5,000,000.00) for all other types of
liability;
      2.   Automobile liability for owned, nonowned and hired vehicles with a
combined single limit of one million dollars ($1,000,000.00) for personal
injury and property damage for each accident;
      3.   Workers' compensation with statutory limits; and
      4.   Employer's liability insurance with limits of not less than one
million dollars ($1,000,000.00) per employee and per accident.
If the utility is not providing such insurance to protect the contractors and
subcontractors performing the work, then such contractors and subcontractors
shall comply with this section.
   B.   Excess Or Umbrella Policies: The coverages required by this section may
be in any combination of primary, excess, and umbrella policies. Any excess or
umbrella policy must provide excess coverage over underlying insurance on a
following form basis such that when any loss covered by the primary policy
exceeds the limits under the primary policy, the excess or umbrella policy
becomes effective to cover such loss.
   C.   Copies Required: The utility shall provide copies of any of the
policies required by this section to the village clerk within ten (10) days
following receipt of a written request.
   D.   Maintenance And Renewal Of Required Coverages: The insurance policies
required by this section shall contain the following endorsement:
It is hereby understood and agreed that this policy may not be canceled nor the
intention not to renew be stated until thirty (30) days after receipt by the
Village Clerk, by registered mail or certified mail, return receipt requested,
of a written notice addressed to the Village Administrator of such intent to
cancel or not to renew.
Within ten (10) days after receipt by the village clerk of said notice, and in
no event later than ten (10) days prior to said cancellation, the utility shall
obtain and furnish to the village clerk evidence of replacement insurance
policies meeting the requirements of this section.
   E.   Self-Insurance: A utility may self-insure all or a portion of the
insurance coverage and limit requirements required by subsection A of this
section. A utility that self-insures is not required, to the extent of such
self-insurance, to comply with the requirement for the naming of additional
insureds under subsection A of this section, or the requirements of subsections
B, C and D of this section. A utility that elects to self-insure shall provide
to the village clerk evidence sufficient to demonstrate its financial ability
to self-insure the insurance coverage and limit requirements required under
subsection A of this section, such as evidence that the utility is a "private
self-insurer" under the workers' compensation act.
   F.   Effect Of Insurance And Self-Insurance On Utility's Liability: The
legal liability of the utility to the village and any person for any of the
matters that are the subject of the insurance policies or self-insurance
required by this section shall not be limited by such insurance policies or
self-insurance or by the recovery of any amounts thereunder.
   G.   Insurance Companies: All insurance provided pursuant to this section
shall be effected under valid and enforceable policies, issued by insurers
legally able to conduct business with the licensee in the state of Illinois.
All insurance carriers and surplus line carriers shall be rated "A-" or better
and of a class size "X" or higher by A.M. Best Company. (Ord. 987, 12-18-2007)
8-6-9: INDEMNIFICATION:
By occupying or constructing facilities in the right of way, a utility shall be
deemed to agree to defend, indemnify and hold the village and its elected and
appointed officers, officials, consultants, agents, representatives, and
employees harmless from and against any and all injuries, claims, demands,
judgments, damages, losses and expenses, including reasonable attorney fees and
costs of suit or defense, arising out of, resulting from or alleged to arise
out of or result from the negligent, careless or wrongful acts, omissions,
failures to act or misconduct of the utility or its affiliates, officers,
employees, agents, contractors or subcontractors in the construction of
facilities or occupancy of the rights of way, and in providing or offering
service over the facilities, whether such acts or omissions are authorized,
allowed or prohibited by this chapter or by a franchise, license, or similar
agreement; provided, however, that the utility's indemnity obligations
hereunder shall not apply to any injuries, claims, demands, judgments, damages,
losses or expenses arising out of or resulting from the negligence, misconduct
or breach of this chapter by the village, its officials, officers, employees,
agents or representatives. (Ord. 987, 12-18-2007)
8-6-10: SECURITY:
   A.   Purpose: The permittee shall establish a security fund in a form and in
an amount as set forth in this section. The security fund shall be continuously
maintained in accordance with this section at the permittee's sole cost and
expense until the completion of the work authorized under the permit. The
security fund shall serve as security for:
      1.   The faithful performance by the permittee of all the requirements of
this chapter;
      2.   Any expenditure, damage, or loss incurred by the village occasioned
by the permittee's failure to comply with any codes, rules, regulations,
orders, permits and other directives of the village issued pursuant to this
chapter; and
      3.   The payment by permittee of all liens and all damages, claims,
costs, or expenses that the village may pay or incur by reason of any action or
nonperformance by permittee in violation of this chapter including, without
limitation, any damage to public property or restoration work the permittee is
required by this chapter to perform that the village must perform itself or
have completed as a consequence solely of the permittee's failure to perform or
complete, and all other payments due the village from the permittee pursuant to
this chapter or any other applicable law.
   B.   Form: The permittee shall provide the security fund to the village
clerk in the form, at the permittee's election, of cash, a surety bond in a
form acceptable to the village board, or an unconditional letter of credit in a
form acceptable to the village board. Any surety bond or letter of credit
provided pursuant to this subsection shall, at a minimum:
      1.   Provide that it will not be canceled without prior notice to the
village and the permittee;
      2.   Not require the consent of the permittee prior to the collection by
the village of any amounts covered by it; and
      3.   Shall provide a location convenient to the village and within the
state of Illinois at which it can be drawn.
   C.   Amount: The dollar amount of the security fund shall be sufficient to
provide for the reasonably estimated cost to restore the right of way to at
least as good a condition as that existing prior to the construction under the
permit, as determined by the right of way manager, and may also include
reasonable, directly related costs, including attorney fees, that the village
estimates are likely to be incurred if the permittee fails to perform such
restoration. The reasonably estimated cost as described above shall be
multiplied by one hundred twenty five percent (125%) to establish the security
fund amount. Where the construction of facilities proposed under the permit
will be performed in phases in multiple locations in the village, with each
phase consisting of construction of facilities in one location or a related
group of locations, and where construction in another phase will not be
undertaken prior to substantial completion of restoration in the previous phase
or phases, the right of way manager may, in the exercise of sound discretion,
allow the permittee to post a single amount of security which shall be
applicable to each phase of the construction under the permit. The amount of
the security fund for phased construction shall be equal to the greatest amount
that would have been required under the provisions of this subsection for any
single phase.
   D.   Withdrawals: The village, upon fourteen (14) calendar days' advance
written notice clearly stating the reason for, and its intention to exercise
withdrawal rights under this subsection, may withdraw an amount from the
security fund, provided that the permittee has not reimbursed the village for
such amount within the fourteen (14) day notice period. Withdrawals may be made
if the permittee:
      1.   Fails to make any payment required to be made by the permittee
hereunder;
      2.   Fails to pay any liens relating to the facilities that are due and
unpaid;
      3.   Fails to reimburse the village for any damages, claims, costs or
expenses which the village has been compelled to pay or incur by reason of any
action or nonperformance by the permittee; or
      4.   Fails to comply with any provision of this chapter that the village
determines can be remedied by an expenditure of an amount in the security fund.
   E.   Replenishment: Within fourteen (14) calendar days after receipt of
written notice from the village that any amount has been withdrawn from the
security fund, the permittee shall restore the security fund to the amount
specified in subsection C of this section.
   F.   Interest: The permittee may request that any and all interest accrued
on the amount in the security fund be returned to the permittee by the village,
upon written request for said withdrawal to the village, provided that any such
withdrawal does not reduce the security fund below the minimum balance required
in subsection C of this section.
   G.   Closing And Return Of Security Fund: Upon completion of the work
authorized under the permit, the permittee shall be entitled to the return of
the security fund, or such portion thereof as remains on deposit, within a
reasonable time after account is taken for all offsets necessary to compensate
the village for failure by the permittee to comply with any provisions of this
chapter or other applicable law. In the event of any revocation of the permit,
the security fund, and any and all accrued interest therein, shall become the
property of the village to the extent necessary to cover any reasonable costs,
loss or damage incurred by the village as a result of said revocation, provided
that any amounts in excess of said costs, loss or damage shall be refunded to
the permittee.
   H.   Rights Not Limited: The rights reserved to the village with respect to
the security fund are in addition to all other rights of the village, whether
reserved by this chapter or otherwise authorized by law, and no action,
proceeding or exercise of right with respect to said security fund shall affect
any other right the village may have. Notwithstanding the foregoing, the
village shall not be entitled to a double monetary recovery with respect to any
of its rights which may be infringed or otherwise violated. (Ord. 987, 12-18-
2007)
8-6-11: PERMIT SUSPENSION AND REVOCATION:
   A.   Village Right To Revoke Permit: The village may revoke or suspend a
permit issued pursuant to this chapter for one or more of the following
reasons:
      1.   Fraudulent, false, misrepresenting, or materially incomplete
statements in the permit application;
      2.   Noncompliance with this chapter;
      3.   Permittee's physical presence or presence of permittee's facilities
on, over, above, along, upon, under, across, or within the public rights of way
presents a direct or imminent threat to the public health, safety, or welfare;
or
      4.   Permittee's failure to construct the facilities substantially in
accordance with the permit and approved plans.
   B.   Notice Of Revocation Or Suspension: The village shall send written
notice of its intent to revoke or suspend a permit issued pursuant to this
chapter stating the reason or reasons for the revocation or suspension and the
alternatives available to permittee under this section.
   C.   Permittee Alternatives Upon Receipt Of Notice Of Revocation Or
Suspension: Upon receipt of a written notice of revocation or suspension from
the village, the permittee shall have the following options:
      1.   Immediately provide the right of way manager with evidence that no
cause exists for the revocation or suspension;
      2.   Immediately correct, to the satisfaction of the village, the
deficiencies stated in the written notice, providing written proof of such
correction to the village clerk within five (5) working days after receipt of
the written notice of revocation; or
      3.   Immediately remove the facilities located on, over, above, along,
upon, under, across, or within the public rights of way and restore the rights
of way to the satisfaction of the village providing written proof of such
removal to the village clerk within ten (10) working days after receipt of the
written notice of revocation.
The village may, in its discretion, for good cause shown, extend the time
periods provided in this subsection.
   D.   Stop Work Order: In addition to the issuance of a notice of revocation
or suspension, the village may issue a stop work order immediately upon
discovery of any of the reasons for revocation set forth within subsection A of
this section.
   E.   Failure Or Refusal Of The Permittee To Comply: If the permittee fails
to comply with the provisions of subsection C of this section, the village or
its designee may, at the option of the village: 1) correct the deficiencies; 2)
upon not less than twenty (20) days' notice to the permittee, remove the
subject facilities or equipment; or 3) after not less than thirty (30) days'
notice to the permittee of failure to cure the noncompliance, deem them
abandoned and property of the village. The permittee shall be liable in all
events to the village for all costs of removal. (Ord. 987, 12-18-2007)
8-6-12: CHANGE OF OWNERSHIP OR OWNER'S IDENTITY OR LEGAL STATUS:
   A.   Notification Of Change: A utility shall notify the village clerk no
less than thirty (30) calendar days prior to the transfer of ownership of any
facility in the right of way or change in identity of the utility. The new
owner of the utility or the facility shall have all the obligations and
privileges enjoyed by the former owner under the permit, if any, and all
applicable laws, ordinances, rules and regulations, including this chapter,
with respect to the work and facilities in the right of way.
   B.   Amended Permit: A new owner shall request that any current permit be
amended to show current ownership within thirty (30) calendar days of assuming
of ownership responsibilities. If the new owner fails to have a new or amended
permit issued in its name within said thirty (30) day period, the new owner
shall be presumed to have accepted, and agreed to be bound by, the terms and
conditions of the permit if the new owner uses the facility or allows it to
remain on the village's right of way.
   C.   Insurance And Bonding: All required insurance coverage or bonding must
be changed to reflect the name of the new owner upon transfer. (Ord. 987, 12-
18-2007)
8-6-13: GENERAL CONSTRUCTION STANDARDS:
   A.   Standards And Principles: All construction in the right of way shall be
consistent with applicable ordinances, codes, laws, rules and regulations, and
commonly recognized and accepted traffic control and construction principles,
sound engineering judgment and, where applicable, the principles and standards
set forth in the following IDOT publications, as amended from time to time:
      1.   "Standard Specifications For Road And Bridge Construction";
      2.   "Supplemental Specifications And Recurring Special Provisions";
      3.   "Highway Design Manual";
      4.   "Highway Standards Manual";
      5.   "Standard Specifications For Traffic Control Items";
      6.   "Illinois Manual On Uniform Traffic Control Devices" (92 Ill. adm.
code section 545);
      7.   "Flagger's Handbook"; and
      8.   "Work Site Protection Manual For Daylight Maintenance Operations".
Additionally, all construction in the right of way shall conform to the latest
regulations and standards of the U.S. department of labor occupational safety
and health administration (OSHA), including, but not limited to, requirements
for confined space entry. The utility and its contractors, subcontractors, and
assigns shall be solely responsible for all job site safety issues pertaining
to work performed under permits issued under this chapter.
   B.   Interpretation Of Municipal Standards And Principles: If a discrepancy
exists between or among differing principles and standards required by this
chapter, the right of way manager shall determine, in the exercise of sound
engineering judgment, which principles apply and such decision shall be final.
If requested, the right of way manager shall state which standard or principle
will apply to the construction, maintenance, or operation of a facility in the
future. (Ord. 987, 12-18-2007)
8-6-14: TRAFFIC CONTROL:
   A.   Minimum Requirements: The village's minimum requirements for traffic
protection are contained in IDOT's "Illinois Manual On Uniform Traffic Control
Devices" and this code.
   B.   Warning Signs, Protective Devices, And Flaggers: The utility is
responsible for providing and installing warning signs, protective devices and
flaggers, when necessary, meeting all applicable federal, state, and local
requirements for protection of the public and the utility's workers when
performing any work on the public rights of way. The erection of advance notice
signs seven (7) calendar days prior to proposed work alerting the public of
work to be performed in the right of way shall be required as deemed necessary
by the public works director.
   C.   Interference With Traffic: All work shall be phased so that there is
minimum interference with pedestrian and vehicular traffic. When required by
the public works director, the utility shall submit work phasing plans. The
public works director may require limiting work to specific days, and/or times
of day or night. In such circumstances where the work is required to be
performed only within specified days and/or times, construction areas shall be
made safe during nonworking times for vehicular and pedestrian traffic until
such time that the work may resume, through the use of appropriate traffic
control measures and trench/excavation protection measures including, but not
limited to, concrete barriers and steel plates.
   D.   Notice When Access Is Blocked: At least forty eight (48) hours prior to
beginning work that will partially or completely block access to any residence,
business or institution, the utility shall notify the resident, business or
institution of the approximate beginning time and duration of such work;
provided, however, that in cases involving emergency repairs pursuant to
section
 8-6-20 of this chapter, the utility shall provide such notice as is
practicable under the circumstances. In cases where access is not restored
within a reasonable time period, temporary access to such properties shall be
provided.
   E.   Compliance: The utility shall take immediate action to correct any
deficiencies in traffic protection requirements that are brought to the
utility's attention by the village. (Ord. 987, 12-18-2007)
8-6-15: LOCATION OF FACILITIES:
   A.   General Requirements: In addition to location requirements applicable
to specific types of utility facilities, all utility facilities, regardless of
type, shall be subject to the general location requirements of this subsection.
      1.   No Interference With Village Facilities: No utility facilities shall
be placed in any location if the right of way manager determines that the
proposed location will require the relocation or displacement of any of the
village's utility facilities or will otherwise interfere with the operation or
maintenance of any of the village's utility facilities.
      2.   Minimum Interference And Impact: The proposed location shall cause
only the minimum possible interference with the use of the right of way and
shall cause only the minimum possible impact upon, and interference with the
rights and reasonable convenience of property owners who adjoin said right of
way.
      3.   No Interference With Travel: No utility facility shall be placed in
any location that interferes with the usual travel on such right of way.
      4.   No Limitations On Visibility: No utility facility shall be placed in
any location so as to limit visibility of or by users of the right of way.
      5.   Size Of Utility Facilities: The proposed installation shall use the
smallest suitable vaults, boxes, equipment enclosures, power pedestals, and/or
cabinets then in use by the facility owner, regardless of location, for the
particular application.
      6.   Noise Disturbances: No utility facility shall be placed at any
location in such proximity to any residence, business or institution such that
operation of internal systems, cooling and/or exhaust fans, etc., within the
facility creates noise levels discernible and/or disturbing to the occupants of
any nearby residence, business or institution.
   B.   Parallel Facilities Located Within Highways:
      1.   Overhead Parallel Facilities: Overhead parallel facilities are
strongly discouraged and shall only be allowed if the village determines that
placement of facilities underground is impractical, unfeasible or undesirable.
Temporary installation of overhead facilities may be allowed if necessary to
provide service prior to the availability of suitable conditions or acquisition
of necessary easement(s). Determination of the acceptability of an overhead
installation and the conditions for such installation shall be at the sole
discretion of the village. If deemed by the village to be acceptable, an
overhead parallel facility may be located within the right of way lines of a
highway only if:
         a.   Lines are located as near as practicable to the right of way line
and as nearly parallel to the right of way line as reasonable pole alignment
will permit;
         b.   Where pavement is curbed, poles are as remote as practicable from
the curb with a minimum distance of two feet (2') behind the face of the curb,
where available;
         c.   Where pavement is uncurbed, poles are as remote from pavement
edge as practicable with minimum distance of four feet (4') outside the outer
shoulder line of the roadway and are not within the clear zone;
         d.   No pole is located in the ditch line of a highway; and
         e.   Any ground mounted appurtenance is located within one foot (1')
of the right of way line or as near as possible to the right of way line.
      2.   Underground Parallel Facilities: An underground parallel facility
may be located within the right of way lines of a highway only if:
         a.   The facility is located as near the right of way line as
practicable and not more than eight feet (8') from and parallel to the right of
way line;
         b.   A new facility may be located under the paved portion of a
highway only if other locations are impracticable or inconsistent with sound
engineering judgment (e.g., a new cable may be installed in existing conduit
without disrupting the pavement); and
         c.   In the case of an underground power or communications line, the
facility shall be located as near the right of way line as practicable and not
more than five feet (5') from the right of way line and any above grounded
appurtenance shall be located within one foot (1') of the right of way line or
as near as practicable.
      3.   Design Parameters Used As Guidelines: The design parameters
specified in this section shall be used as guidelines to be followed in all
cases unless special circumstances, as defined by the village, warrant
consideration of a variance.
   C.   Facilities Crossing Highways:
      1.   No Future Disruption: The construction and design of crossing
facilities installed between the ditch lines or curb lines of village highways
may require the incorporation of materials and protections (such as encasement
or additional cover) to avoid settlement or future repairs to the roadbed
resulting from the installation of such crossing facilities.
      2.   Cattle Passes, Culverts, Or Drainage Facilities: Crossing facilities
shall not be located in cattle passes, culverts, or drainage facilities.
      3.   Ninety Degree Crossing Required: Crossing facilities shall cross at
or as near to a ninety degree (90°) angle to the centerline as practicable.
      4.   Overhead Power Or Communication Facility: Overhead power or
communication facilities are strongly discouraged and shall only be allowed if
the village determines that placement of facilities underground is impractical,
unfeasible or undesirable. Temporary installation of overhead facilities may be
allowed if necessary to provide service prior to the availability of suitable
conditions or acquisition of necessary easement(s). Determination of the
acceptability of an overhead installation and the conditions for such
installation shall be at the sole discretion of the village. In such cases, an
overhead power or communication facility may cross a highway only if:
         a.   It has a minimum vertical line clearance as required by ICC's
rules entitled, "construction of electric power and communication lines" (83
Ill. adm. code 305);
         b.   Poles are located within one foot (1') of the right of way line
of the highway and outside of the clear zone; and
         c.   Overhead crossings at major intersections are avoided.
      5.   Underground Power Or Communication Facility: An underground power or
communication facility may cross a highway only if:
         a.   The design materials and construction methods will provide
maximum maintenance free service life; and
         b.   Capacity for the utility's foreseeable future expansion needs is
provided in the initial installation.
      6.   Markers: The village may require the utility to provide a marker at
each right of way line where an underground facility other than a power or
communication facility crosses a highway. Each marker shall identify the type
of facility, the utility, and an emergency phone number. Markers may also be
eliminated as provided in current federal regulations (49 CFR section 192.707
[1989]).
   D.   Facilities To Be Located Within Particular Rights Of Way: The village
may require that facilities be located within particular rights of way that are
not highways, rather than within particular highways.
   E.   Freestanding Facilities:
      1.   The village may restrict the location and size of any freestanding
facility located within a right of way.
      2.   The village may require any freestanding facility located within a
right of way to be screened from view. Cable and video service providers shall
bear the sole responsibility of installation, replacement and maintenance of
all required screening and landscaping so long as the facilities remain in the
right of way.
   F.   Facilities Installed Aboveground: Aboveground facilities are strongly
discouraged and shall only be allowed if the village determines that placement
of facilities underground is impractical, unfeasible or undesirable. Temporary
installation of overhead facilities may be allowed if necessary to provide
service prior to the availability of suitable conditions or acquisition of
necessary easement(s). Determination of the acceptability of an aboveground
installation and the conditions for such installation shall be at the sole
discretion of the village. In such cases, aboveground facilities may be
installed only if:
      1.   No other existing facilities in the area are located underground;
      2.   New underground installation is not technically feasible; and
      3.   The proposed installation will be made at a location, and will
employ suitable design and materials, to provide the greatest protection of
aesthetic qualities of the area being traversed without adversely affecting
safety. Suitable designs include, but are not limited to, self-supporting
armless, single pole construction with vertical configuration of conductors and
cable. Existing utility poles and light standards shall be used wherever
practicable; the installation of additional utility poles is strongly
discouraged.
   G.   Facility Attachments To Bridges Or Roadway Structures:
      1.   Facilities may be installed as attachments to bridges or roadway
structures only where the utility has demonstrated that all other means of
accommodating the facility are not practicable. Other means shall include, but
are not limited to, underground, underwater, independent poles, cable supports
and tower supports, all of which are completely separated from the bridge or
roadway structure. Facilities transmitting commodities that are volatile,
flammable, corrosive, or energized, especially those under significant pressure
or potential, present high degrees of risk and such installations are not
permitted.
      2.   A utility shall include in its request to accommodate a facility
installation on a bridge or roadway structure supporting data demonstrating the
impracticability of alternate routing. Approval or disapproval of an
application for facility attachment to a bridge or roadway structure will be
based upon the following considerations:
         a.   The type, volume, pressure or voltage of the commodity to be
transmitted and an evaluation of the resulting risk to persons and property in
the event of damage to or failure of the facility;
         b.   The type, length, value, and relative importance of the highway
structure in the transportation system;
         c.   The alternative routings available to the utility and their
comparative practicality;
         d.   The proposed method of attachment;
         e.   The ability of the structure to bear the increased load of the
proposed facility;
         f.   The degree of interference with bridge maintenance and painting;
         g.   The effect on the visual quality of the structure; and
         h.   The public benefit expected from the utility service as compared
to the risk involved.
   H.   Appearance Standards:
      1.   The village may prohibit the installation of facilities in
particular locations in order to preserve visual quality.
      2.   A facility may be constructed only if its construction does not
require extensive removal or alteration of trees or terrain features visible to
the right of way user or to adjacent residents and property owners, and if it
does not impair the aesthetic quality of the lands being traversed.
      3.   The village may require that facilities of a similar type and
function be installed with uniformity in appearance to facilities at other
locations with respect to size, color, materials, etc. (Ord. 987, 12-18-2007)
8-6-16: CONSTRUCTION METHODS AND MATERIALS:
   A.   Standards And Requirements For Particular Types Of Construction
Methods:
      1.   Boring Or Jacking: All work shall be done in accordance with the
applicable articles of section 552 of the IDOT's "Standard Specifications For
Road And Bridge Construction".
         a.   Pits And Shoring: Boring or jacking under rights of way shall be
accomplished from pits located at a minimum distance specified by the right of
way manager from the edge of the pavement. Pits for boring or jacking shall be
excavated no more than forty eight (48) hours in advance of boring or jacking
operations and backfilled within forty eight (48) hours after boring or jacking
operations are completed. While pits are open, they shall be clearly marked and
protected by barricades. Shoring shall be designed, erected, supported, braced,
and maintained so that it will safely support all vertical and lateral loads
that may be imposed upon it during the boring or jacking operation.
         b.   Wet Boring Or Jetting: Wet boring or jetting shall not be
permitted under the roadway.
         c.   Borings With Diameters Greater Than Six Inches: Borings over six
inches (6") in diameter shall be accomplished by directional drilling or with
an auger and following pipe, and the diameter of the auger shall not exceed the
outside diameter of the following pipe by more than one inch (1"), unless
otherwise approved in advance by the village engineer.
         d.   Borings With Diameters Six Inches Or Less: Borings of six inches
(6") or less in diameter may be accomplished by either jacking, directional
drilling, guided with auger, or auger and following pipe method.
         e.   Tree Preservation: Any facility located within the drip line of
any tree designated by the village to be preserved or protected shall be bored
under or around the root system.
      2.   Trenching: Trenching for all areas, and especially for paved or hard
surface areas, shall be performed only in circumstances when directional boring
or other trenchless construction method is impractical or unfeasible, at the
discretion of the director of public works. If deemed necessary, trenching for
facility installation, repair, or maintenance on rights of way shall be done in
accord with the applicable portions of section 603 of IDOT's "Standard
Specifications For Road And Bridge Construction".
         a.   Length: The length of open trench shall be kept to the
practicable minimum consistent with requirements for pipeline testing. Only
one-half (1/2) of any intersection may have an open trench at any time unless
special permission is obtained from the right of way manager.
         b.   Open Trench And Excavated Material: Open trench and windrowed
excavated material shall be protected as required by chapter 6 of the "Illinois
Manual On Uniform Traffic Control Devices". Where practicable, the excavated
material shall be deposited between the roadway and the trench as added
protection. Excavated material shall not be allowed to remain on the paved
portion of the roadway. Where right of way width does not allow for windrowing
excavated material off the paved portion of the roadway, excavated material
shall be hauled to an off road location.
         c.   Drip Lines Of Trees: The utility shall not trench within the drip
line of any tree designated by the village to be preserved.
      3.   Backfilling:
         a.   Any pit, trench, or excavation created during the installation of
facilities shall be backfilled for its full width, depth, and length using
methods and materials in accordance with IDOT's "Standard Specifications For
Road And Bridge Construction". When excavated material is hauled away or is
unsuitable for backfill, suitable granular backfill shall be used.
         b.   For a period of three (3) years from the date construction of a
facility is completed, the utility shall be responsible to remove and restore
any backfilled area that has settled due to construction of the facility. If so
ordered by the right of way manager, the utility, at its expense, shall within
ten (10) calendar days of such order remove any pavement and backfill material
to the top of the installed facility, place and properly compact new backfill
material, and restore new pavement, sidewalk, curbs, and driveways to the
proper grades, as determined by the right of way manager.
      4.   Pavement Cuts: Pavement cuts for facility installation or repair
shall be permitted on a highway only if that portion of the highway is closed
to traffic. If a variance to the limitation set forth in this subsection A4 is
permitted under section
8-6-21 of this chapter, the following requirements shall apply:
         a.   Any excavation under pavements shall be backfilled and compacted
as soon as practicable with granular material of CA-7 gradation, as designated
by the right of way manager.
         b.   Restoration of pavement, in kind, including pedestrian travelways
such as sidewalks and bike paths, shall be accomplished as soon as practicable,
and temporary repair with bituminous mixture shall be provided immediately.
Temporary pavement shall be of sufficient quality and sufficiently smooth to
allow for the safe use of pedestrians, bicyclists and motorists as may be
applicable until final restoration can be completed. Any subsequent failure of
either the temporary repair or the restoration shall be rebuilt upon
notification by the village.
         c.   All pavement removals shall be accomplished by straight, full
depth saw cuts, a minimum of four feet (4') from each edge of the trench or
excavation. Saw cut joints created by the trench or excavation and subsequent
pavement replacement shall be crack filled immediately upon completion of final
pavement restoration.
         d.   For all rights of way which have been reconstructed with a
concrete surface/base in the last seven (7) years, or resurfaced in the last
three (3) years, pavement cut permits shall not be issued unless such work is
determined to be an emergency repair or other work considered necessary and
unforeseen before the time of the reconstruction or unless a pavement cut is
necessary for a JULIE locate.
      5.   Encasement:
         a.   Casing pipe shall be designed to withstand the load of the
highway and any other superimposed loads. The casing shall be continuous either
by one piece fabrication or by welding or jointed installation approved by the
village engineer.
         b.   The venting, if any, of any encasement shall extend within one
foot (1') of the right of way line. No aboveground vent pipes shall be located
in the area established as clear zone for that particular section of the
highway.
         c.   In the case of water main or service crossing, encasement shall
be furnished between bore pits unless continuous pipe or village approved
jointed pipe is used under the roadway. Casing may be omitted only if pipe is
installed prior to highway construction and carrier pipe is continuous or
mechanical joints are of a type approved by the village. Bell and spigot type
pipe shall be encased regardless of installation method.
         d.   In the case of gas pipelines of sixty (60) psig or less,
encasement may be eliminated.
         e.   In the case of gas pipelines or petroleum products pipelines with
installations of more than sixty (60) psig, encasement may be eliminated only
if: 1) extra heavy pipe is used that precludes future maintenance or repair and
2) cathodic protection of the pipe is provided.
         f.   If encasement is eliminated for a gas or petroleum products
pipeline, the facility shall be located so as to provide that construction does
not disrupt the right of way.
      6.   Minimum Cover Of Underground Facilities: Cover shall be provided and
maintained at least in the amount specified in the following table for minimum
cover for the type of facility:
 
Type Of Facility                        Minimum Cover        
Electric lines                         A minimum of 24 inches below finished
                                        grade
Communication, cable or video service  A minimum of 24 inches below finished
lines                                   grade
Gas or petroleum products              A minimum of 24 inches below finished
                                        grade
Water line                             Sufficient cover to provide freeze
                                        protection, but not less than 60 inches
Sanitary sewer, storm sewer, or        Sufficient cover to provide freeze
drainage line                           protection, but not less than 60 inches
 
   B.   Standards And Requirements For Particular Types Of Facilities:
      1.   Electric Power Or Communication Lines:
         a.   Code Compliance: Electric power or communications facilities
within village rights of way shall be constructed, operated, and maintained in
conformity with the provisions of 83 Illinois administrative code part 305
(formerly general order 160 of the Illinois commerce commission) entitled
"rules for construction of electric power and communications lines", and the
national electrical safety code.
         b.   Overhead Facilities: Overhead power or communication facilities
shall use single pole construction and, where practicable, joint use of poles
shall be used. Utilities shall make every reasonable effort to design the
installation so guys and braces will not be needed. Variances may be allowed if
there is no feasible alternative and if guywires are equipped with guy guards
for maximum visibility.
         c.   Underground Facilities:
            (1)   Cable may be installed by trenching or plowing, provided that
special consideration is given to boring in order to minimize damage when
crossing improved entrances and side roads.
            (2)   If a crossing is installed by boring or jacking, encasement
shall be provided between jacking or bore pits. Encasement may be eliminated
only if: a) the crossing is installed by the use of "moles", "whip augers", or
other approved methods which compress the earth to make the opening for cable
installation or b) the installation is by the open trench method which is only
permitted prior to roadway construction.
            (3)   Cable shall be grounded in accordance with the national
electrical safety code.
         d.   Burial Of Drops: All temporary service drops placed between
November 1 of the prior year and March 15 of the current year, also known as
snow drops, shall be buried by May 31 of the current year, weather permitting,
unless otherwise permitted by the village. Weather permitting, utilities shall
bury all temporary drops, excluding snow drops, within ten (10) business days
after placement.
      2.   Underground Facilities Other Than Electric Power Or Communication
Lines: Underground facilities other than electric power or communication lines
may be installed by:
         a.   The use of "moles", "whip augers", or other approved methods
which compress the earth to move the opening for the pipe;
         b.   Jacking or boring with vented encasement provided between the
ditch lines or toes of slopes of the highway;
         c.   Open trench with vented encasement between ultimate ditch lines
or toes of slopes, but only if prior to roadway construction; or
         d.   Tunneling with vented encasement, but only if installation is not
possible by other means.
      3.   Gas Transmission, Distribution And Service: Gas pipelines within
rights of way shall be constructed, maintained, and operated in a village
approved manner and in conformance with the federal code of the office of
pipeline safety operations, department of transportation, part 192 -
transportation of natural and other gas by pipeline: minimum federal safety
standards (49 CFR section 192), IDOT's "Standard Specifications For Road And
Bridge Construction", and all other applicable laws, rules, and regulations.
      4.   Petroleum Products Pipelines: Petroleum products pipelines within
rights of way shall conform to the applicable sections of ANSI standard code
for pressure piping (liquid petroleum transportation piping systems ANSI-
B 31.4).
      5.   Water Lines, Sanitary Sewer Lines, Stormwater Sewer Lines Or
Drainage Lines: Water lines, sanitary sewer lines, storm sewer lines, and
drainage lines within rights of way shall meet or exceed the recommendations of
the current "Standard Specifications For Water And Sewer Main Construction In
Illinois".
      6.   Ground Mounted Appurtenances: Ground mounted appurtenances to
overhead or underground facilities, when permitted within a right of way, shall
be provided with a vegetation free area extending one foot (1') in width beyond
the appurtenance in all directions. The vegetation free area may be provided by
an extension of the mounting pad, or by heavy duty plastic or similar material
approved by the right of way manager. With the approval of the right of way
manager, shrubbery surrounding the appurtenance may be used in place of
vegetation free area. The housing for ground mounted appurtenances shall be
painted a neutral color to blend with the surroundings.
   C.   Materials:
      1.   General Standards: The materials used in constructing facilities
within rights of way shall be those meeting the accepted standards of the
appropriate industry, the applicable portions of IDOT's "Standards
Specifications For Road And Bridge Construction", the requirements of the
Illinois commerce commission, or the standards established by other official
regulatory agencies for the appropriate industry.
      2.   Material Storage On Right Of Way: No material shall be stored on the
right of way without the prior written approval of the right of way manager.
When such storage is permitted, all pipe, conduit, wire, poles, cross arms, or
other materials shall be distributed along the right of way prior to and during
installation in a manner to minimize hazards to the public or an obstacle to
right of way maintenance or damage to the right of way and other property. If
material is to be stored on right of way, prior approval must be obtained from
the village.
      3.   Hazardous Materials: The plans submitted by the utility to the
village shall identify any hazardous materials that may be involved in the
construction of the new facilities or removal of any existing facilities.
   D.   Operational Restrictions:
      1.   Construction operations on rights of way shall, at the discretion of
the village, be required to be discontinued when such operations would create
hazards to traffic or the public health, safety, and welfare. Such operations
may also be required to be discontinued or restricted when conditions are such
that construction would result in extensive damage to the right of way or other
property.
      2.   These restrictions may be waived by the right of way manager when
emergency work is required to restore vital utility services.
      3.   Unless otherwise permitted by the village, the hours of construction
are those set forth in title 9, chapter 7 of this code.
   E.   Location Of Existing Facilities: Any utility proposing to construct
facilities in the village shall contact JULIE and ascertain the presence and
location of existing aboveground and underground facilities within the rights
of way to be occupied by its proposed facilities. The village will make its
permit records available to a utility for the purpose of identifying possible
facilities. When notified of an excavation or when requested by the village or
by JULIE, a utility shall locate and physically mark its underground facilities
within forty eight (48) hours, excluding weekends and holidays, in accordance
with the Illinois underground facilities damage prevention act 1 . (Ord. 987,
12-18-2007)
 
Notes
1 1. 220 ILCS 50/1 et seq.
8-6-17: VEGETATION CONTROL:
   A.   Electric Utilities; Compliance With State Laws And Regulations: An
electric utility shall regularly conduct all tree trimming and vegetation
control activities in the right of way in accordance with applicable Illinois
laws and regulations, and additionally, with such local franchise or other
agreement with the village as permitted by law, in order to proactively
minimize storm damage to their facilities.
   B.   Other Utilities; Tree Trimming Permit Required: Tree trimming that is
done by any other utility with facilities in the right of way and that is not
performed pursuant to applicable Illinois laws and regulations specifically
governing same, or as required under this chapter, shall not be considered a
normal maintenance operation, but shall require the application for, and the
issuance of, a permit, in addition to any other permit required under this
chapter.
      1.   Application For Tree Trimming Permit: Applications for tree trimming
permits shall include assurance that the work will be supervised and
accomplished by competent workers who are experienced in accepted tree pruning
practices. Tree trimming permits shall designate an expiration date in the
interest of assuring that the work will be expeditiously accomplished.
      2.   Damage To Trees: Poor pruning practices resulting in damaged or
misshapen trees will not be tolerated and shall be grounds for cancellation of
the tree trimming permit and for assessment of damages. The village will
require compensation for trees extensively damaged and for trees removed
without authorization. The formula developed by the International Society of
Arboriculture will be used as a basis for determining the compensation for
damaged trees or unauthorized removal of trees. The village may require the
removal and replacement of trees if trimming or radical pruning would leave
them in an unacceptable condition.
   C.   Specimen Trees Or Trees Of Special Significance: The village may
require that special measures be taken to preserve specimen trees or trees of
special significance. The required measures may consist of higher poles, side
arm extensions, covered wire or other means.
   D.   Chemical Use:
      1.   Except as provided in the following subsection, no utility shall
spray, inject or pour any chemicals on or near any trees, shrubs or vegetation
in the village for any purpose, including the control of growth, insects or
disease.
      2.   Spraying of any type of brush killing chemicals will not be
permitted on rights of way unless the utility demonstrates to the satisfaction
of the right of way manager that such spraying is the only practicable method
of vegetation control. (Ord. 987, 12-18-2007)
8-6-18: REMOVAL, RELOCATION, OR MODIFICATIONS OF UTILITY FACILITIES:
   A.   Notice: Within ninety (90) days following written notice from the
village, a utility shall, at its own expense, protect, support, temporarily or
permanently disconnect, remove, relocate, change or alter the position of any
utility facilities within the rights of way whenever the corporate authorities
have determined that such removal, relocation, change or alteration, is
reasonably necessary for the construction, repair, maintenance, or installation
of any village improvement in or upon, or the operations of the village in or
upon, the rights of way.
   B.   Removal Of Unauthorized Facilities: Within thirty (30) days following
written notice from the village, any utility that owns, controls, or maintains
any unauthorized facility or related appurtenances within the public rights of
way shall, at its own expense, remove all or any part of such facilities or
appurtenances from the public rights of way. A facility is unauthorized and
subject to removal in the following circumstances:
      1.   Upon expiration or termination of the permittee's license or
franchise, unless otherwise permitted by applicable law;
      2.   If the facility was constructed or installed without the prior grant
of a license or franchise, if required;
      3.   If the facility was constructed or installed without prior issuance
of a required permit in violation of this chapter; or
      4.   If the facility was constructed or installed at a location not
permitted by the permittee's license or franchise.
   C.   Emergency Removal Or Relocation Of Facilities: The village retains the
right and privilege to cut or move any facilities located within the rights of
way of the village, as the village may determine to be necessary, appropriate
or useful in response to any public health or safety emergency. If
circumstances permit, the municipality shall attempt to notify the utility, if
known, prior to cutting or removing a facility and shall notify the utility, if
known, after cutting or removing a facility.
   D.   Abandonment Of Facilities: Upon abandonment of a facility within the
public rights of way of the village, the utility shall notify the village clerk
within ninety (90) days. Following receipt of such notice the village may
direct the utility to remove all or any portion of the facility if the right of
way manager determines that such removal will be in the best interest of the
public health, safety and welfare. In the event that the village does not
direct the utility that abandoned the facility to remove it, by giving notice
of abandonment to the village clerk, the abandoning utility shall be deemed to
consent to the alteration or removal of all or any portion of the facility by
another utility or person. (Ord. 987, 12-18-2007)
8-6-19: CLEANUP AND RESTORATION:
   A.   The utility shall remove all excess material and restore all turf and
terrain and other property within ten (10) calendar days after any portion of
the rights of way are disturbed, damaged or destroyed due to construction or
maintenance by the utility, all to the satisfaction of the village. This
includes restoration of entrances and side roads. Restoration of roadway
surfaces shall be made using materials and methods approved by the right of way
manager. Such cleanup and repair may be required to consist of backfilling,
regrading, reseeding, resodding, or any other requirement to restore the right
of way to a condition substantially equivalent to that which existed prior to
the commencement of the project. The time period provided in this section may
be extended by the right of way manager for good cause shown.
   B.   The scope and extent to which all restoration shall be performed shall
be at the sole discretion of the right of way manager. Sidewalk removed for
replacement shall be removed to the nearest full section or expansion joint.
Any sidewalks, bike paths, roadways, driveways, landscaped area or other areas
under which directional boring has been performed and for which disturbance of
any kind is visible at the surface shall be repaired as deemed necessary by the
right of way manager; any areas between disturbances less than one hundred feet
(100') in length shall not be allowed to remain in place but shall be repaired
in conjunction with the disturbed sections. Any trees or plantings disturbed by
utility installation shall be acceptably pruned in accordance with section
8-6-17 of this chapter if deemed salvageable by the right of way manager. Any
disturbed trees or plantings deemed unsalvageable shall be replaced in kind and
as directed by the director of public works. Backfilling of excavations and
trenches with granular limestone materials shall not be allowed adjacent to the
roots of trees and shrubs. (Ord. 987, 12-18-2007)
8-6-20: MAINTENANCE AND EMERGENCY MAINTENANCE:
   A.   General: Facilities on, over, above, along, upon, under, across, or
within rights of way are to be maintained by or for the utility in a manner
satisfactory to the village and at the utility's expense.
   B.   Emergency Maintenance Procedures: Emergencies may justify noncompliance
with normal procedures for securing a permit:
      1.   If an emergency creates a hazard on the traveled portion of the
right of way, the utility shall take immediate steps to provide all necessary
protection for traffic on the highway or the public on the right of way
including the use of signs, lights, barricades or flaggers. If a hazard does
not exist on the traveled way, but the nature of the emergency is such as to
require the parking on the shoulder of equipment required in repair operations,
adequate signs and lights shall be provided. Parking on the shoulder in such an
emergency will only be permitted when no other means of access to the facility
is available.
      2.   In an emergency, the utility shall, as soon as possible, notify the
right of way manager or his or her duly authorized agent of the emergency,
informing him or her as to what steps have been taken for protection of the
traveling public and what will be required to make the necessary repairs. If
the nature of the emergency is such as to interfere with the free movement of
traffic, the village police shall be notified immediately.
      3.   In an emergency, the utility shall use all means at hand to complete
repairs as rapidly as practicable and with the least inconvenience to the
traveling public.
   C.   Emergency Repairs: The utility must file in writing with the village
clerk a description of the repairs undertaken in the right of way within forty
eight (48) hours after an emergency repair. (Ord. 987, 12-18-2007)
8-6-21: VARIANCES:
   A.   Request For Variance: A utility requesting a variance from one or more
of the provisions of this chapter must do so in writing to the right of way
manager as a part of the permit application. The request shall identify each
provision of this chapter from which a variance is requested and the reasons
why a variance should be granted.
   B.   Authority To Grant Variances: The right of way manager shall decide
whether a variance is authorized for each provision of this chapter identified
in the variance request on an individual basis.
   C.   Conditions For Granting Of Variance: The right of way manager may
authorize a variance only if the utility requesting the variance has
demonstrated that:
      1.   One or more conditions not under the control of the utility (such as
terrain features or an irregular right of way line) create a special hardship
that would make enforcement of the provision unreasonable, given the public
purposes to be achieved by the provision; and
      2.   All other designs, methods, materials, locations or facilities that
would conform with the provision from which a variance is requested are
impracticable in relation to the requested approach.
   D.   Additional Conditions For Granting Of A Variance: As a condition for
authorizing a variance, the right of way manager may require the utility
requesting the variance to meet reasonable standards and conditions that may or
may not be expressly contained within this chapter but which carry out the
purposes of this chapter.
   E.   Denial Of A Variance: A permit shall be deemed rejected and, if
applicable, the forty five (45) day time period as set forth in section
8-6-5 of this chapter shall be immediately tolled, upon the right of way
manager's denial of a request for a variance.
   F.   Right To Appeal: Any utility aggrieved by any order, requirement,
decision or determination, including denial of a variance, made by the right of
way manager under the provisions of this chapter shall have the right to appeal
to the village board, or such other board or commission as it may designate.
The application for appeal shall be submitted in writing to the village clerk
within thirty (30) days after the date of such order, requirement, decision or
determination. The village board shall commence its consideration of the appeal
at the board's next regularly scheduled meeting occurring at least seven (7)
days after the filing of the appeal. The village board shall timely decide the
appeal. (Ord. 987, 12-18-2007)
8-6-22: PENALTIES:
Any person who violates, disobeys, omits, neglects or refuses to comply with
any of the provisions of this chapter shall be subject to a fine of not less
than one hundred dollars ($100.00) and not more than as provided in section
1-4-1 of this code; and a separate violation shall be deemed committed for each
violation, and on each day during and on which a violation occurs or continues.
There may be times when the village will incur delay or other costs, including
third party claims, because the utility will not or cannot perform its duties
under its permit and this chapter. Unless the utility shows that another
allocation of the cost of undertaking the requested action is appropriate, the
utility shall bear the village's costs of damages and its costs of installing,
maintaining, modifying, relocating, or removing the facility that is the
subject of the permit. No other administrative agency or commission may review
or overrule a permit related cost apportionment of the village. Sanctions may
be imposed upon a utility that does not pay the costs apportioned to it. (Ord.
987, 12-18-2007)
8-6-23: ENFORCEMENT:
Nothing in this chapter shall be construed as limiting any additional or
further remedies that the village may have for enforcement of this chapter.
(Ord. 987, 12-18-2007)
TITLE 9
POLICE REGULATIONS
CHAPTER 1
EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT AGENCY
SECTION:
9-1-1: Purpose And Intent
9-1-2: Definitions
9-1-3: Penalty
9-1-4: Declaration Of An Emergency
9-1-5: Curfew
9-1-6: Executive Orders For Public Safety
9-1-7: Proclamation Effective Period
9-1-8: Proclamation Notice
9-1-9: Police And Fire Department Powers
9-1-10: Establishment; Composition
9-1-11: Director
9-1-12: Functions
9-1-13: Mobile Support Team; Leadership; Compensation
9-1-14: Agreements With Other Political Subdivisions
9-1-15: Emergency Action
9-1-16: Compensation Of Members Called For Training
9-1-17: Reimbursement Of Expenses By State
9-1-18: Purchases And Expenditures
9-1-19: Oath Of Members
9-1-20: Office Space
9-1-21: Budget; Tax Levy
9-1-22: Local Emergency Plan
9-1-1: PURPOSE AND INTENT:
The intent and purpose of this chapter is to establish the village of Manhattan
emergency management agency to be prepared to adequately deal with the possible
occurrence of a disaster of unprecedented size and destructiveness, including,
but not limited to, fire, flood, earthquake, telecommunications failure, or
other natural or technological causes and to preserve the lives and property of
the citizens of the village of Manhattan and protect the public peace, health,
and safety of the citizens of Manhattan in the event of a disaster. (Ord. 934,
1-2-2007)
9-1-2: DEFINITIONS:
The following words, terms, and phrases, when used in this chapter shall have
the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly
indicated a different meaning:
   CIVIL EMERGENCY: A riot or unlawful assembly characterized by the use of
actual force or violence, or any threat to use force that is accompanied by
immediate power to execute by three (3) or more persons acting together without
authority of law.
   CURFEW: A prohibition against any person walking, running, loitering,
standing or motoring upon any alley, street, highway, public property or vacant
premises within the corporate limits of the village, except officials of any
governmental unit and persons officially designated to duty with reference to
the civil emergency/disaster.
   DIRECTOR: Staff assistant to the principal executive officer of a political
subdivision with the duty of coordinating the emergency management programs of
that political subdivision.
   DISASTER: An occurrence or threat of widespread or severe damage, injury or
loss of life or property resulting from any natural or technological cause,
including, but not limited to, fire, flood, earthquake, windstorm, hazardous
materials spill or other water contamination requiring emergency action to
avert danger or damage, epidemic, air contamination, blight, extended periods
of severe and inclement weather, drought, infestation, critical shortages of
essential fuels and energy, explosion, riot, hostile military or paramilitary
action, public health emergencies, or acts of domestic terrorism.
   EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT: The efforts of the state and the political subdivision
to develop, plan, analyze, conduct, provide, implement and maintain programs
for disaster mitigation, preparedness, response and recovery. "Emergency
management agency" means the agency that is established by ordinance within a
political subdivision to coordinate the emergency management program within
that political subdivision and with private organizations, other political
subdivisions, the state and federal governments.
   EMERGENCY OPERATIONS PLAN: The written plans of the state and the village of
Manhattan describing the organization, mission, and functions of the government
and supporting services for responding to and recovering from disasters.
   EMERGENCY SERVICES: The coordination or functions by the state and its
political subdivisions, other than functions for which military forces are
primarily responsible, as may be necessary or proper to prevent, minimize,
repair, and alleviate injury and damage resulting from any natural or
technological causes. These functions include, without limitation, firefighting
services, police services, emergency aviation services, medical and health
services, HAZMAT and technical rescue teams, rescue, engineering, warning
services, communications, radiological, chemical and other special weapons
defense, evacuation of persons from stricken or threatened areas, emergency
assigned functions of plant protection, temporary restoration of public utility
services and other functions related to civilian protection, together with all
other activities necessary or incidental to protecting life or property.
   EXERCISE: A planned event realistically simulating a disaster, conducted for
the purpose of evaluating the political subdivision's coordinated emergency
management capabilities, including, but not limited to, testing the emergency
operations plan.
   HAZMAT TEAM: A career or volunteer mobile support team that has been
authorized by a unit of local government to respond to hazardous materials
emergencies and that is primarily designed for emergency response to chemical
or biological terrorism, radiological emergencies, hazardous material spills,
releases, or fires, or other contamination events.
   ILLINOIS EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT AGENCY: The agency established by this act
within the executive branch of state government responsible for coordination of
the overall emergency management program of the state and with private
organizations, political subdivisions, and the federal government. Illinois
emergency management agency also means the state emergency response commission
responsible for the implementation of title III of the superfund amendments and
reauthorization act of 1986.
   MOBILE SUPPORT TEAM: A group of individuals designated as a team by the
governor or director to train prior to and to be dispatched, if the governor or
the director so determines, to aid and reinforce the state and political
subdivision emergency management efforts in response to a disaster.
   MUNICIPALITY: Any city, village, and incorporated town.
   PRESIDENT/MAYOR: The village president/mayor as set forth by definition in
this code and the Illinois Compiled Statutes. In the absence or disability of
the president/mayor, president/mayor pro tem or temporary president/mayor as
defined by statute, the next senior trustee is hereby empowered with the
authority vested in the president/mayor as defined in this chapter.
   PUBLIC HEALTH EMERGENCY: An occurrence or imminent threat of an illness or
health condition that:
   A.   Is believed to be caused by any of the following:
      1.   Bioterrorism;
      2.   The appearance of a novel or previously controlled or eradicated
infectious agent or biological toxin;
      3.   Natural disaster;
      4.   Chemical attack or accidental release; or
      5.   Nuclear attack or accident; and
   B.   Poses a high probability of any of the following harms:
      1.   Large number of deaths in the affected population;
      2.   Large number of serious or long term disabilities in the affected
population;
      3.   Widespread exposure to an infectious or toxic agent that poses a
significant risk of substantial future harm to a large number of people in the
affected population.
   TECHNICAL RESCUE TEAM: A career or volunteer mobile support team that has
been authorized by a unit of local government to respond to building collapse,
high angle rescue, and other specialized rescue emergencies and that is
primarily designated for emergency response to technical rescue events. (Ord.
934, 1-2-2007)
9-1-3: PENALTY:
Any person violating the provisions of this chapter or an executive order
issued pursuant to this chapter shall be guilty of an offense against the
village, and shall be punishable as provided in section
1-4-1 of this code. (Ord. 934, 1-2-2007)
9-1-4: DECLARATION OF AN EMERGENCY:
Whenever an emergency as defined in section
 9-1-2 of this chapter exists, the president/mayor, or his or her interim
emergency successor, as provided in section 7 of the "emergency interim
executive succession act" 1 , shall declare the existence of a civil emergency
by means of a written declaration setting forth the facts, which constitutes
the emergency. (Ord. 934, 1-2-2007)
 
Notes
1 1. 5 ILCS 275/7.
9-1-5: CURFEW:
After proclamation of a civil emergency by the president/mayor, he/she may
order a general curfew applicable to such geographical areas of the village, or
to the village as a whole, as he/she deems advisable, and applicable during
such hours of the day or night as he/she deems necessary in the interest of the
public safety and welfare. (Ord. 934, 1-2-2007)
9-1-6: EXECUTIVE ORDERS FOR PUBLIC SAFETY:
After the proclamation of a civil emergency, the president/mayor may also, in
the interest of public safety and welfare, make any or all of the following
orders:
   A.   The closing of all retail liquor stores, including taverns and private
clubs or portions thereof wherein the consumption of intoxicating liquor and
beer is permitted.
   B.   The discontinuance of the sale of alcoholic liquor by any wholesaler or
retailer.
   C.   The discontinuance of selling, distributing or giving away gasoline or
other liquid flammable or combustible products in any container other than a
gasoline tank properly affixed to a motor vehicle.
   D.   The discontinuance of selling, distributing, dispensing or giving away
of firearms or ammunition of any character whatsoever.
   E.   Such other orders as are imminently necessary for the protection of
life and property. (Ord. 934, 1-2-2007)
9-1-7: PROCLAMATION EFFECTIVE PERIOD:
The proclamation authorized in this chapter shall be effective for a period of
forty eight (48) hours, or as required by law, unless sooner terminated by a
proclamation of the president/mayor indicating that the civil emergency no
longer exists. The president/mayor may reproclaim the existence of a civil
emergency at the end of each forty eight (48) hour period during the time the
civil emergency exists. The declaration of emergency shall not be continued or
renewed for a period in excess of seven (7) days except by or with the consent
of the village board. (Ord. 934, 1-2-2007)
9-1-8: PROCLAMATION NOTICE:
Upon issuing the proclamation authorized in this chapter, the mayor, village
administrator, or chief of police shall notify the news media situated within
the village. The proclamation declaring the existence of the emergency shall be
posted at the village hall, the police department, on the village website.
Other units of local government and the village’s banking institutions shall be
notified in writing, by email, fax, or in-person delivery.
(Ord. 934, 1-2-2007; amd. Ord. 1476-24, 11-4-2024)
9-1-9: POLICE AND FIRE DEPARTMENT POWERS:
Nothing contained in this chapter shall be construed to impair the power
contained in this code granting powers to the police and fire departments. This
chapter shall be construed with all other ordinances now in effect for the
safety and welfare of the citizens of the village. (Ord. 934, 1-2-2007)
9-1-10: ESTABLISHMENT; COMPOSITION:
There is hereby created the Manhattan emergency management agency, also known
as the Manhattan "EMA", to prevent, minimize, repair, and alleviate injury or
damage resulting from disaster caused by enemy attack, sabotage, or other
hostile action, or from natural or manmade disaster, in accordance with the
Illinois emergency management agency act, 20 Illinois Compiled Statutes 3305/
1 et seq.
This EMA shall consist of the director and such additional members to be
selected by the director. (Ord. 934, 1-2-2007)
9-1-11: DIRECTOR:
   A.   Appointment: The director of the Manhattan emergency management agency
shall be appointed by the president/mayor with the concurrence of the board of
trustees and shall serve until removed by same.
   B.   Powers And Duties: The director shall have direct responsibility for
the organization, administration, training, and operation of the EMA, subject
to the direction and control of the village president/mayor, as provided by
statute.
   C.   Temporary Director: In the event of the absence, resignation, death or
inability to serve as the director, the village president/mayor or any person
designated by him/her shall be and act as director until a new appointment is
made as provided in this chapter. (Ord. 934, 1-2-2007)
9-1-12: FUNCTIONS:
The Manhattan EMA shall perform such EMA functions within the village as shall
be prescribed in and by the state emergency management agency plan and program
prepared by the governor, and such orders, rules and regulations as may be
promulgated by the governor, and in addition shall perform such duties outside
the corporate limits as may be required pursuant to any mutual aid agreement
with any other political subdivision, municipality or quasi-municipality
entered into as provided by the "Illinois emergency management agency act", 20
Illinois Compiled Statutes 3305/1 et seq. (Ord. 934, 1-2-2007)
9-1-13: MOBILE SUPPORT TEAM; LEADERSHIP; COMPENSATION:
All or any member of the Manhattan emergency management agency may be
designated as members of a mobile support team created by the director of the
Illinois emergency management agency as provided by law.
The leader of such Manhattan emergency mobile agency mobile support team shall
be designated by the director of the Manhattan EMA organization.
Any member of a mobile support team who is a village employee or officer while
serving on call to duty by the governor, or the state director, shall receive
the compensation and have the powers, duties, rights and immunities incident to
such employment or office. Any such member who is not a paid officer or
employee of the village, while so serving, shall receive from the state
reasonable compensation as provided by law. (Ord. 934, 1-2-2007)
9-1-14: AGREEMENTS WITH OTHER POLITICAL SUBDIVISIONS:
The director of the Manhattan emergency management agency may negotiate mutual
aid agreements with other cities or political subdivisions of the state, but no
such agreement shall be effective until it has been approved by the village
president/mayor and board of trustees and by the director of the state
emergency management agency. (Ord. 934, 1-2-2007)
9-1-15: EMERGENCY ACTION:
If the governor proclaims that a disaster exists in the event of actual enemy
attack upon the United States or the occurrence within the state of Illinois of
a major disaster resulting from enemy sabotage or other hostile action, or from
natural or manmade disaster, it shall be the duty of the Manhattan EMA to
cooperate fully with the state EMA and with the governor in the exercise of
emergency powers as provided by law. (Ord. 934, 1-2-2007)
9-1-16: COMPENSATION OF MEMBERS CALLED FOR TRAINING:
Members of the Manhattan EMA who are paid employees or officers of the village,
if called for training by the director of the state emergency management
agency, shall receive for time spent in such training the same rate of pay as
is attached to the position held. Members who are not such village employees or
officers shall receive for such training time such compensation as may be
established by the village president/mayor. (Ord. 934, 1-2-2007)
9-1-17: REIMBURSEMENT OF EXPENSES BY STATE:
The village treasurer may receive and allocate to the appropriate fund any
reimbursement by the state to the village for expenses incident to training
members of the Manhattan EMA as prescribed by the director of the state
emergency management agency, compensation for services and expenses of members
of a mobile support team while serving outside the village in response to a
call by the governor or the director of the state emergency management agency,
as provided by law, and any other reimbursement made by the state incident to
EMA activities, as provided by law. (Ord. 934, 1-2-2007)
9-1-18: PURCHASES AND EXPENDITURES:
The village president may, on recommendation of the Manhattan EMA director,
authorize any purchase or contract necessary to place the village in a position
to combat effectively any disaster resulting from the explosion of any nuclear
or other bomb or missile, and to protect the public health and safety, protect
property, and provide emergency assistance to victims in the case of such
disaster, or from manmade or natural disaster.
In the event of enemy caused or other disaster, the Manhattan EMA director is
authorized, on the behalf of the village, to procure such services, supplies,
equipment or material as may be necessary for such purposes, in view of the
exigency without regard to the statutory procedures or formalities normally
prescribed by law pertaining to village contracts or obligations, as authorized
by the "Illinois emergency management agency act", 20 Illinois Compiled
Statutes 3305/1 et seq.; provided that if the president/mayor and the board of
trustees meet at such time he/she shall act subject to the direction and
restrictions imposed by that body.
The Manhattan EMA director may pursue the procedures for the procurement of
surplus supplies, equipment or materials necessary to appropriately respond to
civil emergencies or disasters from the general service administration of the
federal government, and surplus inventories maintained by the state, provided
that prior authorization for such procurement is granted by the village board
of trustees. The EMA director shall receive authorization from the village
board of trustees prior to disposal or change in the disposition of such
surplus property. An inventory of all Manhattan EMA equipment will be
maintained and annually reported to the village president/mayor and board of
trustees. (Ord. 934, 1-2-2007)
9-1-19: OATH OF MEMBERS:
Every person appointed to serve in any capacity in the Manhattan emergency
management agency organization shall, before entering upon his/her duties,
subscribe to the following oath, which shall be filed with the director:
I,                       , do solemnly swear (or affirm) that I will support
and defend and bear true faith and allegiance to the Constitution of the United
States and the Constitution of the State of Illinois, and the territory,
institutions, and facilities therefore, both public and private, against all
enemies, foreign and domestic; that I take this obligation freely, without any
mental reservation; and that I will well and faithfully discharge the duties
upon which I am about to enter. And I do further swear (affirm) that I do not
advocate, nor am I nor have I been a member of any political party or
organization that advocates the overthrow of the Government of the United
States or this State by force or violence; and that during such time as I am
affiliated with the Manhattan EMA organization, I will not advocate or become a
member of any political party or organization that advocates the overthrow of
the Government of the United States or this State by force or violence.
 
(Ord. 934, 1-2-2007)
9-1-20: OFFICE SPACE:
The village president/mayor and board of trustees are authorized to designate
space in a village building or elsewhere as may be provided for by the village
president for the Manhattan EMA as its office. (Ord. 934, 1-2-2007)
9-1-21: BUDGET; TAX LEVY:
The village president and board of trustees may make a budget for EMA purposes
in the manner provided by law, and may levy in addition for EMA purposes only,
a tax not to exceed five cents ($0.05) per one hundred dollars ($100.00) of the
assessed value of all taxable property in addition to all other taxes, as
provided by 65 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/8-3-16, and local emergency plan.
(Ord. 934, 1-2-2007)
9-1-22: LOCAL EMERGENCY PLAN:
The village shall prepare and keep current a local disaster emergency plan for
the area. The Manhattan EMA director shall prepare and distribute to all
appropriate officials in written form a clear and complete statement of the
emergency responsibilities of all local departments and officials and of the
disaster chain of command. (Ord. 934, 1-2-2007)
CHAPTER 2
ANIMALS AND ANIMAL CONTROL
SECTION:
9-2-1: Title
9-2-2: Purpose
9-2-3: Definitions
9-2-4: Exercise Of Certain Powers
9-2-5: Keeping Of Certain Animals Prohibited
9-2-6: Inoculation Of Dogs; Inoculation Tag Affixed To Collars
9-2-7: Inoculation To Be Performed By Licensed Veterinarian; Issuance Of
Certificate
9-2-8: Exhibition Of Certificate On Request
9-2-9: Restraint Of Dogs And Other Animals
9-2-10: Animals As Nuisances
9-2-11: Keeping Animals
9-2-12: Owner's Responsibility For Removal Of Excreta
9-2-13: Biting Animals
9-2-14: Confinement; Warning Of Dangerous Dogs
9-2-15: Killing Or Attacking Animals
9-2-16: Cruelty To Animals
9-2-17: Dead Animals
9-2-18: Injured Animals; Animals Found Dead On Public Ways
9-2-19: Interference With Enforcement
9-2-20: Authority To Impound Animals And Enter Onto Private Property
9-2-21: Impoundment Of Dogs Or Other Animals Which Have Bitten Persons
9-2-22: Notice To Owners Or Keepers Of Impoundment And Violation
9-2-23: Redemption Of Impounded Animals
9-2-24: Dangerous Dog (Animal) Determination
9-2-25: Dangerous Dog; Leash
9-2-26: Dangerous Dog; Appeal
9-2-27: Vicious Dog (Animal)
9-2-28: Disposition Of Animals
9-2-29: Citations In Chapter Violation Cases
9-2-30: Prosecution Of Violations
9-2-31: Penalties
9-2-1: TITLE:
This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the VILLAGE OF MANHATTAN ANIMAL
CONTROL CODE. (Ord. 990, 2-19-2008)
9-2-2: PURPOSE:
The purpose of this chapter is to provide harmonious relationships in the
interaction between man and animal by:
   A.   Protecting the citizens of the village of Manhattan from rabies by
specifying such preventive and control measures as may be necessary;
   B.   Protecting animals from improper use, abuse, neglect, inhumane
treatment and health hazards, particularly rabies;
   C.   Providing security to residents from annoyance, intimidation and injury
from cats, dogs and other animals;
   D.   Encouraging responsible pet ownership;
   E.   Providing for the assessment of penalties for violators and for the
enforcement and administration of this chapter. (Ord. 990, 2-19-2008)
9-2-3: DEFINITIONS:
For the purpose of this chapter, all terms have the same meaning as in the
animal control act, 510 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/1 et seq. The following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning:
   ANIMAL: Every living creature, other than man, which may be affected by
rabies.
   ANIMAL CONTROL ADMINISTRATOR: A veterinarian licensed by the state of
Illinois and appointed by Will County animal control, or in the event a
veterinarian cannot be found and appointed, a nonveterinarian may serve as
animal control administrator under this chapter. In the event the animal
control administrator is not a veterinarian, the animal control administrator
shall defer to a veterinarian regarding all medical decisions.
   ANIMAL CONTROL WARDEN: Any person appointed by the animal control
administrator to perform the duties set forth in this chapter, and those
designated by the chief of police whose duty it is to enforce the provisions of
this chapter.
AT LARGE: Any animal not under "restraint" as defined herein.
   BITE: To seize with the teeth or jaws so that the person or animal seized
has been nipped, gripped, wounded, or pierced and further includes contact of
saliva with any break or abrasion of the skin.
   CAT: All members of the family Felis catus.
   CHIEF OF POLICE: The chief of the village police department or his or her
designee.
   CONFINED: Restriction of an animal at all times by the owner, or his agent,
to an escape proof building, house, or other enclosure away from other animals
and the public.
   COUNTY: Will County, Illinois.
   COUNTY ANIMAL CONTROL PERSONNEL: Personnel who are employed by the county to
take up domestic animals and transport them to the county pound, or take up
wild animals and dispose of them in accordance with the procedures of the
county animal control department.
   COUNTY POUND: The animal pound operated by the county animal control
department.
   DANGEROUS DOG: A. Any individual dog anywhere other than upon the property
of the owner or custodian of the dog and unmuzzled, unleashed, or unattended by
its owner or custodian that behaves in a manner that a reasonable person would
believe poses a serious and unjustified imminent threat of serious physical
injury or death to a person or a companion animal; or
   B.   A dog that, without justification, bites a person and does not cause
serious physical injury.
   DEPARTMENT: The department of agriculture of the state of Illinois.
   DIRECTOR: The director of the department of agriculture of the state of
Illinois or his duly appointed representative.
   DOG: All members of the family Canidae.
   ENCLOSURE: A fence or structure of at least six feet (6') in height, forming
or causing an enclosure suitable to prevent the entry of young children, and
suitable to confine a vicious dog in conjunction with other measures that may
be taken by the owner or keeper, such as tethering of the vicious dog within
the enclosure. The enclosure shall be securely enclosed and locked and designed
with secure sides, top, and bottom and shall be designed to prevent the animal
from escaping from the enclosure. If the enclosure is a room within a
residence, it cannot have direct ingress from or egress to the outdoors unless
it leads directly to an enclosed pen and the door must be locked. A vicious dog
may be allowed to move about freely within the entire residence if it is
muzzled at all times.
   IMPOUNDED: Taken into the custody of the public animal control facility in
the city, town, or county where the animal is found.
   INOCULATION AGAINST RABIES: The injection of an antirabies vaccine approved
by the department.
   INTACT ANIMAL: An animal that has not been spayed or neutered.
   LEASH: A cord, rope, strap, or chain which shall be securely fastened to the
collar or harness of a dog or other animal and shall be of sufficient strength
to keep such dog or other animal under control.
   LICENSED VETERINARIAN: A veterinarian licensed by the state in which he
engages in the practice of veterinary medicine.
   LIVESTOCK: Cattle, cows, horses, sheep, swine, goats, chickens, ducks,
turkeys, geese and any other animals commonly recognized as livestock.
   MUZZLE: A device constructed of strong, soft material or a metal muzzle,
made in a manner which will not cause injury to the dog or interfere with its
vision or respiration but will prevent the dog from biting any person or
animal.
   NIP: To pinch or squeeze with teeth with no breaking of skin or tissue.
   OWNER OR KEEPER: Any person having a right of property in an animal, or who
keeps or harbors an animal, or who has it in his care, or acts as its
custodian, or who knowingly permits a dog to remain on any premises occupied by
him or her. "Owner or keeper" does not include a feral cat caretaker
participating in a trap, spay/neuter, return or release program.
   PERSON: Any individual, firm, corporation, partnership, society, association
or other legal entity, any public or private institution, the state of
Illinois, municipal corporation or political subdivision of the state, or any
other business unit.
   PHYSICAL INJURY: The impairment of physical condition.
   POLICE ANIMAL: An animal owned or used by a law enforcement department or
agency in the course of the department's or agency's work.
   POLICE OFFICER: The chief of police of the village or any police officer
employed by the village or any police officer from another jurisdiction
operating in the village under a mutual aid agreement or under the direction of
the chief of police of the village.
   POUND OR ANIMAL CONTROL FACILITY: May be used interchangeably and mean any
facility approved by the animal control administrator for the purpose of
enforcing this chapter and used as a shelter for seized, stray, homeless,
abandoned, or unwanted dogs or other animals.
   PUBLIC ENTRANCE: The entranceway of a residence or other building closest to
the public street or sidewalk or one which would be reasonably perceived by the
public to be the entrance to the dwelling available for public use.
   REGISTRATION CERTIFICATE: A printed form prescribed by the department for
the purpose of recording pertinent information as required by the department
under the animal control act.
   RESTRAINT: An animal is under restraint if it is:
   A.   Attached to a leash held by a responsible person; or
   B.   Attached to a structure or fixture in such a manner that it is unable
to reach beyond the limits of the owner's or keeper's property and is unable to
reach or molest service persons or casual visitors to the owner's or keeper's
property using the public entrance or persons placing mail in the mailbox or
delivering newspapers at the request of the owners; or
   C.   Enclosed in a fenced yard from which it is unable to escape without
assistance from a person; or
   D.   On the property of its owner or keeper authorized by the owner and
under voice command; or
   E.   Confined by a fence of sufficient height and security (which may be an
electronic invisible fence system) to prevent it from leaving the area so
encompassed.
Herding of animals and tethering of animals for grazing purposes is not "under
restraint" as defined herein.
   SERIOUS PHYSICAL INJURY: A physical injury that creates a substantial risk
of death or that causes death, serious disfigurement, protracted impairment of
health, impairment of the function of any bodily organ, or plastic surgery.
   VICIOUS DOG: A dog that, without justification, attacks a person and causes
serious physical injury or death or any individual dog that has been found to
be a "dangerous dog" upon three (3) separate occasions.
   VILLAGE: The village of Manhattan, Illinois.
   WILD ANIMAL, UNDOMESTICATED ANIMAL, OR EXOTIC ANIMAL: Any mammal, amphibian,
reptile, or bird which is of a species usually not domesticated, due to size,
wild nature or other characteristic or which is dangerous to humans. By way of
example, but not limited to: monkey, chimpanzee, orangutan and gorilla, deer,
elk, moose, zebra, bison, giraffe, camel, llama, pigmy goat, potbelly pig,
miniature horse, wallabies, kangaroo, koala, mink, weasel, otter, porcupine,
prairie dog, fox, skunk, squirrel, jackal, dingo, wolverine, wolf, coyote or
crossbreed of coyote-dog or wolf-dog, emu, ostrich, peacock, panther, leopard,
tiger, lion, lynx, bobcat, bat, poisonous reptile, poisonous amphibian,
crocodile, alligator, seal or bear. (Ord. 990, 2-19-2008)
9-2-4: EXERCISE OF CERTAIN POWERS:
   A.   The chief of police or his designee and police officers shall have the
exclusive power to request county animal control personnel to take up and
transport animals in accordance with this chapter and in accordance with
contractual arrangements with the county.
   B.   Police officers on duty shall have the additional authority to take up
and temporarily detain vicious animals and animals running at large pending the
arrival of county animal control personnel. (Ord. 990, 2-19-2008)
9-2-5: KEEPING OF CERTAIN ANIMALS PROHIBITED:
   A.   The keeping of livestock within the corporate limits of the village is
prohibited.
   B.   The keeping of wild, undomesticated or exotic animals within the
village is prohibited.
   C.   Except for legally permitted commercial kennels, the keeping of more
than four (4) dogs and cats in the aggregate (e.g., 4 dogs, 2 dogs and 2 cats,
1 dog and 3 cats or 4 cats) on one zoning lot within the village is prohibited,
provided this subsection does not apply to litters of pups or kittens less than
four (4) months of age.
   D.   Residential zoning lots having more than four (4) dogs and cats in the
aggregate at the time of passage are exempt until the animal(s) expire, so long
as:
      1.   Said animals are reasonably and safely cared for and otherwise in
compliance with this chapter, and
      2.   The expired animal(s) is not replaced unless the total number of
dogs and cats in the aggregate, including the replacement animal, is four (4)
or less. (Ord. 990, 2-19-2008)
9-2-6: INOCULATION OF DOGS; INOCULATION TAG AFFIXED TO COLLARS:
Each calendar year, or at such intervals as may hereafter be promulgated by the
department of agriculture, every owner or keeper of a dog which is four (4)
months of age or older shall cause such dog to be inoculated against rabies.
Such owner or keeper of such dog shall cause a serially numbered tag evidencing
such inoculation to be attached to a collar or harness worn by the dog at all
times. (Ord. 990, 2-19-2008)
9-2-7: INOCULATION TO BE PERFORMED BY LICENSED VETERINARIAN; ISSUANCE OF
CERTIFICATE:
   A.   The inoculation of dogs required by this chapter shall be performed by
a veterinarian, duly licensed to practice in this state or in the state where
the inoculation occurred. On performing such inoculation, such veterinarian
shall issue to the owner or keeper a certificate of such fact. (Ord. 990, 2-19-
2008)
9-2-8: EXHIBITION OF CERTIFICATE ON REQUEST:
At any reasonable time on request of any member of the police department or
animal control officer, the owner or keeper of any dog shall exhibit any
current, valid certificate, required under the provisions of this chapter,
certifying the inoculation against rabies of any dog owned or kept by him.
(Ord. 990, 2-19-2008)
9-2-9: RESTRAINT OF DOGS AND OTHER ANIMALS:
Any dog found running at large contrary to provisions of this chapter may be
apprehended and impounded. A dog found running at large contrary to the
provisions of this chapter a second or subsequent time must be spayed or
neutered within thirty (30) days after being reclaimed unless already spayed or
neutered; failure to comply shall result in impoundment. A dog shall be deemed
to be running at large at any time when it is not on premises owned, leased or
lawfully occupied by the owner, possessor, custodian, or other person having
control or in charge of the dog in question and not controlled or restrained by
means of a leash, chain, cable, strap or other appropriate restraint held by a
competent person who has the capacity to control the dog. (Ord. 990, 2-19-2008)
9-2-10: ANIMALS AS NUISANCES:
   A.   The owner or keeper of an animal shall not suffer or permit the animal
to bark, howl, cry or make other distressing or loud or unusual noise or to
disturb the peace or quiet of any place, neighborhood, family or person in the
village. The disturbing of any neighborhood or persons by any such animal is
declared to be a nuisance and no person shall suffer or permit any such
nuisance to exist.
   B.   In addition to the general restrictions of subsection A of this
section, for the purpose of this section, an owner or keeper is in violation of
this section if he or she permits a dog to bark in a substantially continuous
manner for a period of more than thirty (30) minutes or who allows such animal
to bark, howl or cry for numerous periods of time, regardless of duration, so
as to disturb the quiet of the neighborhood or of particular neighbors.
   C.   Any dog which may, in any manner, including urination, destroy or
injure any plant, shrub or other property not on the premises of its owner or
keeper, is hereby declared to be a nuisance. (Ord. 990, 2-19-2008)
9-2-11: KEEPING ANIMALS:
No person shall house or keep animals in any pen, stable, yard, confinement
structure or any other place in such a manner that associated debris or odors
are unreasonably offensive to persons residing in the vicinity or passing along
any nearby street or alley or constitute a hazard to the health of persons
residing nearby. Any pen, stable, yard, confinement structure or other place
where animals are housed or kept in violation of this section is declared to be
a nuisance. (Ord. 990, 2-19-2008)
9-2-12: OWNER'S RESPONSIBILITY FOR REMOVAL OF EXCRETA:
The owner of every animal shall be responsible for the immediate removal and
sanitary disposition of excreta deposited by his animal not on owner's
property. When accompanying the animal outside his property the owner shall
have on his person suitable means for the removal of such excreta which must
then be placed in a refuse container for sanitary removal. (Ord. 990, 2-19-
2008)
9-2-13: BITING ANIMALS:
No owner or keeper of an animal shall suffer, permit or fail to prevent an
animal from biting or attacking a person or another animal resulting in injury
to the person or animal attacked, provided that such an attack on a person who
is or reasonably appears to be in the commission of a criminal act is not
prohibited if the animal is acting in the defense of the owner or keeper of his
or her family or premises and the animal remains on its premises. For purposes
of this section, it is not necessary that the person bitten or attacked be
arrested or convicted of a criminal offense. (Ord. 990, 2-19-2008)
9-2-14: CONFINEMENT; WARNING OF DANGEROUS DOGS:
No person shall own, keep, or harbor within the village a dog that is dangerous
or vicious, unless such person shall keep such animal safely and securely
confined so as to protect from injury any child or other person who may come on
the premises in the vicinity where such dog may be located. Adequate warning by
sign, or otherwise shall be given to all persons coming on the premises in the
vicinity of any such vicious or dangerous dog. (Ord. 990, 2-19-2008)
9-2-15: KILLING OR ATTACKING ANIMALS:
No person shall kill or wound or attempt to kill or wound by the use of
firearms, slingshot, bow and arrow, BB gun, air rifle or any other dangerous
weapon, any animal within the village limits, provided that this section shall
not prohibit a person from defending himself or another from attack by an
animal. This section does not prohibit the use of a weapon by a police officer
to destroy animals which are seriously injured to avoid unnecessary suffering,
or in self-defense of others. (Ord. 990, 2-19-2008)
9-2-16: CRUELTY TO ANIMALS:
No person shall commit acts of cruelty to animals. The following acts shall be
deemed to be examples of cruelty to animals and are not intended to be a
complete list of acts which may constitute cruelty. Doctors of veterinary
medicine, in the performance of their profession, are not subject to the
provisions of this section.
   A.   Overloading, overdriving, overworking, beating, torturing, tormenting,
mutilating, or killing any animal or causing or knowingly allowing the same to
be done.
   B.   Cruelly working any old, maimed, injured, sick or disabled animal or
causing or knowingly allowing the same to be done.
   C.   Failing to provide any animal in one's charge or custody, as owner or
keeper, with proper food, drink, shelter, air, sanitation or medical care.
   D.   Abandoning any animal without making provisions for its care and
feeding. (Ord. 990, 2-19-2008)
9-2-17: DEAD ANIMALS:
   A.   The owner or keeper of an animal shall be responsible for the disposal
of such animal's remains upon its death, from whatever cause and regardless of
the location of the remains of such animals.
   B.   Animal's remains shall be disposed of:
      1.   By burial beneath at least eighteen inches (18") of compacted soil
on the property of the animal's owner or keeper, or any other location with the
express permission of the owner of the property.
      2.   By or through the county animal pound.
      3.   By or through a licensed veterinarian; or
      4.   By action of the police department.
   C.   The police department may issue a written notice to any owner or keeper
who has failed to properly dispose of the remains of an animal as prescribed
herein. Such person shall have twenty four (24) hours from receipt of such
notice to properly dispose of such remains. The notice shall be served on the
violator personally or by leaving such notice at the usual place of abode with
some person of the family of the age of thirteen (13) years or upwards and
informing that person of the contents thereof.
   D.   The village may dispose of any animal's remains without notice to the
owner or keeper when:
      1.   Such remains are located on a public roadway;
      2.   The remains are located on the property of a person other than the
owner or keeper; or
      3.   Service of a notice on the owner or keeper is refused or not readily
possible within a short time.
   E.   In any case where a disposal notice is required, in accordance with
subsection C of this section, on failure of a person served a notice to
properly dispose of such remains within the time allowed, the remains may be
disposed of by an employee of the village and all costs of such removal shall
be paid by the owner or keeper of the dead animal.
   F.   A minimum charge of fifty dollars ($50.00) for each hour or part of an
hour spent by police officers or other village employees and any fees charged
by the county pound or licensed veterinarian in disposing of the remains may be
levied against the owner or keeper when the village disposes of the remains.
(Ord. 990, 2-19-2008)
9-2-18: INJURED ANIMALS; ANIMALS FOUND DEAD ON PUBLIC WAYS:
   A.   Any animal discovered injured on a public way shall be impounded or
picked up by the county animal control personnel at the direction of a police
officer and processed in accordance with the procedures of the county pound.
   B.   When a domestic animal is discovered dead on a public way, the police
officer on duty shall attempt to ascertain its owner and shall request that the
owner dispose of the remains. If a wild animal is discovered dead on the public
way, or the officer cannot ascertain the owner of a dead domestic animal, the
officer shall notify the public works department and the public works
department shall dispose of the remains. (Ord. 990, 2-19-2008)
9-2-19: INTERFERENCE WITH ENFORCEMENT:
No person shall in any way interfere with any person who is known to such
person to be or who identifies himself to be and is in fact, a village or
county employee or other officer enforcing the provisions of this chapter or
engaged in catching or impounding any animal under the authority of this
chapter. (Ord. 990, 2-19-2008)
9-2-20: AUTHORITY TO IMPOUND ANIMALS AND ENTER ONTO PRIVATE PROPERTY:
For the purpose of making inspections hereunder, the animal control
administrator, or his or her authorized representative, or any law enforcement
officer may enter upon private premises, provided that the entry shall not be
made into any building that is a person's residence, to apprehend a straying
dog or other animal, a dangerous or vicious dog or other animal, or an animal
thought to be infected with rabies. If, after request therefor, the owner of
the dog or other animal shall refuse to deliver the dog or other animal to the
officer, the owner shall be in violation of this chapter. (Ord. 990, 2-19-2008)
9-2-21: IMPOUNDMENT OF DOGS OR OTHER ANIMALS WHICH HAVE BITTEN PERSONS:
   A.   Any dog whether under restraint or not, which shall have bitten or
otherwise injured any persons so as to cause an abrasion of the skin shall be
immediately taken by the police department or county animal control personnel
and confined under the observation of a licensed veterinarian for a period of
ten (10) days. The chief of police or county animal control personnel may
permit such confinement to be reduced to a period of less than ten (10) days.
When evidence is presented that the animal was inoculated against rabies within
the time prescribed by law, it shall be confined in a house, or in a manner
which will prohibit it from biting any person for a period of ten (10) days, if
a licensed veterinarian adjudges such confinement satisfactory. At the end of
the confinement period, the animal shall be examined by a licensed
veterinarian.
   B.   Any person having knowledge that any person has been bitten by an
animal shall notify the chief of police. It is unlawful for the owner of the
animal to euthanize, sell, give away, or otherwise dispose of any animal known
to have bitten a person, until it is released by the chief of police. It is
unlawful for the owner of the animal to refuse or fail to comply with the
reasonable written or printed instructions made by the chief of police. If such
instructions cannot be delivered in person, they shall be mailed to the owner
of the animal by regular mail. Any expense incurred in the handling of an
animal under this section shall be borne by the owner.
   C.   When a person has been bitten by a police dog that is currently
vaccinated against rabies, the police dog may continue to perform its duties
for the peace officer or law enforcement agency and any period of observation
of the police dog may be under the supervision of a peace officer. The
supervision shall consist of the dog being locked in a kennel, performing its
official duties in a police vehicle, or remaining under the constant
supervision of its police handler. (Ord. 990, 2-19-2008)
9-2-22: NOTICE TO OWNERS OR KEEPERS OF IMPOUNDMENT AND VIOLATION:
The police department shall make best efforts to notify the owners or keepers
of animals impounded pursuant to this chapter, if known to them, of the fact of
impoundment and the procedures for redemption of the impounded animal. Such
notification shall be independent of any citation for chapter violation, but
may be served together with a citation for chapter violation. Notice shall be
given within twenty four (24) hours of impoundment, either by personal service,
or if the owner is not at home when service is made, by taping the notice to
the front door of the residence of the owner, if known and notice by mail.
(Ord. 990, 2-19-2008)
9-2-23: REDEMPTION OF IMPOUNDED ANIMALS:
   A.   When dogs or cats are apprehended and impounded, they must be scanned
for the presence of a microchip.
   B.   An animal impounded under the provisions of this chapter, except an
animal that may have bitten any person, shall, unless sooner redeemed, be held
until it may be disposed of pursuant to section
9-2-28 of this chapter in order to afford opportunity to the owner or keeper
thereof to redeem the same.
   C.   Prior to disposition, animals shall be held for a minimum of seven (7)
business days, if the owner is known, in order to give the owner an opportunity
to redeem the animal. Animals which have bitten persons are subject to an
impoundment in accordance with section
9-2-21 of this chapter.
   D.   The owner or keeper of any impounded animal may redeem such animal upon
compliance with the following conditions:
      1.   Presenting proof of current rabies inoculation and registration, if
applicable.
      2.   Paying for the rabies inoculation of the dog or cat and
registration, if applicable.
      3.   Payment for all expenses incurred during the impoundment,
apprehension or confinement.
      4.   Payment for microchipping and registration if not already done.
   E.   The payments required for redemption under this section shall be in
addition to any other penalties invoked under the Illinois animal control act 1
and the Illinois public health and safety animal population control act 2 .
(Ord. 990, 2-19-2008)
 
Notes
1 1. 510 ILCS 5.
2 2. 510 ILCS 92.
9-2-24: DANGEROUS DOG (ANIMAL) DETERMINATION:
   A.   After a thorough investigation including: 1) sending within ten (10)
days of the chief of police or animal control officer becoming aware of the
alleged infraction, notifications to the owner of the alleged infractions, the
fact of the initiation of an investigation and affording the owner an
opportunity to meet with the chief of police or animal control officer prior to
the making of a determination; 2) gathering of any medical or veterinary
evidence; 3) interviewing witnesses and making a detailed written report, an
animal control warden or chief of police, may ask the animal control
administrator of Will County animal control or his or her designee, to deem a
dog to be "dangerous". No dog shall be deemed a "dangerous dog" without clear
and convincing evidence. The owner shall be sent immediate notification of the
determination by registered or certified mail that includes a completed
description of the appeal process.
   B.   A dog shall not be declared dangerous if the animal control
administrator, his or her designee, or the director determines the conduct of
the dog was justified because:
      1.   The threat was sustained by a person who at the time was committing
an offense upon the owner or custodian of the dog;
      2.   The threatened person was tormenting, abusing, assaulting or
physically threatening the dog or its offspring;
      3.   The injured, threatened or killed companion animal was attacking or
threatening to attack the dog or its offspring; or
      4.   The dog was responding to pain or injury or was protecting itself,
its owner, custodian or a member of its household, kennel or offspring.
   C.   Testimony of a certified applied behaviorist, a board certified
veterinary behaviorist or another recognized expert may be relevant to the
determination of whether the dog's behavior was justified pursuant to the
provisions of this section.
   D.   If deemed dangerous, the animal control administrator or his or her
designee, or the director shall order the dog to be spayed or neutered within
fourteen (14) days at the owner's expense and microchipped, if not already, and
one or more of the following as deemed appropriate under the circumstances and
necessary for the protection of the public:
      1.   Evaluation of the dog by a certified applied behaviorist, a board
certified veterinary behaviorist or another recognized expert in the field and
completion of training or other treatment as deemed appropriate by the expert.
The owner of the dog shall be responsible for all costs associated with
evaluations and training ordered under this subsection; or
      2.   Direct supervision by an adult eighteen (18) years of age or older
whenever the animal is on public premises.
   E.   The animal control administrator or chief of police may order a
dangerous dog to be muzzled whenever it is on public premises in a manner that
will prevent it from biting any person or animal but that shall not injure the
dog or interfere with its vision or respiration.
   F.   Guide dogs for the blind or hearing impaired, support dogs for the
physically handicapped and sentry, guard or police owned dogs are exempt from
this section; provided, an attack or injury to a person occurs while the dog is
performing duties as expected. To qualify for exemption under this section,
each such dog shall be currently inoculated against rabies in accordance with
section 9-2-21 of this chapter. It shall be the duty of the owner of such
exempted dog to notify the animal control administrator of changes of address.
In the case of a sentry or guard dog, the owner shall keep the animal control
administrator advised of the location where such dog will be stationed. The
animal control administrator shall provide police and fire departments with a
categorized list of such exempted dogs and shall promptly notify such
departments of any address changes reported to him. (Ord. 990, 2-19-2008)
9-2-25: DANGEROUS DOG; LEASH:
It is unlawful for any person to knowingly or recklessly permit any dangerous
dog to leave the premises of its owner when not under control by leash or other
recognized control methods. (Ord. 990, 2-19-2008)
9-2-26: DANGEROUS DOG; APPEAL:
   A.   The owner of a dog found to be a dangerous dog pursuant to this chapter
by an animal control administrator may file a complaint against the animal
control administrator in the circuit court within thirty five (35) days of
receipt of notification of the determination for a de novo hearing on the
determination pursuant to section 15.3 of the animal control act 1 .
   B.   The owner of a dog found to be a dangerous dog pursuant to this chapter
by the director may, within fifteen (15) days of receipt of notification of the
determination, request an administrative hearing to appeal the determination
pursuant to the department of agriculture's rules applicable to formal
administrative proceedings; 8 Illinois administrative code part 1, subparts A
and B.
   C.   Until the order has been reviewed and at all times during the appeal
process, the owner shall comply with the requirements set forth by the animal
control administrator, the court or the director.
   D.   At any time after a final order has been entered the owner may petition
the circuit court to reverse the designation of dangerous dog. (Ord. 990, 2-19-
2008)
 
Notes
1 1. 510 ILCS 5/15.3.
9-2-27: VICIOUS DOG (ANIMAL):
   A.   In order to have an animal deemed "vicious", an animal control officer,
chief of police or the village attorney must give notice of the infraction that
is the basis of the investigation to the owner. The police department shall
conduct a thorough investigation, interview any witnesses, including the owner,
gather any existing medical records, veterinary medical records or behavioral
evidence and make a detailed report recommending a finding that the animal is a
vicious animal and give the report to the state's attorney's office and the
owner. The state's attorney, village attorney or animal control officer may
file a complaint in the circuit court to deem a dog to be a vicious dog.
Testimony of a certified applied behaviorist, board certified veterinary
behaviorist or another recognized expert may be relevant to the court's
determination of whether the dog's behavior was justified. The petitioner must
prove the dog is a vicious dog by clear and convincing evidence. Will County
animal control shall determine where the animal shall be confined during the
pendency of the case. The provisions and appeal rights of this section shall be
carried out pursuant to section 15 of the animal control act 1 .
   B.   If the dog is found to be a vicious dog, the dog shall be spayed or
neutered within ten (10) days of the finding at the expense of its owner,
microchipped and subject to enclosure. A dog found to be a vicious dog shall
not be released to the owner until the animal control warden or chief of police
approves the enclosure. No owner or keeper of a vicious dog shall sell or give
away the dog without court approval. Whenever an owner of a vicious dog
relocates, he or she shall notify both the animal control administrator of
county animal control where he or she has relocated and the animal control
administrator of county animal control where he or she formerly resided.
   C.   It shall be unlawful for any person to keep or maintain any dog which
has been found to be a vicious dog unless the dog is kept in an enclosure. The
only times that a vicious dog may be allowed out of the enclosure are:
      1.   If it is necessary for the owner or keeper to obtain veterinary care
for the dog.
      2.   In the case of an emergency or natural disaster where the dog's life
is threatened, or
      3.   To comply with the order of a court of competent jurisdiction,
provided that the dog is securely muzzled and restrained with a leash not
exceeding six feet (6') in length and shall be under the direct control and
supervision of the owner or keeper of the dog or muzzled in its residence.
   D.   Any dog which has been found to be a vicious dog and which is not
confined to an enclosure shall be impounded by the animal control
administrator, an animal control warden or the law enforcement authority having
jurisdiction in such area.
   E.   If the owner of the dog has not appealed the impoundment order to the
circuit court in the county in which the animal was impounded within fifteen
(15) working days, the dog may be euthanized.
   F.   Upon filing notice of appeal, the order of euthanasia shall be
automatically stayed pending the outcome of the appeal. The owner shall bear
the burden of timely notification to animal control in writing.
   G.   Guide dogs for the blind or hearing impaired, support dogs for the
physically handicapped and sentry, guard or police owned dogs are exempt from
this section; provided, an attack or injury to a person occurs while the dog is
performing duties as expected. To qualify for exemption under this section,
each such dog shall be currently inoculated against rabies in accordance with
section
9-2-6 of this chapter. It shall be the duty of the owner of such exempted dog
to notify the animal control administrator of changes of address. In the case
of a sentry or guard dog, the owner shall keep the animal control administrator
advised of the location where such dog will be stationed. The animal control
administrator shall provide police and fire departments with a categorized list
of such exempted dogs and shall promptly notify such departments of any address
changes reported to him. (Ord. 990, 2-19-2008)
 
Notes
1 2. 510 ILCS 5/15.
9-2-28: DISPOSITION OF ANIMALS:
Any dog or other animal which has not been redeemed within the time specified
in section 9-2-23 of this chapter shall be humanely destroyed or otherwise
disposed of by the director of the county animal pound. (Ord. 990, 2-19-2008)
9-2-29: CITATIONS IN CHAPTER VIOLATION CASES:
   A.   For violations of this chapter other than violations relating to
dangerous, vicious and biting dogs and other animals, village police officers
are authorized to issue citations. Citations shall be issued on forms approved
by the chief of police and shall be served personally on the violator, left
with a responsible family member of at least sixteen (16) years of age at the
home of the violator or mailed to the residence of the violator.
   B.   On receipt of any citation alleging violation of any section of this
chapter the violator may pay one-half (1/2) of the minimum fine provided in
this chapter at the village hall within ten (10) working days of issuance of
the citation and in such event, the village will not prosecute the chapter
violation. After ten (10) working days but before filing of an action with the
circuit court of Will County, an alleged violator may avoid prosecution under
this chapter by paying the full minimum fine applicable to the violation at the
village hall. (Ord. 990, 2-19-2008)
9-2-30: PROSECUTION OF VIOLATIONS:
   A.   The village may by its attorney file a complaint and prosecute any
alleged violation of this chapter.
   B.   In addition to the penalties set forth in this chapter, the village may
pursue any and all other remedies available under state law, including, but not
limited to, bringing actions to abate nuisances and seeking the destruction of
dangerous or vicious animals. (Ord. 990, 2-19-2008)
9-2-31: PENALTIES:
Any person found to have violated this chapter shall, in addition to any fees,
boarding costs and impoundment fees required herein, be fined not less than one
hundred dollars ($100.00) nor more than the maximum amount contained in section
1-4-1 of this code. Each day an offense continues shall be considered a
separate offense. (Ord. 990, 2-19-2008)
CHAPTER 3
POLICE PROTECTION AND PUBLIC ORDER
SECTION:
9-3-1: State Provisions Adopted
9-3-2: Alcoholic Liquor
9-3-3: Propelling Missiles
9-3-4: Loitering
9-3-5: Junkyards
9-3-6: Fireworks
9-3-7: Explosives
9-3-8: Combustible Refuse; Fires
9-3-9: False Alarms
9-3-10: Wheeled Vehicles Prohibited
9-3-11: Gambling
9-3-12: Sweepstakes Kiosks Prohibited
9-3-1: STATE PROVISIONS ADOPTED:
   A.   The sections listed below of the Illinois Compiled Statutes, as
amended, are adopted by reference as if fully set out herein as part of this
police protection and public order code for the village:
Section            
720 ILCS 5/26-1   Disorderly conduct
720 ILCS 5/25-1   Mob action
720 ILCS 5/21-1   Criminal damage to property
720 ILCS 5/21-2   Criminal trespass to vehicles
720 ILCS 5/21-3   Criminal trespass to real property
720 ILCS 5/16-1   Theft
720 ILCS 5/16/-25 Retail Theft
720 ILCS 5/12-1   Assault
720 ILCS 5/12-3   Battery
720 ILCS 5/12-5   Reckless conduct
720 ILCS 5/11-9   Public indecency
720 ILCS 5/11-14  Prostitution
720 ILCS 5/11-15  Soliciting for a prostitute
720 ILCS 5/28-1   Gambling
720 ILCS 5/28-2   Definitions
425 ILCS 35/1     Fireworks defined
235 ILCS 5/6-16   Sales of alcohol to and possession by persons under 21
 
   B.   All sections of the Illinois Criminal Code of 2012 (720 ILCS 5/1-1, et.
seq.), as amended, that are misdemeanor offenses punishable by incarceration in
a penal institution other than the penitentiary not to exceed six (6) months
are hereby adopted by reference as if set out at length herein as part of this
police protection and public order code for the village.
   C.   All sections of the Illinois Complied Statutes adopted by reference in
subsection (A) and (B) of this Chapter may be written as ordinance violations
of the village. All citations so issued shall be issued in the name of the
village.
   D.   Those certain portions of the Illinois Compiled Statutes adopted by
reference in this Chapter shall be subject to all application definitions,
defenses and presumptions provided for by state law; provided, however, that
guilt need only be established by a preponderance of the evidence. Further, all
amendments to said statutes shall be considered as adopted upon their effective
date.
   E.   Penalty: Whosoever violates or fails to comply with any of the
provisions of this section shall be guilty of a village ordinance offense and
fined not less than seventy-five dollars ($75.00) nor more than seven hundred
fifty dollars ($750.00), unless another penalty is specifically provided for in
this chapter. A separate offense shall be deemed committed for each day during
on or which a violation occurs or continues. (1990 Code; amd. Ord. 1427-23, 5-
2-2023)
9-3-2: ALCOHOLIC LIQUOR:
   A.   In Public: It shall be unlawful for any person to be in an intoxicated
condition in any street, alley or public place of the village. (1928 Code §229;
amd. Ord. 937, 2-6-2007)
   B.   Open Container: It shall be unlawful for any person to possess an open
container of any alcoholic liquor or consume any alcoholic liquor on a street,
alley, sidewalk, parkway, village parking lot, or on any nonresidential private
property that is open for public access or public accommodation; provided
however that it shall not be unlawful if any person or group has received
approval, permission or other authorization from the village. (Ord. 939, 2-6-
2007)
   C.   Minors:
      1.   It shall be unlawful for any person under the age of twenty one (21)
to receive, accept, possess or consume any alcoholic liquor; provided however
that it shall not be unlawful in the performance of a recognized religious
ceremony or service, under the direct supervision and approval of that minor's
parent or guardian in a private residence, or in the pursuance of employment.
      2.   It shall be unlawful for any person under the age of twenty one (21)
to attempt to purchase any alcoholic liquor in any tavern or other place in the
village where alcoholic liquor is sold, unless acting at the direction of a law
enforcement officer. An "attempt" is defined as any act constituting a
substantial step toward the purchase of any alcoholic liquor. It shall not be a
defense that because of a misunderstanding of the circumstances it would have
been impossible to purchase any alcoholic liquor, or the attempt to purchase
any alcoholic liquor was unsuccessful due to refusal by a licensee or officer,
employee or agent of a licensee. (Ord. 937, 2-6-2007)
   D.   Penalty: Any person violating the provisions of this section shall be
fined not less than one hundred dollars ($100.00) for each offense. (Ord. 939,
2-6-2007)
9-3-3: PROPELLING MISSILES:
It shall be unlawful to propel any object or missile, including, but not
limited to, arrows, pebbles, rocks and/or any other form or type of object or
missile, by the use of bow, sling, projector or other instrument, designed or
capable of being used to propel said object or missile by mechanical means
through use of said bow, sling, projector or other instrument, within the
village limits. (Ord. 421, 1-4-1972)
9-3-4: LOITERING:
   A.   Definitions: As used in this section:
   LOITERING: Remaining idle in essentially one location and shall include the
concept of spending time idly; to be dilatory; to linger; to stay; to saunter;
to delay; to stand around and shall also include the colloquial expression
"hanging around".
   PUBLIC PLACE: Any place to which the general public has access and a right
to resort for business, entertainment or other lawful purpose, but does not
necessarily mean a place devoted solely to the uses of the public. It shall
also include the front or immediate area of any store, shop, restaurant, tavern
or other place of business and also public grounds, areas or parks.
   B.   Loitering; Police Order To Disperse; Penalty:
      1.   It shall be unlawful for any person to loiter, loaf, wander, stand
or remain idle either alone and/or in consort with others in a public place in
such manner so as to:
         a.   Obstruct any public street, public highway, public sidewalk or
any other public place or building by hindering or impeding or tending to
hinder or impede the free and uninterrupted passage of vehicles, traffic or
pedestrians.
         b.   Commit in or upon any public street, public highway, public
sidewalk or any other public place or building any act or thing which is an
obstruction or interference to the free and uninterrupted use of property, or
with any business lawfully conducted by anyone in or upon or facing or fronting
on any such public street, public highway, public sidewalk or any other public
place or building, all of which prevents the free and uninterrupted ingress,
egress and regress therein, thereon and thereto.
      2.   When any person causes or commits any of the conditions enumerated
in subsection B1 of this section, a police officer or any law enforcement
officer shall order that person to stop causing or committing such conditions
and to move on or disperse. Any person who fails or refuses to obey such orders
shall be guilty of a violation of this section. (Ord. 442, 12-3-1974)
9-3-5: JUNKYARDS:
The conducting of a business of dealing in outdoor junkyards is hereby declared
an unwholesome and offensive business and is hereby prohibited within the
village 1 . (Ord. 362, 4-3-1962)
 
Notes
1 1. See title 7, chapter 4 of this code.
9-3-6: FIREWORKS:
   A.   Fireworks shall be as defined in 425 Illinois Compiled Statutes 35/1 et
seq., and shall include any explosive composition, or any substance or
combination of substances, or article prepared for the purpose of producing a
visible or audible effect of a temporary exhibitional nature by explosion,
combustion, deflagration or detonation, and shall include toy cannons, in which
explosives are used, the type of balloons which require fire underneath to
propel the same, firecrackers, torpedoes, skyrockets, Roman candles, bombs, or
other fireworks of like construction and any fireworks containing any explosive
compound, or any tablets or other device containing any explosive substance, or
containing combustible substances producing visual effects. The term
"fireworks" shall not include snake or glow worm pellets; smoke devices;
sparklers; trick noisemakers known as "party poppers", "booby traps",
"snappers", "trick matches", "cigarette loads", and "auto burglar alarms"; toy
pistols, toy canes, toy guns, or other devices in which paper or plastic caps
containing twenty five hundredths (0.25) grain or less of explosive compound
are used, providing they are so constructed that the hand cannot come in
contact with the cap when in place for the explosion; and toy pistol paper or
plastic caps which contain less then twenty hundredths (0.20) grain of
explosive mixture; the sale and use of which shall be permitted at all times.
   B.   No person, firm, copartnership or corporation shall knowingly possess,
offer for sale, expose for sale, sell at retail, or use or explode any
fireworks, flame effects, or pyrotechnic displays except as herein provided.
   C.   The village president and the board of trustees shall have the
authority to adopt reasonable rules and regulations for the granting of permits
for supervised displays of fireworks by the village, park district and other
organizations or groups of individuals. Permits may be granted and approved in
accordance with the regulations for the display upon application to the chief
of the Manhattan fire protection district ("fire chief") and upon filing a
proof of insurance with the village in the sum of not less than one million
dollars ($1,000,000.00) with the village of Manhattan named as an additional
insured on the insurance policy. (See NFPA 1123, code for fireworks display and
NFPA 1126, standard for the use of pyrotechnics before a proximate audience.)
Every such display shall be handled by a competent operator, licensed or
certified as to competency. Every such display shall be of such composition and
character and shall be located, discharged, or fired so as, in the opinion of
the fire chief, after proper site inspection, not to be hazardous to any person
or property. No permit granted hereunder shall be transferable.
   D.   Applications for a pyrotechnic display permit shall be made in writing
to the fire chief at least fifteen (15) days in advance of the date of the
pyrotechnic display. After a permit has been granted, sales, possession, use,
and distribution of display fireworks for the display shall be lawful for that
purpose only.
   E.   Before any permit for a pyrotechnic display shall be issued, the
person, firm, or corporation making application therefor shall furnish proof of
financial responsibility (proof of insurance in the amount of $1,000,000.00
with village named as additional insured) to satisfy claims for damages to
property or personal injuries arising out of any act or omission on the part of
such person, firm, or corporation or any agent or employee thereof, in such
amount, character, and form as the fire chief determines to be necessary for
the protection of the public.
   F.   A permit shall be issued only after the fire chief, or his or her
designee, has inspected the site and determined that the display can be
performed in full compliance with the rules adopted by the state fire marshal
and that the display shall not be hazardous to property or endanger any person
or persons.
   G.   Nothing in this section shall be construed to prohibit any of the
following (as enumerated):
      1.   The sale at wholesale of any fireworks for supervised displays by
any approved resident manufacturer, wholesaler, dealer, or jobber in accordance
with regulations of the U.S. bureau of alcohol, tobacco and firearms (see title
27, Code of Federal Regulations, subchapter C) and the U.S. department of
transportation.
      2.   The manufacture, transportation or storage of fireworks at a
manufacturing facility. The testing of fireworks under the direction of its
manufacturer provided permission for such testing has been obtained from the
village of Manhattan.
      3.   The sale, transportation, handling or use of industrial pyrotechnic
devices or fireworks such as railroad torpedoes, fuses, automotive,
aeronautical and marine flares and smoke signals.
      4.   The sale and use of blank cartridges for use in a show or theater,
for signal or ceremonial purposes, in athletics or sports, or legal power
tools.
      5.   The transportation, handling, or use of pyrotechnic devices by the
armed forces of the United States.
      6.   The use of pyrotechnics in training by the fire service, law
enforcement or similar government agencies.
      7.   The use of fireworks for agricultural purposes under the direct
supervision of the U.S. department of the interior or an equivalent state or
local agency. (See title 16, Code of Federal Regulations, part 1500.17(a)(8).)
   H.   The village shall seize, take, remove or cause to be removed at the
expense of the owner all stocks of fireworks offered or exposed for sale or
stored or held in violation of this section. If the court finds that the owner
possessed the seized fireworks or combustibles in violation of this section
and/or the fireworks use act, the village shall seek a judgment ordering the
confiscation, forfeiture, and destruction of the seized fireworks or
combustibles. Fireworks or combustibles subject to the court's order shall be
destroyed under the supervision of the village at the expense of the owner of
the fireworks or combustibles.
   I.   If the owner of real property on which any of the prohibited activities
cited in this section takes place is present while the prohibited activity or
activities occurs, the owner shall have violated this section by failing to
exercise proper responsibility for those committing any of the acts set forth
in this section and said other persons shall be deemed to have committed the
said acts with the knowledge and permission of the owner, in violation of this
section.
   J.   Upon being given notice by any member of the Manhattan police
department of the existence or occurrence of any of the prohibited activities
set forth in this section occurring on his or her property, the owner of said
property shall immediately take appropriate actions to terminate and/or prevent
said activities. The owner's failure to terminate and/or prevent the prohibited
activities shall constitute a further violation of this section. (Ord. 902, 5-
2-2006)
   K.   Any person, firm or corporation violating any of the provisions of this
section shall, upon conviction thereof, be subject to a fine as established in
section
1-4-1 of this code for each offense plus the cost of removal and disposal of
the stocks of fireworks offered or exposed for sale or stored or held. (Ord.
902, 5-2-2006; amd. Ord. 1061, 4-20-2010)
9-3-7: EXPLOSIVES:
   A.   Gunpowder, Other Explosives: It shall be unlawful to store any
gunpowder or black powder, dynamite or other explosives, in excess of five (5)
pounds in buildings unless such explosive is stored in a separate fireproof
building. It shall be unlawful to smoke or permit smoking in any place where
such explosives are stored or to permit any open fire in any room where such
explosives are stored. (1928 Code §250)
   B.   Nitroglycerin: It shall be unlawful to store any nitroglycerin or the
explosive commonly known as TNT except for medicinal purposes in any place in
the village. (1928 Code §251)
   C.   Flammable Liquids: It shall be unlawful to store any petroleum,
kerosene, gasoline, coal oil or any of their products in excess of fifteen (15)
gallons in any place in the village unless in underground containers. All tanks
or containers used for the storage of such liquids must be properly constructed
and kept free from leaks. It shall be unlawful to smoke or permit an open flame
in any room or enclosure used for the storing of such flammable liquids. (1928
Code §252)
   D.   Penalty: Any person convicted of a violation of any section or
provision of this chapter shall be punished by a fine as established in section
1-4-1 of this code for any one offense. Each day such violation is committed or
permitted to continue shall constitute a separate offense and shall be
punishable as such hereunder. (Ord. 791, 8-5-2003; amd. Ord. 1061, 4-20-2010)
9-3-8: COMBUSTIBLE REFUSE; FIRES:
   A.   Combustible Refuse: It shall be unlawful to permit or to store any
combustible refuse in such a way as to create a fire hazard, or to store or
throw any refuse of any kind onto any street, alley or other public place.
(1928 Code §239)
   B.   Fires: It shall be unlawful to build or light any bonfire so close to
any building or other structure as to endanger such building or structure; or
on any pavement of a public street or sidewalk. (1928 Code §243)
9-3-9: FALSE ALARMS:
   A.   Fees: In the event that more than three (3) alarms are received by the
village police department from a residence or business in the village during a
one year period, which are determined by the chief of police to be due to human
error, mechanical difficulties or in any way a false alarm, then and in that
event, such owner of a residence or business shall pay a fee in the amount of
fifty dollars ($50.00) for the fourth such false alarm during any such one year
period, and for each additional false alarm thereafter in any such one year
period, an additional fee of seventy five dollars ($75.00) per false alarm
shall be paid to the village. (Ord. 678, 10-20-1998; amd. Ord. 791, 8-5-2003)
   B.   Payment: All fees provided for by this section shall be paid within
thirty (30) days from the date a bill therefor is deposited in the regular U.S.
mail with postage fully prepaid and addressed to the address of the residence
or business. (Ord. 678, 10-20-1998)
9-3-10: WHEELED VEHICLES PROHIBITED:
   A.   On Private Property: It shall be unlawful and a violation of this
section to ride or otherwise use in any way skateboards, rollerblades, roller
skates, scooters, motorized scooters, and similar wheeled vehicles on private
commercial property without the consent of the property owner.
   B.   Parental Responsibility: Pursuant to 740 Illinois Compiled Statutes
115/1 et seq., the parent or legal guardian of a minor defendant who resides
with such parent or legal guardian shall be liable for any fine or condition of
restitution or reparation imposed by a court upon a minor for actual damages
for wilful or malicious acts of such minor which cause injury to a person or
property, provided, that such minor has not paid such fine or made such
restitution or reparation within the time ordered by the court, and further
provided that such parent or legal guardian has been served with a summons or
notice to appear in the original cause and all proceedings thereafter as
provided by law. (Ord. 781, 1-7-2003)
9-3-11: GAMBLING:
   A.   Definitions: For the purposes of this chapter the following words and
phrases shall have the following meanings ascribed to them respectively.
 
          Any clock, tape machine, slot machine, or other machines or device for the
          reception of money or other thing of value on chance or skill, or upon the
          action of which money or other thing of value is staked, hazarded, bet, won,
          or lost; or any mechanism, furniture, fixture, equipment, or other device
GAMBLING  designed primarily for use in a gambling place. A GAMBLING DEVICE does not
DEVICE:   include the following:
             1.   Coin-in-the-slot operated mechanical devices.
             2.   Vending machines.
             3.   Crane games.
             4.   Redemption machines.
             5.   Video game terminals.
          An interactive computer service or system or an information service, system,
          or access software provided that provides or enables computer access by
          multiple users to a computer server, including but not limited to an
          information service, system, or access software provider that provides access
INTERNET: to a network system commonly known as the internet or any comparable system or
          service, and also including but not limited to a world-wide web page,
          newsgroup, message board, mailing list, or chat area on any interactive
          computer service or system or other online service. ACCESS and COMPUTER have
          the meanings ascribed to them in ILCS Ch. 720, Act 5, § 16D-2.
          Any scheme or procedure whereby one or more prizes are distributed by chance
          among persons who have paid or promised consideration for a chance to win such
          prizes, whether such scheme or procedure is called a lottery, raffle, gift,
          sale, or some other name, excluding savings promotion raffles authorized under
LOTTERY:  § 5g of the Illinois Banking Act (ILCS Ch. 205, Act 5, § 5g), § 7008 of the
          Illinois Bank Savings Act (ILCS Ch. 205, Act 205, § 7008), § 42.7 of the
          Illinois Credit Union Act (ILCS Ch. 205, Act 305, § 42.7), section 5136B of
          the National Bank Act (12 U.S.C. 25a), or section 4 of the Home Owners' Loan
          Act (12 U.S.C. 1463).
          Any scheme or procedure whereby a person promises or guarantees by any
POLICY    instrument, bill, certificate, writing, token, or other device that any
GAME:     particular number, character, ticket, or certificate shall in the event of any
          contingency in the nature of a lottery entitle the purchaser or holder to
          receive money, property, or evidence of debt.
 
   B.   Gambling:
      1.   A person commits gambling when, within the corporate limits of the
village, he or she:
         a.   Knowingly plays a game of chance or skill for money or other
thing of value, unless excepted in division (b);
         b.   Knowingly makes a wager upon the result of any game, contest, or
any political nomination, appointment, or election;
         c.   Knowingly operates, keeps, owns, uses, purchases, exhibits,
rents, sells, bargains for the sale or lease of, manufactures, or distributes
any gambling device;
         d.   Contracts to have or give himself or herself or another the
option to buy or sell, or contracts to buy or sell, at a future time, any grain
or other commodity whatsoever, or any stock or security of any company, as
described in ILCS Ch. 720, Act 5, § 28-1(a)(4);
         e.   Knowingly owns or possesses any book, instrument, or apparatus by
means of which bets or wagers have been, or are, recorded or registered, or
knowingly possesses any money which he or she has received in the courses of a
bet or wager;
         f.   Knowingly sells pools upon the result of any game or contest of
skill or chance, political nomination, appointment, or election;
         g.   Knowingly sets up or promotes any lottery or sells, offers to
sell, or transfers any ticket or share for any lottery;
         h.   Knowingly sets up or promotes any policy game or sells, offers to
sell, or knowingly possesses or transfers any policy ticket, slip, record,
document, or other similar device;
         i.   Knowingly drafts, prints, or publishes any lottery ticket or
share, or any policy ticket, slip, record, document or similar device, except
for such activity related to lotteries, bingo games, and raffles authorized by
and conducted in accordance with the laws of Illinois or any other state or
foreign government;
         j.   Knowingly advertises any lottery or policy game, except for such
activity related to lotteries, bingo games, and raffles authorized by and
conducted in accordance with the laws of Illinois or any other state;
         k.   Knowingly transmits information as to wagers, betting odds, or
changes in betting odds by telephone, telegraph, radio, semaphore, or similar
means; or knowingly installs or maintains equipment for the transmission or
receipt of such information; except that nothing in this division (a)(11)
prohibits transmission or receipt of such information for use in news reporting
of sporting events or contests; or
         l.   Knowingly establishes, maintains, or operates an internet site
that permits a person to play a game of chance or skill for money or other
thing of value by means of the internet or to make a wager upon the result of
any game, contest, political nomination, appointment, or election by means of
the internet. This division (a)(12) does not apply to activities referenced in
division (b)(6) below.
      2.   Participants in any of the following activities shall not be
convicted of gambling:
         a.   Agreements to compensate for loss caused by the happening of
chance including without limitation contracts of indemnity or guaranty and life
or health or accident insurance;
         b.   Offers of prizes, awards, or compensation to the actual
contestants in any bona fide contest for the determination of skill, speed,
strength, or endurance or to the owners of animals or vehicles entered in such
contest;
         c.   Pari-mutuel betting as authorized by the law of this state;
         d.   Manufacture of gambling devices, including the acquisition of
essential parts therefor and the assembly thereof, for transportation in
interstate or foreign commerce to any place outside this state when such
transportation is not prohibited by any applicable federal law or the
manufacture, distribution, or possession of video gaming terminals, as defined
in the Video Gaming Act (ILCS Ch. 239, Act 40), by manufacturers, distributors,
and terminal operators licensed to do so under the Video Gaming Act;
         e.   The game commonly known as "bingo," when conducted in accordance
with ILCS Ch. 230, Act 25, §§ 1 et seq.;
         f.   (1)   Lotteries when conducted by the state in accordance with
ILCS Ch. 20, Act 1605, §§ 1 et seq. This exemption includes any activity
conducted by the Department of Revenue to sell lottery tickets pursuant to the
provisions of the Illinois Lottery Law and its rules;
            (2)   The purchase of lottery tickets through the internet for a
lottery conducted by the state under the program established in ILCS Ch. 20,
Act 1605, § 7.12;
         g.   Possession of an antique slot machine that is neither used nor
intended to be used in the operation or promotion of any unlawful gambling
activity or enterprise. For the purpose of this division, an ANTIQUE SLOT
MACHINE is one manufactured 25 years ago or earlier;
         h.   Raffles and Poker Runs when conducted in accordance with ILCS Ch.
230, Act 15, §§ 1 et seq.;
         i.   The purchase of raffle chances for a raffle conducted in
accordance with the Raffles and Poker Runs Act.
         j.   Charitable games when conducted in accordance with ILCS Ch. 230,
Act 30, §§ 1 et seq.; and
         k.   Pull tabs and jar games when conducted under ILCS Ch. 230, Act
20, §§ 1 et seq.;
         l.   Gambling games authorized under ILCS Ch. 230, Act 10, §§ 1 et
seq.;
         m.   Video gaming terminal games at a licensed establishment, licensed
large truck stop establishment, licensed fraternal establishment, or licensed
veterans establishment when conducted in accordance with the Video Gaming Act;
         n.   Games of skill or chance where money or other things of value can
be won but no payment or purchase is required to participate.
         o.   Savings promotion raffles authorized under § 5g of the Illinois
Banking Act (ILCS Ch. 205, Act 5, § 5g), § 7008 of the Illinois Bank Savings
Act (ILCS Ch. 205, Act 205, § 7008), § 42.7 of the Illinois Credit Union Act
(ILCS Ch. 205, Act 305, § 42.7), section 5136B of the National Bank Act (12
U.S.C. 25a), or section 4 of the Home Owners' Loan Act (12 U.S.C. 1463).
      3.   Circumstantial evidence. In prosecutions under division (a) of this
section, circumstantial evidence shall have the same validity and weight as in
any criminal prosecution.
   C.   Keeping a Gambling Place:
      1.   For purposes of this section, a GAMBLING PLACE is any real estate,
vehicle, boat, or any other property whatsoever used for the purposes of
gambling other than gambling conducted in the manner authorized by the Video
Gaming Act (ILCS Ch. 239, Act 40). No person shall knowingly permit any
premises or property owned or occupied by him or her or under his or her
control to be used as a gambling place.
      2.   When any premises is determined by the circuit court to be a
gambling place:
         a.   The premises is hereby declared to be a public nuisance and may
be proceeded against as such; and
         b.   The premises of any person who knowingly permits thereon a
violation of any section of this chapter shall be held liable for and may be
sold to pay any unsatisfied judgment that may be recovered and any unsatisfied
fine that may be levied under any section of this chapter.
   D.   Seizure of Gambling Devices and Gambling Funds:
      1.   Every device designed for gambling which is incapable of lawful use
or every device used unlawfully for gambling shall be considered a gambling
device and shall be subject to seizure, confiscation, and destruction by
village authorities. As used in this section, a GAMBLING DEVICE includes any
slot machine and includes any machine or device constructed for the reception
of money or other thing of value and so constructed as to return or cause
someone to return on chance to the player thereof money, property, or a right
to receive money or property. With the exception of any device designed for
gambling which is incapable of lawful use, no gambling device shall be
forfeited or destroyed unless an individual with a property interest in the
device knows of the unlawful use thereof.
      2.   Every gambling device shall be seized and forfeited as contraband to
the county wherein the seizure occurs. Any money or other thing of value
integrally related to acts of gambling shall be seized and forfeited as
contraband to the county wherein the seizure occurs.
   E.   Video Gaming:
      1.   Definitions: For purposes of this subsection E, the following words
and phrases shall have the following meanings ascribed to them respectively:
 
                        Any retail establishment licensed under this section
LICENSED ESTABLISHMENT: where alcoholic liquor is drawn, poured, mixed, or
                        otherwise served for use or consumption on the
                        premises.
                        The person or persons, general or limited partnership,
                        corporation, trust, land trust, joint venturer, or
LICENSEE:               limited liability company holding a video gaming
                        license to operate video gaming terminals under the
                        provisions of this section.
                        An individual, partnership, corporation or limited
                        liability company that is licensed under the Illinois
                        Video Gaming Act that owns, services, and maintains
TERMINAL OPERATOR:      video gaming terminals for placement in licensed
                        establishments, licensed truck stop establishments,
                        licensed fraternal establishments or licensed veterans
                        establishments.
VIDEO GAMING:           The ownership, placement, maintenance, operation or use
                        of a video gaming terminal.
                        Any licensed electronic video game machine offered for
VIDEO GAMING TERMINAL:  play by licensed establishments operated in accordance
                        with the Illinois Video Gaming Act and the provisions
                        of this Code.
 
      2.   Video Gaming License Required: Video gaming terminals as authorized
by the state pursuant to the Illinois Video Gaming Act (230 ILCS 40/1 et seq.)
are permitted within the Village at licensed liquor establishments in the
village, provided that:
         a.   No licensed establishment shall be permitted to operate any video
gaming terminals in the village unless the establishment also has obtained a
video gaming license from the village and paid the annual license fee; and
         b.   Every licensee shall strictly comply with all of the conditions,
rules and regulations imposed by the state and by the village.
      3.   Video Gaming License Fee: The annual video gaming license fee shall
be one hundred fifty dollars ($150.00) per an establishment. The annual fee
shall be split equally between the licensed establishment and the terminal
operator.
      4.   Liquor License Required: Each establishment that desires to operate
video gaming terminals within the village must possess a valid local liquor
license issued by the village and a state liquor license issued by the Illinois
Liquor Control Commission.
      5.   Application For License: Applications for a video gaming license
shall be made to and filed with the village clerk, shall be in writing, signed
by the applicant, if an individual, or a duly authorized agent thereof if a
corporation, verified by oath or affidavit. Such application shall be presented
not less than thirty (30) days prior to the date issuance is desired and shall
include but is not limited to the following information:
         a.   The name, address and date of birth of the owner of the video
gaming terminal and of the owner or operator of the establishment where the
video gaming terminal shall be located;
         b.   Prior convictions of the owner of the video gaming terminal and
the owner or operator of the establishment, if any;
         c.   The number of video gaming terminals to be installed on the
premises, which number may not exceed six (6);
         d.   The place where the video gaming terminal is to be placed or
operated and the business conducted at that place;
         e.   A description of the video gaming terminal to be covered by the
license;
         f.   A copy of the applicant’s Video Gaming Location License and the
Terminal Operator’s Video Gaming License issued by the Illinois Gaming Board.
         g.   A copy of the applicant’s Retailer’s Liquor License issued by the
Illinois Liquor Control Commission; and
         h.   A statement that the applicant agrees to abide by all federal and
state laws and regulations and all village ordinances.
      6.   Issuance Of License: Upon the filing of an application for a new
video gaming license, the village president shall review the application, the
applicant’s credentials, the video gaming requirements, and any other relevant
information to determine if the video gaming license shall be granted., If the
village president approves an application, the applicant shall be issued a
license, upon the payment in advance of the required fee, which license shall
be in writing over the name and under the seal of the village and executed by
the village president and attested by the village clerk. The village president
cannot approve an application unless the number of video gaming licenses
authorized under section
9-3-11(E)(7) of the village code is greater than the number of such licenses
issued and outstanding.
      7.   Number Of Licenses Issued: There shall be issued in the village no
more than seven (7) video gaming licenses to be in effect at any one time. In
the event that any license issued pursuant to this section (1) is surrendered
or abandoned by the licensee for any reason; (2) is not renewed by the licensee
as required by this section, or (3) is revoked by village president for cause
pursuant to this section, such license shall cease to exist, the number of
available licenses, as set forth above, shall be immediately and automatically
deemed and construed to have been reduced by one without further action by the
corporate authorities of the village, and said license shall not be available
to be re-issued unless and until the number of available licenses is again
increased by an ordinance of the corporate authorities of the village.
      8.   Term: All video gaming licenses issued pursuant to this section
shall be valid from the date of issuance, or in the case of renewals, from
January 1 through the business night of December 31, including the morning
hours of January 1. A new or renewed video gaming license will be required in
order for the licensed establishment to commence operations on January 1 of the
New Year.
      9.   Renewal: Any licensee may apply for renewal of their video gaming
licenses at the expiration thereof, provided that the licensee is then
qualified to receive a license and the premises for which such renewal license
is sought are suitable for such purpose and are in compliance with all
applicable ordinances of the village, the Illinois Video Gaming Act and all
related rules, regulations and restrictions promulgated by the Illinois Gaming
Board. The renewal privilege herein provided for shall not be construed as a
contract or as any vested interest or right in any video gaming license issued
by the village which shall in any case prevent the village president from
decreasing the number of licenses to be issued within the village.
      10.   Restrictions Of Licenses And Location:
         a.   No license shall be issued to a licensed establishment that is
located within one hundred feet (100') of a school or a place of worship under
the Religious Corporation Act.
         b.   Video gaming terminals must be located in an area restricted to
persons over twenty-one (21) years of age and the entrance to which must be
within the view of at least one employee, who is over twenty-one (21) years of
age.
         c.   No licensee shall cause or permit any person under the age of
twenty-one (21) years to use or play a video gaming terminal.
         d.   No video gaming terminal may be operated or played except during
the hours of sale for the consumption of alcoholic beverages at the licensed
establishment.
         e.   There shall be no more than six (6) video gaming terminals
located and operated in any licensed establishment.
      11.   Suspension Or Revocation:
         a.   Any licensee who violates, disobeys, omits, neglects or refuses
to comply with any provision of this section, the Village Code, or the
provisions of the Illinois Video Gaming Act (230 ILCS 40/1 et seq.) and the
rules, regulations, and restrictions promulgated under said Act by the Illinois
State Gaming Board, may be subject to revocation or suspension of their video
gaming license after a public hearing before the village president or his
designee.
         b.   Notice Required. Whenever this section requires a hearing
concerning a video gaming license, the licensee shall be afforded reasonable
notice of such hearing. The notice shall state:
            (1)   The time, place, and nature of the charge.
            (2)   The date when the appearance of the licensee is required.
            (3)   A reference to the particular sections of the ordinance
involved.
            (4)   A statement informing the licensee of their ability to
respond by presenting evidence and argument.
         c.   Hearings. A hearing required under this section shall be held in
accordance with the following rules:
            (1)   A hearing shall be set at the initial appearance date or any
continuance thereof and shall be held at a reasonable time, date, and place.
            (2)   No cause shall be heard earlier than ten (10) business days
after receipt by a licensee of the notice required under this section.
            (3)   A licensee may present evidence and argument.
            (4)   The village president may limit, but not prohibit, the
presentation of evidence and argument.
            (5)   An audio recording device shall be present at each hearing
and shall record the testimony and evidence presented. In lieu of an audio
recording a certified court reporter, or certified shorthand reporter, shall be
present at each hearing and shall record the testimony and evidence presented.
         d.   The village president may grant a continuance if extenuating and
unusual circumstances are presented in support of the request for continuance.
         e.   After a hearing, the village president may revoke or suspend any
video gaming license issued if it is determined that the licensee has violated
any of the provisions of this section, the Village Code, or the provisions of
the Illinois Video Gaming Act (230 ILCS 40/1 et seq.) and the regulations
promulgated under said Act by the Illinois State Gaming Board.
         f.   Any licensed establishment that has its state or local liquor
license suspended or revoked or has its state video gaming licenses suspended
or revoked, shall automatically, without a hearing, have its video gaming
license issued pursuant to this section, revoked or suspended for the duration
for which its state or local liquor licenses and/or state video gaming license
is revoked or suspended, as the case may be.
      12.   Penalty: In addition to all other civil remedies available to
village, including but not limited to suspension or revocation of any video
gaming license or suspension or revocation of the establishment’s local liquor
license, any person who violates disobeys, omits, neglects or refuses to comply
with any provision of this section shall be subject to the fines set forth in
section
1-4-1 of the village code for each such offense. Each day such violation is
committed or permitted shall constitute a separate offense and shall be
punishable as such hereunder. All violations of this section are hereby
determined to be a nuisance which may be abated or enjoined by the village. The
village reserves the right to suspend or revoke a licensed establishment’s
business license issued by the village for the operation of their business if
the licensed establishment is in violation of this section and fails to bring
the licensed establishment into compliance with this section. In the event the
village exercises their right to suspend or revoke a licensed establishment’s
business license, the licensee shall be entitled to a hearing and afforded
reasonable notice of such hearing as provided for under Section
9-3-11(E)(11) of the village code before their business license is suspended or
revoked.
   13.   Prohibition: To the extent permitted by the Acts, the village reserves
the right to prohibit video gaming within the corporate limits of the village,
by ordinance.
(Ord. 1367-21, 10-5-2021; amd. Ord. 1416-22, 12-6-2022; Ord. 1472-72, 8-27-
2024)
9-3-12: SWEEPSTAKES KIOSKS PROHIBITED:
   A.   Definitions: For purposes of this section, the following terms shall be
defined as follows:
 
                              A mechanically, electrically or electronically
                              operated machine or device, that is owned, leased
                              or otherwise possessed by a sweepstakes sponsor
                              or promoter, or any of the sweepstakes sponsor's
ELECTRONIC MACHINE OR DEVICE: or promoter's partners, affiliates, subsidiaries
                              or contractors, that is intended to be used by a
                              sweepstakes entrant, that uses energy, and that
                              is capable of displaying information on a screen
                              or other mechanism.
                              The act or process by which a person becomes
ENTER or ENTRY:               eligible to receive any prize offered in a
                              sweepstakes.
                              The visual information capable of being seen by a
                              sweepstakes entrant that takes the form of actual
                              game play or simulated game play of games,
                              including, but not limited to, a poker game or
                              any other kind of playing card game; a bingo
                              game; a craps game; a keno game; a lotto game; an
                              eight-liner game; a pot-of-gold game; a game
ENTERTAINING DISPLAY:         based on or involving the random or chance
                              matching of different pictures, words, numbers or
                              symbols not dependent on the skill or dexterity
                              of the player; a casino or gambling game; and any
                              other video game the outcome of which is not in
                              whole or in part dependent on the skill or
                              dexterity of the player that is played in the
                              course of revealing a prize as a result of an
                              entry into a sweepstakes.
                              Any gift, award, gratuity, good, service, credit,
                              or anything else of value, which may be
PRIZE:                        transferred to a person, whether possession of
                              the prize is actually transferred, or placed on
                              an account or other record as evidence of the
                              intent to transfer the prize.
                              Any game, advertising scheme or plan, or other
                              promotion, which, with or without payment of any
SWEEPSTAKES:                  consideration, a person may enter to win or
                              become eligible to receive any prize, the
                              determination of which is based upon an element
                              of chance.
 
   B.   Sweepstakes prohibited. It shall be unlawful for any person to operate,
or place into operation, an electronic machine or device for the following
purposes:
      1.   To conduct a sweepstakes through the use of an entertainment
display, including the entry process or the reveal of a prize; or
      2.   To promote a sweepstakes that is conducted through the use of an
entertainment display, including the entry process or the reveal of a prize.
   C.   Video gaming terminals-Not prohibited. Nothing contained in this
section shall be construed as prohibiting duly licensed video gaming terminals
as authorized by Title 9, Chapter 3,
Section 11 of this Code.
   D.   Violation-Penalty. Any person violating any provision of any section or
provision of this section shall be fined not less than two hundred and fifty
dollars ($250.00) nor more than seven hundred and fifty dollars ($750.00) for
each offense. Each machine or device found to be in violation, and each day
during or on which a violation occurs or continues, shall constitute a separate
and distinct offense.
(Ord. 1368-21, 10-19-2021)
CHAPTER 4
MINORS
SECTION:
9-4-1: Curfew
9-4-2: Regulation Of Smoking Materials
9-4-1: CURFEW:
   A.   Hours: No minor under the age of seventeen (17) years who has not been
emancipated by court order shall be in and upon the streets of the village or
in any public place of public entertainment in the village between the hours of
ten o'clock (10:00) P.M. and five o'clock (5:00) A.M.
   B.   Defenses: It is a defense to a violation under subsection A of this
section that the minor engaged in the unlawful conduct while:
      1.   Accompanied by and supervised by the minor's parent, legal guardian
or other responsible companion at least eighteen (18) years of age approved by
a parent or legal guardian;
      2.   On the sidewalk abutting the minor's residence or on a sidewalk
abutting the residence of the minor's next door neighbor, if the neighbor did
not complain to the police department about the minor's presence;
      3.   In a motor vehicle, train, or bus involved in interstate travel;
      4.   Married or has been married; or
      5.   Participating in, going to, or returning from, without any detour or
stop:
         a.   Employment which the laws of this state authorize a person less
than seventeen (17) years of age to perform;
         b.   A school recreational activity;
         c.   A religious event;
         d.   An emergency involving the protection of a person or property
from an imminent threat of serious bodily injury, loss of life, or substantial
damage, the resulting state calling for immediate action, and includes, but is
not limited to, a fire, a natural disaster, or automobile accident;
         e.   An activity involving the exercise of the minor's rights
protected under the first amendment to the United States constitution or
article 1, sections 3, 4 and 5 of the constitution of the state of Illinois, or
both;
         f.   An activity conducted by a nonprofit or governmental entity that
provides recreation, education, training, or other care under the supervision
of one or more adults; or
         g.   An errand at the direction of the minor's parent or guardian.
(Ord. 867, 8-2-2005)
   C.   Violation: A citation for violation of subsection A of this section may
be issued by a police officer if he reasonably believes that a violation has
occurred only after investigation and, based on any response and other
circumstances, none of the defenses enumerated in subsection B of this section
apply. In that instance, the minor shall be taken into custody by the police
officer and held in custody until the parent or guardian of said minor appears
and removes him. Any minor violating this section shall be fined as established
in section
1-4-1 of this code. (Ord. 867, 8-2-2005; amd. Ord. 1061, 4-20-2010)
   D.   Place Of Public Entertainment: It shall be unlawful for any place of
public entertainment to permit minors upon their premises in violation of this
section.
The owner of any place of public entertainment violating this subsection shall
be fined not more than as provided in section 1-4-1 of this code for each
offense and shall further be subject to revocation of license therefor. (Ord.
867, 8-2-2005)
9-4-2: REGULATION OF SMOKING MATERIALS:
   A.   Definitions: For the purposes of this section, the following words and
phrases shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them:
   MINOR: A person who has not yet attained the age of eighteen (18) years of
age.
   PERSON: Any individual, firm, partnership, corporation, company,
association, joint venture or any employee or agent thereof.
   SMOKING MATERIALS: Cigarette papers, pipes, holders of smoking materials of
all types, cigarette rolling machines, and other items designed primarily for
the smoking or ingestion of tobacco products; or of substances made illegal
under any ordinance or of substances whose sale, gift, barter, or exchange is
made unlawful under this section. Any substance containing either smoking herbs
or tobacco leaf, including, but not limited to, cigarettes, cigars, pipe
tobacco, loose tobacco, snuff, chewing tobacco or dipping tobacco.
   B.   Prohibited Sales, Delivery:
      1.   It shall be unlawful for any person to sell, offer for sale, give
away or deliver smoking materials to any person under the age of eighteen (18)
years.
      2.   If any person contemplating the sale or furnishing of smoking
materials believes or has reason to believe that a sale or delivery of smoking
materials is prohibited because of the nonage of the prospective recipient, he
shall, before making such sale or delivery, demand presentation of some form of
positive identification, containing proof of age, issued by a public officer in
the performance of his official duties.
   C.   Warning Signs: Every person engaged in the business of selling smoking
materials shall at all times display signs informing the public of the age
restrictions provided for herein. The sign shall be posted by every licensee at
or near every display of smoking materials and on or upon every vending machine
which offers smoking materials for sale. Each such sign shall be plainly
visible and shall state:
THE SALE OF SMOKING MATERIALS TO PERSONS UNDER EIGHTEEN YEARS OF AGE IS
PROHIBITED BY LAW
The text of such signs shall be in red letters on a white background, said
letters to be at least one inch (1") high.
   D.   Purchase By Minors Prohibited: It shall be unlawful for any person
under the age of eighteen (18) years to purchase smoking materials, or to
misrepresent their identity or age, or to use any false or altered
identification for the purpose of purchasing smoking materials. No person shall
transfer, alter or deface such an identification card; use the identification
card of another; carry or use a false or forged identification card; or obtain
an identification card by means of false information.
   E.   Possession By Minors Prohibited: It shall be unlawful for any person
under the age of eighteen (18) years to possess any smoking materials;
provided, that the possession by a person under the age of eighteen (18) years
under the direct supervision of the parent or guardian of such person in the
privacy of the parent's or guardian's home shall not be prohibited.
   F.   Certain Free Distributions Prohibited: It shall be unlawful for any
person in the business of selling or otherwise distributing, promoting or
advertising smoking materials, or any employee or agent of any such person, in
the course of such person's business, to distribute, give away or deliver
smoking materials free of charge to any person on any right of way, park,
playground or other property owned by the village, any school district, any
park district or any public library.
   G.   Responsibility For Agents And Employees: Every act or omission of
whatsoever nature, constituting a violation of any of the provisions of this
section by any officer, director, manager or other agent or employee of any
person possessing a village business license shall be deemed and held to be the
act of such licensee; and such licensee shall be punishable in the same manner
as if such act or omission had been done or omitted by the licensee personally.
   H.   Revocation Of Licenses: Violation of this section shall constitute
grounds for revocation and/or suspension of any and all village licenses issued
to the persons/premises where such violations occur. Such revocation or
suspension shall be as provided for in the ordinance granting such license.
(Ord. 660, 10-7-1997)
   I.   Penalty: Any person convicted of a violation of any section or
provision of this chapter shall be punished by a fine as established in section
1-4-1 of this code for any one offense. (Ord. 791, 8-5-2003; amd. Ord. 1061, 4-
20-2010)
CHAPTER 5
PUBLIC INDECENCY
SECTION:
9-5-1: Interpretation
9-5-2: Definitions
9-5-3: Offense Committed
9-5-4: Penalty
9-5-1: INTERPRETATION:
   A.   This Chapter is patterned after Indiana Public Indecency Statute upheld
by the United States Supreme Court in Barnes v. Glen Theatre, Inc., 501 U.S.
560, 111 S.Ct. 2456 (1991). It is the intent of the Village that this Chapter
be interpreted in the same manner as said statute.
   B.   It is the intent of the Village that the definition of "public place"
set forth above shall be interpreted to be no more broad than the definition of
public place set forth in 720 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/11-9 as upheld by
the Illinois Supreme Court in People v. Garrison, 82 Ill.2d 444, 412 N.E.2d 483
(1980). (Ord. 703, 8-3-1999)
9-5-2: DEFINITIONS:
   NUDITY: The showing of the human male or female genitals, pubic area, female
breast with less than a full opaque covering of any part of the nipple, the
covered male genitals in a discernably turgid state or that portion of the
buttocks which would be covered by a properly worn "thong" type bikini bottom.
   PUBLIC PLACE: Any location frequented by the public, or where the public is
present or likely to be present, or where a person may reasonably be expected
to be observed by members of the public. Public places include, but are not
limited to, streets, sidewalks, parks, beaches, business and commercial
establishments, (whether for profit or not-for-profit and whether open to the
public at large or where entrance is limited by a cover charge or membership
requirement), hotels, motels, restaurants, night clubs, country clubs,
cabarets, and meeting facilities utilized by religious, social, fraternal or
similar organizations. Premises used solely as a private residence, whether
permanent or temporary in nature, shall not be deemed a public place. Public
place shall not include enclosed single sex public restrooms, enclosed single
sex functional showers, locker and/or dressing room facilities, enclosed motel
rooms and hotel rooms designed and intended for sleeping accommodations,
doctor's offices, churches, synagogues or similar places when used for
circumcisions, baptisms or similar ceremonies, portions of hospitals and
similar places in which nudity or exposure is necessarily and customarily
expected outside of the home; nor shall it include a person appearing in a
state of nudity as a model in a class operated by: a) a proprietary school
licensed by the State; a college, junior college or university supported
entirely or partly by taxation; or b) a private college or university which
maintains and operates educational programs in which credits are transferable
to a college, junior college or university supported entirely or partly by
taxation or an accredited private college. (Ord. 703, 8-3-1999)
9-5-3: OFFENSE COMMITTED:
   A.   Public Indecency: A person commits the offense of public indecency if
they knowingly or intentionally, in a public place: 1) engage in sexual
intercourse; 2) engage in deviate sexual conduct; 3) appear in a state of
nudity; or 4) fondles the genitals of himself/herself or another person.
   B.   Accessory: A person who knowingly or intentionally encourages or
facilitates another person's commission of the offense of public indecency
shall be deemed to have committed the offense itself.
   C.   Public Nuisance: A club, restaurant, theater or other place where
violations of this Chapter occur shall be deemed a public nuisance which shall
be subject to abatement. (Ord. 703, 8-3-1999)
9-5-4: PENALTY:
A person convicted of the offense of public indecency shall be fined seven
hundred fifty dollars ($750.00) for each offense and may be enjoined from
continuing the conduct determined to be public indecency. (Ord. 703, 8-3-1999)
CHAPTER 6
CANNABIS AND DRUG PARAPHERNALIA
SECTION:
9-6-1: Definitions
9-6-2: Possession
9-6-3: Exempted Items; Determination
9-6-4: Penalty
9-6-1: DEFINITIONS:
   CANNABIS: Shall have the same meaning ascribed to it in the Illinois
Cannabis Control Act (720 ILCS 550/3), as amended from time to time.
   CONTROLLED SUBSTANCE: Shall have the meaning ascribed to it in the Illinois
Controlled Substances Act (720 ILCS 570/100, et seq.), as amended from time to
time.
   DRUG PARAPHERNALIA: All equipment, products and materials of any kind, other
than methamphetamine manufacturing materials as defined in the Methamphetamine
Control and Community Protection Act (720 ILCS 646/1, et seq.), as amended,
which are peculiar to and marketed for the use, or are used, in planting,
propagating, cultivating, growing, harvesting, manufacturing, compounding,
converting, producing, processing, preparing, testing, analyzing, packaging,
repackaging, storing, containing, concealing, injecting, ingesting, inhaling,
or otherwise introducing into the human body cannabis or any controlled
substance in violation of the "cannabis control act" (720 ILCS 550/1, et seq.),
as amended. It includes, but is not limited to:
   A.   Kits peculiar to and marketed for the use in manufacturing,
compounding, converting, producing, processing or preparing cannabis;
   B.   Isomerization devices peculiar to and marketed for use in increasing
the potency of any species of plant which is cannabis;
   C.   Testing equipment peculiar to and marketed for private home use in
identifying or analyzing the strength, effectiveness or purity of cannabis;
   D.   Diluents and adulterants peculiar to and marketed for cutting cannabis
or a controlled substance by private persons;
   E.   Objects peculiar to and marketed for use in ingesting, inhaling, or
otherwise introducing cannabis, cocaine, hashish, or hashish oil into the human
body including, where applicable, the following items:
      1.   Water pipes;
      2.   Carburetion tubes and devices;
      3.   Smoking and carburetion masks;
      4.   Miniature cocaine spoons and cocaine vials;
      5.   Carburetor pipes;
      6.   Electric pipes;
      7.   Air driven pipes;
      8.   Chillums;
      9.   Bongs;
      10.   Ice pipes or chillers;
   F.   Any item whose purpose, as announced or described by the seller, is for
use in violation of this chapter.(Ord. 762, 5-21-2002; amd. Ord. 1319-20, 2-4-
2020)
9-6-2: POSSESSION:
   A.   Except as provided in the Cannabis Regulation and Tax Act (410 ILCS
705/1-1, et seq.), as amended; the Compassionate Use of Medical Cannabis
Program Act (410 ILCS 130/1, et seq.), as amended; the Illinois Cannabis
Control Act (720 ILCS 550/1, et seq.), as amended; the Industrial Hemp Act (505
ILCS 89/1, et seq.), as amended; or any other state or federal law, as amended,
permitting the purchase, possession, consumption, and/or use of cannabis, it
shall be unlawful for any person to knowingly possess not more than 2.5 grams
of cannabis.
   B.   Except as provided in the Cannabis Regulation and Tax Act (410 ILCS
705/1-1, et seq.), as amended; the Compassionate Use of Medical Cannabis
Program Act (410 ILCS 130/1, et seq.), as amended; the Illinois Cannabis
Control Act (720 ILCS 550/1, et seq.), as amended; the Industrial Hemp Act (505
ILCS 89/1, et seq.), as amended; or any other state or federal law, as amended,
permitting the purchase, possession, consumption, and/or use of cannabis, it
shall be unlawful for any person to knowingly possess more than 2.5 grams but
not more than ten grams (10 g) of cannabis.
   C.   Except as provided in the Cannabis Regulation and Tax Act (410 ILCS
705/1-1, et seq.), as amended; the Compassionate Use of Medical Cannabis
Program Act (410 ILCS 130/1, et seq.), as amended; the Illinois Cannabis
Control Act (720 ILCS 550/1, et seq.), as amended; the Industrial Hemp Act (505
ILCS 89/1, et seq.), as amended; or any other state or federal law, as amended,
permitting the purchase, possession, consumption, and/or use of cannabis, it
shall be unlawful for any person to knowingly possess an item of drug
paraphernalia with the intent to use it in ingesting, inhaling, or otherwise
introducing cannabis or any controlled substance into the human body, or in
preparing cannabis or any controlled substance for that use. (Ord. 936, 2-6-
2007; amd. Ord. 1319-20, 2-4-2020)
9-6-3: EXEMPTED ITEMS; DETERMINATION:
This chapter shall not apply to:
   A.   Items marketed for use in the preparation, compounding, packaging,
labeling, or other use of cannabis as an incident to lawful research, teaching,
or chemical analysis and not for sale; or
   B.   Items marketed for, or historically and customarily used in connection
with, the planting, propagating, cultivating, growing, harvesting,
manufacturing, compounding, converting, producing, processing, preparing,
testing, analyzing, packaging, repackaging, storing, containing, concealing,
injecting, ingesting, or inhaling of tobacco or any other lawful substance.
   C.   Items excepted under this subsection include, but are not limited to,
garden hoes, rakes, sickles, baggies, tobacco pipes, and cigarette rolling
papers.
   D.   Items listed in section (b) of the Illinois cannabis control act which
are marketed for decorative purposes, when such items have been rendered
completely inoperable or incapable of being used for any illicit purpose
prohibited by this chapter.
   E.   In determining whether or not a particular item is exempt under this
section, the trier of fact should consider, in addition to all other logically
relevant factors, the following:
      1.   The general, usual, customary, and historical use to which the item
involved has been put;
      2.   Expert evidence concerning the ordinary or customary use of the item
and the effect of any peculiarity in the design or engineering of the device
upon its functioning;
      3.   Any written instructions accompanying the delivery of the item
concerning the purposes or uses to which the item can or may be put;
      4.   Any oral instructions provided by the seller of the item at the time
and place of sale or commercial delivery;
      5.   Any national or local advertising, concerning the design, purpose or
use of the item involved, and the entire context in which such advertising
occurs;
      6.   The manner, place and circumstances in which the item was displayed
for sale, as well as any item or items displayed for sale or otherwise
exhibited upon the premises where the sale was made;
      7.   Whether the owner or anyone in control of the object is a legitimate
supplier of like or related items to the community, such as a licensed
distributor or dealer of tobacco products;
      8.   The existence and scope of legitimate uses for the object in the
community. (Ord. 762, 5-21-2002)
9-6-4: PENALTY:
   A.   A person convicted of violating subsection
9-6-2A of this chapter shall be fined not less than two hundred fifty dollars
($250.00) for each offense.
   B.   A person convicted of violating subsection
9-6-2B of this chapter shall be fined not less than five hundred dollars
($500.00) for each offense.
   C.   A person convicted of violating subsection
9-6-2C of this chapter shall be fined not less than five hundred dollars
($500.00) for each offense. (Ord. 936, 2-6-2007)
CHAPTER 7
NOISE REGULATIONS
SECTION:
9-7-1: Construction Noise
9-7-1: CONSTRUCTION NOISE:
   A.   Unlawful Noise: It shall be unlawful for any person to make, continue
or cause to be made any loud, unnecessary or unusual noise which annoys,
disturbs, injures or endangers the comfort, repose, health, peace or safety of
others within the village that is caused by noise from construction or
maintenance activities, including, but not limited to, noises such as
hammering, sawing, drilling, excavating, heavy construction vehicles and
equipment operation, pumping, sandblasting, etc., except when said noise occurs
between the hours of seven o'clock (7:00) A.M. and nine o'clock (9:00) P.M.
Monday through Friday, and eight o'clock (8:00) A.M. and nine o'clock (9:00)
P.M., Saturday and Sunday. Roofers may apply to the village administrator or
chief building official for an hour exemption in the morning during the period
from June 1 through August 31. The one hour exemption may be granted if the
forecast is for temperatures to exceed eighty degrees (80°) on the day
following the day an exemption is requested. Noise emanating from construction
projects for the village, or Will County public works projects, as well as
noises from emergency construction, or routine upkeep functions, is exempt from
this provision.
   B.   Method To Determine Violation: The method for determining a violation
shall be based upon a noise being audible at a distance of seventy five feet
(75'), whether originating from a home or business/commercial site. (Ord. 756,
11-20-2001)
   C.   Penalty: A person convicted of a violation of any of the provisions of
this section shall be fined as established in section
1-4-1 of this code for each offense. (Ord. 756, 11-20-2001; amd. Ord. 1061, 4-
20-2010)
CHAPTER 8
PROHIBITIONS ON THE USE, SALE, AND DISTRIBUTION OF NITROUS OXIDE SECTION:
9-8-1: Definitions
9-8-2: Sale And Distribution Prohibited
9-8-3: Usage Prohibited
9-8-4: Penalties For Violations
9-8-1: DEFINITIONS:
For the purposes of this chapter, the following words and phrases shall have
the meanings respectively ascribed to them by this section, as follows:
NITROUS OXIDE: A colorless, non-flammable gas, (N 2O), used as an anesthetic
and in aerosols. Nitrous oxide also refers to any of the following substances:
dinitrogen monoxide, dinitrogen oxide, nitrogen oxide, or laughing gas.
NITROUS OXIDE CARTRIDGE: Any cartridge of compressed nitrous oxide (N2O) tied
to the illegal usage of nitrous oxide. Nitrous oxide cartridge includes but is
not limited to the following definitions:
   A.   Cylinders, balloons, and other containers used, intended for use, or
designed for use in packaging nitrous oxide;
   B.   Containers and other objects used, intended for use, or designed for
use in storing or concealing nitrous oxide; and
   C.   Objects used, intended for use, or designed for use in ingesting,
inhaling, or otherwise introducing nitrous oxide into the human body. (Ord.
1449-24, 2-6-2024)
9-8-2: SALE AND DISTRIBUTION PROHIBITED:
   A.   It shall be unlawful for any person, firm, corporation or association
to sell, offer for sale, distribute or give away any N2O cartridge, balloon or
other container; except that, the foregoing provision shall not apply to
wholesalers and manufacturers who use nitrous oxide (N2O) in the normal course
of their business to manufacture other lawful items.
   B.   It shall be unlawful for any business to sell, offer for sale,
distribute or give away any N2O cartridge, balloon or other container for the
recreational usage of nitrous oxide in a manner inconsistent with the laws of
Illinois. (Ord. 1449-24, 2-6-2024)
9-8-3: USAGE PROHIBITED:
It shall be unlawful for any person to inhale or otherwise introduce into his
or her respiratory system nitrous oxide (N2O), except under the direct care and
supervision of a licensed physician or dentist. (Ord. 1449-24, 2-6-2024)
9-8-4: PENALTIES FOR VIOLATIONS:
   A.   Any person or business who violates this chapter shall be subject to a
maximum fine of five hundred dollars ($500.00).
   B.   Any person or business who violates this chapter for a second or
subsequent time is subject to a revocation of their business license. (Ord.
1449-24, 2-6-2024)
TITLE 10
MOTOR VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC
CHAPTER 1
GENERAL TRAFFIC REGULATIONS
SECTION:
10-1-1: Motor Vehicle Code Adopted
10-1-2: Unlicensed Vehicles And Drivers
10-1-3: Speed Limit
10-1-4: Parking Regulations
10-1-5: Vehicle Equipment And Condition
10-1-6: Penalty (Rep. by Ord. 1044, 1-19-2010)
10-1-7: Noise; Spinning Wheels
10-1-8: Depositing Of Dirt Or Rock On Roadway
10-1-9: Vehicle Load Weights; Exceptions; Permits
10-1-10: Engine Braking
10-1-11: Violations, Penalties
10-1-1: MOTOR VEHICLE CODE ADOPTED:
   A.   625 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/1-100 to 5/20-204, as the same may be
amended from time to time, are hereby adopted and incorporated by reference as
the motor vehicle code traffic ordinance of the Village of Manhattan, Will
County, Illinois. All citations issued pursuant to this section that are to be
prosecuted in the Will County Circuit County by the village prosecutor shall be
written in the name of the village and shall refer to the corresponding
numbered sections of 625 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/1-100 to 5/20-204, and
shall designate the violation as an ordinance violation on the traffic
citation, ticket, complaint, or compliance ticket. The village hereby declares
that the citations issued for the width of vehicles pursuant to section 15-102
of the Illinois vehicle code, the height of vehicles pursuant to section 15-103
of the Illinois vehicle code, and the length of vehicles pursuant to section
15-107 of the Illinois vehicle code may, at the police officer’s discretion, be
written so as to be administratively adjudicated pursuant to the village’s
administrative adjudication system pursuant to title 1, chapter 20 of this
code.
   B.   625 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/3-401(d) and 5/3-815, as the same may
be amended from time to time, are hereby adopted and incorporated by reference
as the registration of second division vehicles ordinance of the Village of
Manhattan, Will County, Illinois. All citations issued pursuant to this section
shall be in the name of the village and shall refer to the corresponding
numbered sections of 625 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/3-401(d) and 5/3-815 and
shall designate the violation as an ordinance violation on the traffic
citation, ticket, complaint, or compliance ticket.
   C.   625 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/15-100 to 5/15-319, as the same may be
amended from time to time, are hereby adopted and incorporated by reference as
the size, weight, and load permits ordinance of the village of Manhattan, Will
County, Illinois. All citations issued pursuant to this section that are to be
prosecuted in the Will County Circuit Court by the village prosecutor shall be
in the name of the village and shall refer to the corresponding numbered
sections of 625 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/15-100 to 5/15-319 and shall
designate the violation as an ordinance violation on the traffic citation,
ticket, complaint, or compliance ticket. The village hereby declares that the
citations issued for the width of vehicles pursuant to section 15-102 of the
Illinois vehicle code, the height of vehicles pursuant to section 15-103 of the
Illinois vehicle code, and the length of vehicles pursuant to section 15-107 of
the Illinois vehicle code may, at the police officer’s discretion, be written
so as to be administratively adjudicated pursuant to the villager’s
administrative adjudication system pursuant to title 1, chapter 20 of this
code.
   D.   Unless as otherwise provided, all fines and penalties for violations
shall be in accordance with the fines and penalties established in 625 Illinois
Compiled Statutes 5/1-100 to 5/20-204. (Ord. 1044, 1-19-2010) The minimum fine
shall be seventy-five dollars ($75.00) unless a higher fine is provided in the
Illinois Vehicle Code.
(Ord. 1044, 1-19-2010; amd. Ord. 1426-23, 4-18-2023; Ord. 1474-24, 9-17-2024)
10-1-2: UNLICENSED VEHICLES AND DRIVERS:
   A.   Unlicensed Vehicles: No person, whether he is licensed or unlicensed by
this state or any other state, shall drive any motor vehicle within the village
limits unless said motor vehicle has been licensed under the traffic laws of
the state, specifically 625 Illinois Compiled Statutes. This provision shall be
enforced without regard to whether the motor vehicle in question is susceptible
to licensing under the laws of the state. Provided, however, that the owner of
a motor vehicle shall not be prohibited under this section from driving said
vehicle on property which he owns, or in which he has any ownership or
leasehold interest.
   B.   Unlicensed Drivers: No person who is unlicensed to drive a motor
vehicle under the laws of the state, specifically 625 Illinois Compiled
Statutes, shall drive any motor vehicle anywhere within the village limits.
Provided, however, that this section shall not apply to any driver who is
driving a motor vehicle upon property in which the driver holds an ownership or
leasehold interest. This section shall be enforced without regard to where the
offender resides.
   C.   Minors:
      1.   Warning: If a minor child is arrested for an offense committed under
subsection A or B of this section, the arresting officer shall return the minor
child to the custody of his or her parents or guardian. Upon returning the
minor child, the officer shall submit to the parent or guardian a written
warning, which warning shall read as follows: (Ord. 509, 11-19-1985)
WARNING: Your child, whose name is                       , has been arrested
for the offense of (driving an unlicensed vehicle in the Village of Manhattan/
driving a vehicle in the Village of Manhattan while unlicensed to drive). This
offense can subject the offender to a fine of up to $750.00 plus court costs.
This offense also gives the court the right to impose court supervision,
conditional discharge, probation, and various terms of work service upon the
offender. You are hereby notified that as the offender's parent or legal
guardian, you also may be subject to criminal prosecution if the minor child
again commits either of the above violations. The Village of Manhattan
Ordinances provide that where the parent or guardian allows a minor child to
operate a vehicle within the Village limits of Manhattan in violation of those
ordinances, that parent or legal guardian is also subject to a fine of up to
$750.00 plus court costs, and imposition by the court of court supervision,
conditional discharge, probation, including work release.
                                                            
   (Arresting Officer)
   Village of Manhattan Police Department
   Manhattan, Illinois
(Ord. 509, 11-19-1985; amd. Ord. 791, 8-5-2003)
      2.   Parental Liability: Any parent or guardian, having been first duly
warned in accordance with the provisions of this subsection C, shall be guilty
of the offense of allowing a minor child to drive an unlicensed motor vehicle
within the village of Manhattan, Illinois, if the minor child of said parent or
guardian commits a second or subsequent offense under this section. Any parent
or guardian, having first been duly warned under this subsection C, commits the
offense of allowing an unlicensed person to drive a motor vehicle within the
village, if his or her minor child commits a second or subsequent offense under
subsection B of this section. (Ord. 509, 11-19-1985)
10-1-3: SPEED LIMIT:
The maximum speed limit for motor traffic on all residential roads within the
village maintained by the village street department shall be twenty five (25)
miles per hour. (Ord. 536, 10-3-1989)
10-1-4: PARKING REGULATIONS:
See chapter 4 of this title for parking regulations. (Ord. 549, 5-21-1991)
10-1-5: VEHICLE EQUIPMENT AND CONDITION:
It shall be unlawful to operate any vehicle which is not properly equipped with
good and efficient brakes, lights and signaling devices as required by state
law. (1928 Code §185)
10-1-6: PENALTY:
(Rep. by Ord. 1044, 1-19-2010)
10-1-7: NOISE; SPINNING WHEELS:
It shall be unlawful for any person to operate a motor vehicle within the
village in such a manner as to cause or produce loud, excessive or unusual
noise by tire friction as a result of rapid turning, weaving or by the spinning
of wheels from a stopped, standing or slow moving position. (Ord. 508, 1985;
amd. Ord. 791, 8-5-2003)
10-1-8: DEPOSITING OF DIRT OR ROCK ON ROADWAY:
No vehicle shall be operated on any street in the village which causes, as a
result of the operation of such vehicle, the distribution, placing, leaving,
throwing, scattering or depositing of dirt, mud, stone, rock or other refuse
upon the roadway. (Ord. 859, 7-5-2005)
10-1-9: VEHICLE LOAD WEIGHTS; EXCEPTIONS; PERMITS:
   A.   Weight Regulations On Village Streets: The maximum weight limit
permitted on all nondesignated streets under the jurisdiction of the village
shall be eight (8) tons except for the following:
      Baker Road from Cedar Road to Eastern Avenue: Twelve (12) tons.
      Bruns/Gallagher Road from U.S. Route 52 to corporate limits: Twelve (12)
tons.
      Eastern Ave from E North Street to Smith Rd: Five (5) tons.
      Gougar Road from Manhattan Road to Sweedler Road: Twelve (12) tons.
      Pauling/Watkins Road from Kankakee Street to Cedar Road: Twelve (12)
tons.
      Smith Road from Cedar Road to U.S. Route 52: Twelve (12) tons.
      Sweedler Road from Front Street to Cherry Hill Road: Twelve (12) tons.
      All municipal roads shall be classified as nondesignated unless
signposted, state designated, or as provided for herein.
   B.   Vehicles With A Gross Weight In Excess Of Maximum Weight Limits On A
Nondesignated Municipal Road: It shall be unlawful to operate on any
nondesignated municipal road any motor vehicle with a gross weight, including
load, in excess of the maximum weight limits as set forth in subsection A of
this section, or in excess of special weight limits provided for by ordinance
and signposted, without having first obtained an overweight permit from the
police chief or his designee.
   This subsection shall not apply to any nondesignated municipal road which
has been designated by the village as a construction entrance, or to garbage
trucks, tow trucks, school buses, ambulances, firefighting vehicles, snowplows,
street maintenance vehicles, emergency vehicles, or vehicles making deliveries
on First Street from Park Road to U.S. Route 52 or Park Road from U.S. Route 52
to First Street, except that any of the aforesaid vehicles in excess of eighty
thousand (80,000) pounds must first obtain an overweight permit from the police
chief or his designee.
   This subsection shall not apply to trucks and other vehicles making
deliveries or off street parking on:
      Front Street from U.S. Route 52 to Sweedler/Elwood/Brown Road,
      Sweedler/Elwood/Brown Road from Front Street to corporate limits,
      except that the aforesaid vehicles in excess of eighty thousand (80,000)
pounds must first obtain an overweight permit from the police chief or his
designee.
   C.   Vehicles With A Gross Weight In Excess Of Eighty Thousand Pounds: It
shall be unlawful to operate a vehicle with a gross weight, including load, in
excess of eighty thousand (80,000) pounds, without first having obtained an
overweight permit from the police chief or his designee.
   D.   Application For Overweight Permit: Application for all overweight
permits shall be submitted in writing to the police chief or his designee on
the form provided and shall include, at a minimum:
      1.   The type of vehicle(s);
      2.   The weight to be transported;
      3.   The content to be transported;
      4.   The number of trips required;
      5.   The route to be taken by the vehicles;
      6.   The destination of the vehicles within the village; and
      7.   The name of the carrier, if different than the applicant.
   E.   Issuance Of Overweight Permit: Upon receipt of a completed application
and proof of payment of the fee, the police chief or his designee may issue an
overweight permit, subject to the following conditions:
      1.   In consideration of seasonal or other time limitations, the police
chief or his designee shall restrict the number or time of daily trips
authorized by each overweight permit, as is consistent with the public safety.
      2.   In establishing the routes to be traveled, the police chief or his
designee may establish the most direct and shortest route consistent with the
public safety, taking into consideration existing traffic, the character of the
road or roads, and the configuration of the terrain.
      3.   All overweight permits shall be nontransferable and shall be valid
only for the applicant or his agent or employee and the specific vehicle and
load listed on the application.
      4.   Every overweight permit shall be carried in the vehicle to which it
refers and shall be open to inspection by any police officer or agent of the
village.
      5.   No refunds of the overweight permit fee shall be made to the
applicant following the issuance of an overweight permit.
      6.   The applicant shall comply with all village, state, county, and
township ordinances, regulations and requirements.
      7.   Altering or falsifying a permit will revoke overweight permit
privileges for twelve (12) months.
      8.   No overweight permits will be issued for the following streets:
         McClure Avenue from Park Road to Gustafson Street.
         Railroad Street from East North Street to West Prairie Street.
         West Prairie Street from Railroad Street to U.S. Route 52.
   F.   Fee Schedule For Overweight Permit, Vehicle With A Gross Weight In
Excess Of Maximum Weight Limits On A Nondesignated Municipal Road: Overweight
permits for a motor vehicle with a gross weight, including load, in excess of
the maximum weight limits as set forth in subsection A of this section or in
excess of special weight limits provided for by ordinance and signposted, may
be applied for and may be granted in accordance with the following schedule:
      1.   Single trip permit: Thirty dollars ($30.00).
      2.   Round trip permit: Fifty dollars ($50.00).
      3.   Thirty (30) day permit: Seventy five dollars ($75.00).
      4.   One hundred twenty (120) day permit: One hundred fifty dollars
($150.00).
   G.   Fee Schedule For Overweight Permit, Vehicle With A Gross Weight In
Excess Of Eighty Thousand Pounds: Overweight permits for a motor vehicle with a
gross weight, including load, in excess of eighty thousand (80,000) pounds may
be applied for and may be granted according to the fee schedule as set forth in
section
10-1-1 of this chapter. (Ord. 1044, 1-19-2010; amd. Ord. 1421-23, 2-21-2023)
10-1-10: ENGINE BRAKING:
   A.   No person shall operate or cause to be operated at or upon any public
highway located within the village any compression/release engine brake on any
vehicle. For purposes of this section, a compression/release engine brake
(engine braking) is a mechanical exhaust device designed to aid in the braking
or deceleration of any vehicle by converting engine power to compressed air
which results in additional, excessive, loud or explosive noise from such
vehicle.
   B.   Any person violating any of the provisions of this section shall be
subject to a fine of not less than three hundred dollars ($300.00) and not more
than as provided in section
1-4-1 of this code. It shall be a defense that the driver used a compression/
release engine brake in an emergency to avoid a collision with a person or
another vehicle. (Ord. 1044, 1-19-2010)
10-1-11: VIOLATIONS, PENALTIES:
   A.   Violations, Penalties Generally: Unless as otherwise provided, any
person convicted of a violation of any section or provision of this chapter
shall be punished by a fine as established in section
1-4-1 of this code for any one offense. Each day such violation is committed or
permitted to continue shall constitute a separate offense and shall be
punishable as such hereunder. (Ord. 1044, 1-19-2010; amd. Ord. 1061, 4-20-2010)
   B.   Penalty, Vehicle With A Gross Weight In Excess Of Maximum Weight Limits
On A Nondesignated Municipal Road: Every person, firm, or corporation who
violates this chapter operating a vehicle with a gross weight in excess of the
maximum weight limits as set forth in section
10-1-9 of this chapter, on a nondesignated municipal road, in addition to any
other fines, penalties, or restitution, shall be subject to a fine of not less
than five hundred dollars ($500.00) and not more than as provided in section
1-4-1 of this code; except that a vehicle with a gross weight in excess of
eighty thousand (80,000) pounds may be subject to the fines and penalties as
set forth in subsection C of this section.
Each occurrence shall constitute a separate offense and shall be punishable as
such hereunder.
   C.   Penalty, Vehicle With A Gross Weight In Excess Of Prescribed Weight
Limits: Every person, firm, or corporation who violates this chapter operating
a vehicle with a gross weight in excess of prescribed weight limits, in
addition to any other fines, penalties, or restitution, shall be subject to the
fines and penalties as follows:
      1.   Weight: Whenever any vehicle is operated in violation of the
provisions of 625 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/15-111 or 5/3-401(d), the owner
or driver of such vehicle shall be deemed guilty of such violation and either
the owner or the driver of such vehicle may be prosecuted for such violation.
Any person charged with a violation of any of these provisions who pleads not
guilty shall be present in court for the trial on the charge. Any person, firm
or corporation convicted of any violation of 625 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/
15-111, as enforced by the village, including, but not limited to, a maximum
axle or gross limit specified on a regulatory sign posted in accordance with
625 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/15-111(g) or (h), in addition to any
surcharge, court costs, and fees, shall be fined according to the following
schedule:
Number Of Pounds Overweight  Fine
Number Of Pounds Overweight    Fine
   Up to and including 2,0 $100.00
   2,001 through 2,500     270.00
   2,501 through 3,000     330.00
   3,001 through 3,500     520.00
   3,501 through 4,000     600.00
   4,001 through 4,500     850.00
   4,501 through 5,000     950.00
                               Computed by assessing $1,500.00 for the first
   5,001 or more           5,000 pounds overweight and $150.00 for each
                               additional increment of 500 pounds overweight or
                               fraction thereof
 
   In addition, any person, firm or corporation convicted of four (4) or more
violations of 625 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/15-111 within any twelve (12)
month period shall be fined an additional amount of five thousand dollars
($5,000.00) for the fourth and each subsequent conviction within the twelve
(12) month period. Provided, however, that with regard to a firm or
corporation, a fourth or subsequent conviction shall mean a fourth or
subsequent conviction attributable to any one employee driver.
   2.   Width, Height, Length Of Vehicles: Whenever any vehicle is operated in
violation of the provisions of 625 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/15-102, 5/15-
103 or 5/15-107, the owner or driver of such vehicle shall be liable of such
violation and either may be prosecuted by the village prosecutor in the Will
County Circuit Court or through the village’s administrative adjudication
system pursuant to title 1 chapter 20 of this code, at the police officer’s
discretion, for such violation. Any person, firm or corporation convicted of
any violation of 625 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/15-102, 5/15-103 or 5/15-107
shall be fined for the first or second conviction an amount equal to not less
than fifty dollars ($50.00) nor more than five hundred dollars ($500.00), and
for the third and subsequent convictions by the same person, firm or
corporation within a period of one (1) year after the date of the first
offense, not less than five hundred dollars ($500.00) nor more than one
thousand dollars ($1,000.00).
   3.   Sentence Of Permit Moves: Whenever any vehicle is operated in violation
of the provisions of a permit issued under the provisions of 625 Illinois
Compiled Statutes 5/15-301 through 5/15-319, as enforced by the village, by
operating under a fraudulent permit or under a permit not specifically covering
the move, the owner or driver of such vehicle shall be deemed guilty of a
business offense and either the owner or the driver of such vehicle may be
prosecuted for such violation. When any person, firm or corporation is
convicted of such violation, the permit shall be null and void and such person,
firm or corporation shall be fined in an amount not less than ten cents ($0.10)
per pound for each pound the gross weight of the vehicle exceeds the gross
weight of such vehicles allowable under 625 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/15-
111. Penalties for violations of this section shall be in addition to any
penalties imposed for violation of 625 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/15-301(j)
as enforced by the village.
   4.   Sentence Of Permit Moves Exceeding Axle Weights: Whenever any vehicle
is operated in violation of the provisions of a permit issued under the
provisions of 625 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/15-301 through 5/15-319, as
enforced by the village, by operating with axle weights in excess of those
authorized in such permit, the owner or driver of such vehicle shall be deemed
guilty of a business offense and either the owner or the driver of such vehicle
may be prosecuted for such violation. Any person, firm or corporation convicted
of such violation shall be fined in an amount:
      Not less than two cents ($0.02) nor more than five cents ($0.05) per
pound for each pound of excess weight on such axle or tandem axle in excess of
the weight authorized in the permit when the excess is one thousand (1,000)
pounds or less;
      Not less than five cents ($0.05) nor more than ten cents ($0.10) per
pound for each pound of excess weight when the excess exceeds one thousand
(1,000) pounds and is two thousand (2,000) pounds or less;
      Not less than ten cents ($0.10) nor more than fifteen cents ($0.15) per
pound for each pound of excess weight when the excess exceeds two thousand
(2,000) pounds and is three thousand (3,000) pounds or less; and
      Not less than fifteen cents ($0.15) nor more than twenty cents ($0.20)
per pound for each pound of excess weight when the excess exceeds three
thousand (3,000) pounds.
      Penalties for violations of this section shall be in addition to any
penalties imposed for violation of 625 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/15-301(j)
as enforced by the village.
   5.   Sentence Of Permit Moves Exceeding Gross Weight: Whenever any vehicle
is operated in violation of the provisions of a permit issued under the
provisions of 625 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/15-301 through 5/15-319, as
enforced by the village, by operating with the gross weight in excess of that
authorized in such permit, the owner or driver of such vehicle shall be deemed
guilty of a business offense and either the owner or the driver of such vehicle
may be prosecuted for such violation. Any person, firm or corporation convicted
of such violation shall be fined in an amount:
      Not less than two cents ($0.02) nor more than five cents ($0.05) per
pound for each pound of excess weight in excess of the gross weight authorized
in the permit when the excess is one thousand (1,000) pounds or less;
      Not less than four cents ($0.04) nor more than seven cents ($0.07) per
pound for each pound of excess weight when the excess exceeds one thousand
(1,000) pounds and is two thousand (2,000) pounds or less;
      Not less than seven cents ($0.07) nor more than ten cents ($0.10) per
pound for each pound of excess weight when the excess exceeds two thousand
(2,000) pounds and is three thousand (3,000) pounds or less;
      Not less than ten cents ($0.10) nor more than fifteen cents ($0.15) per
pound for each pound of excess weight when the excess exceeds three thousand
(3,000) pounds and is four thousand (4,000) pounds or less;
      Not less than fifteen cents ($0.15) nor more than twenty cents ($0.20)
per pound for each pound of excess weight when the excess exceeds four thousand
(4,000) pounds and is five thousand (5,000) pounds or less; and
      Not less than seventeen cents ($0.17) nor more than twenty five cents
($0.25) per pound for each pound of excess weight when the excess exceeds five
thousand (5,000) pounds.
      Penalties for violations of this section shall be in addition to any
penalties imposed for violation of 625 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/15-301(j)
as enforced by the village.
   6.   Registration, Second Division Vehicles: Whenever any vehicle is
operated in violation of the provisions of 625 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/3-
401(d), in that a vehicle and load are operated in this state and the
appropriate fees and taxes have not been paid or the vehicle and load exceed
the registered gross weight for which the required fees and taxes have been
paid by two thousand one (2,001) pounds or more, the operator or owner shall be
fined according to the schedule as provided in subsection C1 of this section,
provided that for any unregistered vehicle or vehicle displaying expired
registration, no fine shall exceed the actual cost of what the appropriate
registration for that vehicle and load should have been as set forth below
regardless of the route traveled:
SCHEDULE OF FLAT WEIGHT TAX REQUIRED BY LAW
Gross Weight In Pounds Including Vehicle And Class Total Fees Each Fiscal Year
Maximum Load
Gross Weight In Pounds Including Vehicle And Class Total Fees Each Fiscal Year
Maximum Load
                                                  
   8,000 and less                         B     $ 98.00
   8,001 to 12,000                        D     138.00
   12,001 to 16,000                       F     242.00
   16,001 to 26,000                       H     490.00
   26,001 to 28,000                       J     630.00
   28,001 to 32,000                       K     842.00
   32,001 to 36,000                       L     982.00
   36,001 to 40,000                       N     1,202.00
   40,001 to 45,000                       P     1,390.00
   45,001 to 50,000                       Q     1,538.00
   50,001 to 54,999                       R     1,698.00
   55,000 to 59,500                       S     1,830.00
   59,501 to 64,000                       T     1,970.00
   64,001 to 73,280                       V     2,294.00
   73,281 to 77,000                       X     2,622.00
   77,001 to 80,000                       Z     2,790.00
 
(Ord. 1044, 1-19-2010; amd. Ord. 1474-24, 9-17-2024)
CHAPTER 2
VEHICLES PARKED UNLAWFULLY
SECTION:
10-2-1: Definitions
10-2-2: Time Limit For Leaving Vehicles On Property Within The Village
10-2-3: Authority To Inspect Vehicles
10-2-4: Authority To Impound Vehicles
10-2-5: Contents Of Notice
10-2-6: Record Searches
10-2-7: Reclaimed Vehicles; Disposal Of Unclaimed Vehicles
10-2-8: Penalty
10-2-1: DEFINITIONS:
For purposes of this chapter, the following words shall have the respective
meanings ascribed to them:
   ABANDONED VEHICLE: Any vehicle in a state of disrepair rendering the vehicle
incapable of being driven safely, or unlicensed or unregistered (except
vehicles for sale by new and used motor vehicle dealers and repair shops), or
left for such a time and under such circumstances as to reasonably appear to
have been abandoned or deserted. A vehicle is unlicensed when it does not have
a current set of valid license plates from the state in which the vehicle is
registered displayed on the vehicle. A vehicle is unregistered when it does not
have a current village vehicle sticker displayed on the windshield in
accordance with applicable law.
   ALLEY: A public way within a block generally giving access to the rear of
lots or buildings and not used for general traffic circulation.
   CHIEF OF POLICE: The chief of police or his authorized representative.
   HIGHWAY OR STREET: The entire width of public right of way of every way
publicly maintained and open to the use of the public for vehicular traffic.
   INOPERABLE MOTOR VEHICLE: Any motor vehicle from which, for a period of at
least seven (7) days, the engine, wheels or other parts have been removed, or
on which the engine, wheels or other parts have been altered, damaged or
otherwise so treated that the vehicle is incapable of being driven under its
own motor power. Inoperable motor vehicle shall not include a motor vehicle
which has been rendered temporarily incapable of being driven under its own
motor power in order to perform ordinary service or repair operations.
   OWNER: A person who holds legal title to a vehicle, a person who has
registered a vehicle in his name with the state of Illinois, or in the event a
vehicle is subject to an agreement for a conditional sale, lease, or mortgage
which vests an immediate right of possession in the conditional vendee, lessee
or mortgagor, then such conditional vendee, lessee, or mortgagor shall be
deemed the owner for the purpose of this chapter.
   URBAN DISTRICT: The territory contiguous to and including any street or
highway which is built up with structures devoted to business, industry or
dwelling houses situated at intervals of less than one hundred feet (100') for
a distance of a fourth of a mile or more. (Ord. 676, 7-7-1998, eff. retroactive
to 7-1-1998; amd. Ord. 868, 8-2-2005)
10-2-2: TIME LIMIT FOR LEAVING VEHICLES ON PROPERTY WITHIN THE VILLAGE:
   A.   Any vehicle, or any part thereof, which is on a highway and is
abandoned, burned, partially dismantled, unattended, or wrecked and creating a
traffic hazard because of its position in relation to the highway, or on a
highway and causing the impeding of traffic by its physical appearance, that
remains for any period of time, is unlawful.
   B.   Any vehicle, or any part thereof, which is on a highway and is
abandoned in an urban district that remains ten (10) hours or more, is
unlawful.
   C.   Any vehicle, or any part thereof, which is on a highway and is
abandoned or left unattended outside of an urban district that remains twenty
four (24) hours or more, is unlawful.
   D.   Any vehicle, or any part thereof, abandoned on public or private
property, other than a highway, in view of the general public, except on
property of the owner or bailee of such abandoned vehicle, that remains seven
(7) days or more, is unlawful.
   E.   Any vehicle, or any part thereof, abandoned, discarded, inoperable,
junked, partially dismantled, or wrecked on private property, and in view of
the general public, by any person in charge or control of said vehicle and
property, that remains thirty (30) days or more, is declared a nuisance and
unlawful. This chapter shall not apply to a vehicle in an enclosed building, a
vehicle on the premises of a business enterprise operated in a lawful place and
manner when necessary to the lawful operation of such business enterprise, or a
vehicle in an appropriate storage place or depository maintained in a lawful
place and manner by the village. (Ord. 868, 8-2-2005)
10-2-3: AUTHORITY TO INSPECT VEHICLES:
The chief of police is authorized to enter upon public or private property at
all reasonable hours for the purpose of inspecting vehicles reasonably believed
to be in violation of this chapter, and affix to such vehicle, in a conspicuous
location, in the form of an adhesive sticker, notice informing the owner of the
violation. It shall be unlawful for any person to prevent the chief of police
from entering public or private property for purposes of carrying out his
duties under this chapter or to interfere with him in the lawful performance of
his duties under the provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 868, 8-2-2005)
10-2-4: AUTHORITY TO IMPOUND VEHICLES:
   A.   When a vehicle, or any part thereof, is on a highway and abandoned,
burned, inoperable, partially dismantled, unattended, or wrecked and creating a
traffic hazard because of its position in relation to the highway, or on a
highway and causing the impeding of traffic by its physical appearance, the
chief of police is hereby authorized to immediately remove or have removed said
vehicle, or any part thereof, in accordance with all applicable laws.
   B.   When a vehicle, or any part thereof, is abandoned on a highway in an
urban district that remains ten (10) hours or more, the chief of police is
hereby authorized to immediately remove or have removed said vehicle from the
highway in accordance with all applicable laws.
   C.   When a vehicle, or any part thereof, is abandoned or left unattended on
a highway, outside of an urban district, that remains twenty four (24) hours or
more, the chief of police is hereby authorized to immediately remove or have
removed said vehicle from the highway in accordance with all applicable laws.
   D.   When a vehicle, or any part thereof, is abandoned on private or public
property, other than a highway, in view of the general public, except on
property of the owner or bailee of such abandoned vehicle, that remains seven
(7) days or more, the chief of police is hereby authorized to remove or have
removed said vehicle, in accordance with all applicable laws; provided however
that no vehicle shall be removed and impounded until five (5) days after the
chief of police gives written notice of his intention to impound the vehicle,
if the vehicle has not been brought into compliance with the provisions of this
chapter at the end of such time. Such notice shall be given in the following
manner:
      1.   By leaving a copy of the notice with the owner of the vehicle
personally; or
      2.   Affixing a "police tow" notice on the vehicle; or
      3.   By sending a copy of the notice to the last known address of the
owner of the vehicle via certified or regular mail.
   E.   When a vehicle, or any part thereof, is abandoned, discarded,
inoperable, junked, partially dismantled, or wrecked on public or private
property, and in view of the general public, by any person in charge or control
of said vehicle and property, that remains thirty (30) days or more, the chief
of police is authorized to remove or have removed said vehicle, in accordance
with all applicable laws; provided however that no vehicle shall be removed and
impounded until after the chief of police issues a written notice of his
intention to impound the vehicle, and a notice to appear for a hearing in the
circuit court with competent jurisdiction. Such notice shall be given in the
following manner:
      1.   By leaving a copy of the notice with the owner of the vehicle
personally; or
      2.   By sending a copy of the notice to the last known address of the
owner of the vehicle by regular and certified mail; and
      3.   By sending a copy of the notice to the person in charge or control
of said property by regular and certified mail.
The chief of police may request an appropriate court order for the impoundment
of the vehicle at said hearing if the vehicle is not brought into compliance
with the provisions of this chapter. Upon obtaining an appropriate court order,
the chief of police is hereby authorized to remove or have removed said
vehicle, in accordance with all applicable laws. The enforcement of this
subsection is stayed when a hearing and/or decision is pending.
   F.   Such vehicle shall be impounded until lawfully claimed or disposed of
in accordance with 625 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/4-203 et seq., and the
provisions of this chapter.
   G.   The chief of police may tow or cause to be towed any vehicle
inoperable, abandoned, parked, or otherwise kept in violation of the provisions
of this chapter to a suitable storage area. (Ord. 868, 8-2-2005)
10-2-5: CONTENTS OF NOTICE:
The notice required to be given under this chapter shall contain the following
information:
   A.   The name of the owner of the vehicle, if available;
   B.   A description of the vehicle;
   C.   Location of the vehicle;
   D.   The nature of the violation;
   E.   The right to a pretow hearing (if applicable);
   F.   The owner of the vehicle shall be responsible for the fees and expenses
of towing, storage, impounding and enforcement. (Ord. 868, 8-2-2005)
10-2-6: RECORD SEARCHES:
When the identity of the owner of a vehicle is not known, the police department
will cause:
   A.   The vehicle registration records of the state to be searched by the
secretary of state for the purpose of obtaining the required ownership
information; and/or
   B.   The stolen motor vehicle files of the state police and the national
crime information center (NCIC) files to be searched by a directed
communication to the state police for stolen or wanted information on the
vehicle. (Ord. 868, 8-2-2005)
10-2-7: RECLAIMED VEHICLES; DISPOSAL OF UNCLAIMED VEHICLES:
   A.   Disposal of unclaimed vehicles shall be as set forth in the motor
vehicle code of the state, as amended.
   B.   Any time before a vehicle is sold or disposed of as provided in this
section, the owner of the vehicle may reclaim the vehicle by presenting to the
police department and the commercial towing service having custody of the
vehicle, proof of ownership or proof of right to possession of the vehicle. No
vehicle shall be released until all fees and expenses of towing, storage,
impounding and enforcement have been paid, and shall be in addition to the fine
provided for in this chapter for the violation of this chapter, unless
prohibited by law which requires the release of the vehicle without paying such
charges. Said fees and expenses may be collected by the village in an action at
law. (Ord. 868, 8-2-2005)
10-2-8: PENALTY:
Every person who is convicted of a violation of the provisions of this chapter
shall be punished by a fine as established in section
1-4-1 of this code. (Ord. 868, 8-2-2005; amd. Ord. 1061, 4-20-2010)
CHAPTER 3
VEHICLE LICENSES
(Rep. by Ord. 976, 9-18-2007, eff. 1-1-2008)
CHAPTER 4
PARKING REGULATIONS
SECTION:
10-4-1: Prohibited In Specified Places
10-4-2: One-Way Streets
10-4-3: Unattended Motor Vehicles
10-4-4: Powers Of Village Board To Restrict Parking
10-4-5: Presumption As To Identity Of Violator
10-4-6: Penalty
10-4-7: Commuter Parking Facility
10-4-8: On Street Parking Of Trailers
10-4-9: On Street Parking Of Trucks And Buses
10-4-1: PROHIBITED IN SPECIFIED PLACES:
   A.   Except when necessary to avoid conflict with other traffic, or in
compliance with law or the directions of a police officer or official traffic
control device, no person shall park a vehicle in any of the following places:
      1.   On the roadway side of any vehicle stopped or parked at the edge or
curb of a street.
      2.   On a sidewalk or a place where a sidewalk would normally be
constructed if there is no sidewalk.
      3.   Between the curb and the sidewalk or a place where a sidewalk would
normally be constructed if there is no sidewalk.
      4.   In front of a public or private driveway.
      5.   Within an intersection.
      6.   On a crosswalk.
      7.   Between a safety zone and the adjacent curb or within thirty feet
(30') of points on the curb immediately opposite the ends of a safety zone,
unless a different length is indicated by signs or markings.
      8.   Alongside or opposite any street excavation or obstruction when such
parking would obstruct traffic.
      9.   Upon any bridge or other elevated structure upon a highway or within
a highway tunnel.
      10.   On any railroad tracks.
      11.   At any place where official signs prohibit parking.
      12.   In the area between roadways of a divided highway, including
crossovers.
      13.   In any area designated handicapped parking unless there is
displayed on such vehicle a registration plate, special decal, or other device
issued by any jurisdiction designating the vehicle as being operated by or for
a handicapped person.
      14.   Within fifteen feet (15') of a fire hydrant.
      15.   Within twenty feet (20') of a crosswalk at an intersection.
      16.   Within thirty feet (30') upon the approach to any flashing signal,
stop sign, yield sign or traffic control signal located at the side of the
roadway.
      17.   Within twenty feet (20') of the driveway entrance to any fire
station and on the side of a street opposite the entrance to any fire station
within seventy five feet (75') of such entrance (when properly signposted).
      18.   Within fifty feet (50') of the nearest rail of a railroad crossing.
      19.   At any place where official signs prohibit parking. (Ord. 549, 5-
21-1991)
      20.   On all streets after one inch (1") of snowfall or one quarter of an
inch (1/4") of ice buildup.
      21.   At Market Place Shopping Center, a thirty foot (30') fire lane is
hereby established for the property legally described in exhibit A, attached to
the ordinance codified herein and incorporated herein as if fully set forth,
beginning at the curb line in front of the shopping center building. Further,
that a minimum of seven (7) parking stalls shall be designated as handicapped
parking. Said handicapped parking stalls shall be properly marked by signs and
striping as required by state law.
         a.   The fine for parking in the designated fire lane shall be seventy
five dollars ($75.00) for the first offense, seventy five dollars ($75.00) for
the second offense and one hundred dollars ($100.00) for each subsequent
offense committed in the same calendar year. Further, the fine for parking in a
designated handicapped parking space without the proper license or placard
shall be one hundred dollars ($100.00) per offense.
   B.   No person shall move a vehicle not lawfully under his control into any
such prohibited area or away from a curb such distance as is unlawful. (Ord.
549, 5-21-1991; amd. Ord. 682, 12-1-1998; Ord. 779, 1-7-2003; Ord. 1061, 4-20-
2010; Ord. 1362-21, 8-17-2021; Ord. 1425-23, 4-3-2023)
10-4-2: ONE-WAY STREETS:
   A.   Where parking is permitted, every vehicle standing, stopped or parked
upon a street or roadway shall be so stopped or parked with the right hand
wheels of such vehicle parallel with and within twelve inches (12") of the
right hand curb or edge of the roadway in the direction of the authorized
traffic movement.
   B.   Every vehicle stopped or parked upon a one-way roadway shall be so
stopped or parked parallel to the curb or edge of the roadway in the direction
of authorized traffic movement with its right hand wheels within twelve inches
(12") of the right hand curb or edge of the roadway or its left hand wheels
within twelve inches (12") of the left hand curb or edge of the roadway. (Ord.
549, 5-21-1991)
10-4-3: UNATTENDED MOTOR VEHICLES:
No person driving or in charge of a motor vehicle shall permit it to stand
unattended without first stopping the engine, locking the ignition, removing
the key from the ignition, effectively setting the brake thereon and, when
standing upon any perceptible grade, turning the front wheels to the curb or
side of the highway. (Ord. 549, 5-21-1991)
10-4-4: POWERS OF VILLAGE BOARD TO RESTRICT PARKING:
The village board may, from time to time, by resolution, designate certain
areas in and upon the streets of the village as being restricted against
parking, but where such areas are so designated by resolution, the areas shall
be appropriately marked by plain legible signs indicating such restriction.
(Ord. 549, 5-21-1991)
10-4-5: PRESUMPTION AS TO IDENTITY OF VIOLATOR:
Whenever any vehicle is parked in violation of any of the provisions of this
chapter, the registered owner of the vehicle shall be presumed to be the
violator. (Ord. 549, 5-21-1991)
10-4-6: PENALTY:
   A.   Any person convicted of a violation of any section or provision of this
chapter except for violation of parking in a handicap parking zone, shall be
punished by a fine as established in section
1-4-1 of this code for any one offense. Each day such violation is committed or
permitted to continue shall constitute a separate offense and shall be
punishable as such hereunder. (Ord. 791, 8-5-2003; amd. Ord. 1061, 4-20-2010)
   B.   Any person convicted of a violation of parking in a handicap parking
zone shall be punished by a fine of not less than two hundred fifty dollars
($250.00) nor more than seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00) for any one
offense. Each day such violation is committed or permitted to continue shall
constitute a separate offense and shall be punishable as such hereunder. (Ord.
992, 1-8-2008)
10-4-7: COMMUTER PARKING FACILITY:
   A.   Location: An area for commuter parking has been designated by the
village board and is located off of Sweedler Road west of the Metra commuter
line.
   B.   Fee: Fees for the use of the commuter parking facility have been
established by the village board to be paid on a daily basis of one dollar
($1.00) per day.
   C.   Parking Restrictions; Penalty For Violations; Payment Of Fee:
      1.   Parking in the following manner is prohibited in the commuter
parking lot:
         a.   There shall be no parking in nondesignated areas.
         b.   There shall be no parking except within the white lines of
designated parking spaces.
      2.   Individuals who violate any of the parking policies listed shall be
required to pay a fine in the amount of fifty dollars ($50.00) for each
violation and may be subject to having their vehicle towed if they are in
violation of subsection C1 of this section.
      3.   Individuals parking in the designated daily fee parking areas shall
place one dollar ($1.00) in the pay box coin slot corresponding to the number
of the stall in which they are parked. No money placed under windshield wipers
or in envelopes, or given to ticket agents or other Metra employees will be
accepted.
   D.   Insufficient Parking: The village is under no obligation to provide
parking for everyone, and as such is not accountable to those persons unable to
secure a legal parking space at any time.
   E.   Modification Of Regulations: The regulations set forth in this section
for the operation of the commuter parking facility are hereby established by
the direction of the president and board of trustees of the village of
Manhattan and are not subject to change, relief or modification by any party
other than by the president and board of trustees. (Ord. 881, 1-17-2006)
10-4-8: ON STREET PARKING OF TRAILERS:
   A.   It shall be unlawful and an offense for any person to park, store or
leave standing any trailer upon a public street or permit same under their
control to be parked, stored or left standing upon a public street unless it is
attached to a motor vehicle designed for and capable of towing it on a public
street. This section shall not prohibit the parking of construction or
maintenance trailers upon a public street during the time the actual
construction or maintenance activity is being conducted.
   B.   It shall be unlawful to park any trailer on any public street within
the village in such a manner as to interfere with the safe, normal use and flow
of traffic upon the street, whether or not attached to the tow vehicle.
   C.   "Trailer" shall mean, but is not limited to, any vehicle designed or
utilized for the transportation of a boat, automobile, snowmobile, livestock,
cargo or similar items or as living quarters for recreation, camping or travel
use as in the case of a travel, tent, camp pop up or fifth wheel trailer, which
does not have motive power of its own, but is designed to be drawn by a
vehicle. (Ord. 992, 1-8-2008)
10-4-9: ON STREET PARKING OF TRUCKS AND BUSES:
It shall be unlawful and an offense for any person to park, store or leave
standing within any residential district upon a public street any truck tractor
of any size, apportioned power unit, semitrailer, stinger steered semitrailer,
road tractor, pole trailer, converter dolly, apportioned trailer, apportioned
semitrailer, type B or greater bus, whether privately owned or a school bus,
implement of husbandry or any vehicle requiring an Illinois registration plate
suffix of "H" or greater, including foreign registered vehicles, which would
require such registration, if registered in Illinois, any vehicle required to
have mileage plates of "MG" suffix or greater, farm plates of "VG" or greater,
or tow trucks capable of towing any vehicle which is prohibited under this
section. (Ord. 1051, 3-2-2010)
CHAPTER 5
SNOWMOBILES AND OTHER OFF ROAD VEHICLES
SECTION:
10-5-1: Operation; Speed Limit
10-5-2: Designated Routes
10-5-3: Definitions
10-5-4: State Statute
10-5-5: Local Regulations
10-5-6: Penalty
10-5-1: OPERATION; SPEED LIMIT:
   A.   No one shall operate a snowmobile or ATV in the corporate limits of the
village of Manhattan on any other streets or other public rights of way within
the village other than the routes designated in section
10-5-2 of this chapter, except that operators may use village streets or other
public rights of way between where the snowmobile, ATV or off highway
motorcycle is stored and a designated route. However, operators shall use the
most direct path to a designated route. (Ord. 767, 7-16-2002)
   B.   Operators shall travel along the shoulder of a road or other right of
way in the same direction as other vehicular traffic and shall comply with all
regulatory signage on said roadway. The maximum speed limit for snowmobiles and
ATVs shall be fifteen (15) miles per hour.
   C.   Operation of a snowmobile or ATV on private property is prohibited
without the permission of the owner.
   D.   Operators shall not operate a snowmobile or ATV in such a manner as to
damage public or private property. (Ord. 685, 1-5-1999)
10-5-2: DESIGNATED ROUTES:
The following streets and roads within the corporate limits of the village are
hereby designated as snowmobile and ATV routes within the village:
   East North Street from the eastern corporate limits to Eastern Avenue.
   Eastern Avenue from State Street to Baker Road.
   Elwood Road from Front Street to the western corporate limits.
   Front Street from State Street to Elwood Road.
   Park Street from State Street to McClure Avenue.
   Prairie Street from Eastern Avenue to the railroad tracks.
   Prairie Street from Railroad Street to West North Street.
   Railroad Street from East North Street to Prairie Street.
   State Street from Eastern Avenue to the southern corporate limits.
   Wabash Street from East North Street to State Street.
   West North Street from Prairie Street to the northern corporate limits.
   Western Avenue from West North Street to the western corporate limits. (Ord.
685, 1-5-1999)
10-5-3: DEFINITIONS:
   ALL-TERRAIN VEHICLE: Any motorized off highway device designed to travel
primarily off highway that is fifty inches (50") or less in width, having a
manufacturer's dry weight of one thousand (1,000) pounds or less, traveling on
three (3) or more low pressure tires, designed with a seat or saddle for
operator use, and handlebars or steering wheel for steering control. This
excludes vehicles commonly known as a go-kart.
   OFF HIGHWAY MOTORCYCLE: Any motorized device designed to travel primarily
off highway on two (2) wheels, having a seat or saddle for the use of the
operator, upon or by which any person, persons or property may be transported
or drawn, commonly referred to as a dirt bike.
   SNOWMOBILE: A self-propelled device designed for travel on snow or ice or
natural terrain steered by skis or runners, and supported in part by skis,
belts or cleats. (Ord. 767, 7-16-2002)
10-5-4: STATE STATUTE:
The provisions of 625 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/11-1426 through and
including 5/11-1427.4 are hereby incorporated herein as if fully set forth.
(Ord. 767, 7-16-2002)
10-5-5: LOCAL REGULATIONS:
   A.   All-Terrain Vehicles: In addition to the state statutes incorporated
herein by section
10-5-4 of this chapter, no person shall operate an all-terrain vehicle in the
corporate limits of the village of Manhattan except in accordance with the
following regulations:
      1.   Operators shall have a valid driver's license in good standing;
      2.   Operators shall be a minimum of sixteen (16) years of age;
      3.   Operators and all passengers shall wear a helmet at all times the
ATV or off highway motorcycle is in motion;
      4.   No ATV shall be operated unless the headlight(s) and rear taillight
(s) are on and in good working order.
   B.   Off Highway Motorcycles And Go-Karts Prohibited: The operation of off
highway motorcycles and go-karts is hereby prohibited on all public property in
the corporate limits of the village, including, but not limited to, streets,
sidewalks, parkways, parks, detention ponds, schools and other government and
public facilities. (Ord. 767, 7-16-2002)
10-5-6: PENALTY:
Any person convicted of a violation of any section or provision of this chapter
shall be punished by a fine as established in section
1-4-1 of this code for any one offense. (Ord. 791, 8-5-2003; amd. Ord. 1061, 4-
20-2010)
CHAPTER 6
VEHICLE SEIZURE AND IMPOUNDMENT
SECTION:
10-6-1: Nuisance Declared
10-6-2: Seizure And Impoundment
10-6-3: Administrative Fee
10-6-4: Vehicle Possession
10-6-5: Preliminary Hearing
10-6-6: Administrative Hearing
10-6-7: Failure To Pay
10-6-8: Right To Appeal
10-6-1: NUISANCE DECLARED:
   A.   Any motor vehicle used in connection with the following shall be
declared a public nuisance and subject to seizure and impoundment under this
chapter:
      1.   A violation of 625 Illinois Compiled Statues 5/6-101, operating a
motor vehicle with an expired license, permit, or a restricted driving permit
if the period of expiration is greater than one year, or operating a motor
vehicle without ever having been issued a driver’s license or permit;
      2.   A violation of section
9-3-6 , "Fireworks", or section
9-6-2 , possession (of cannabis or drug paraphernalia), of this code;
      3.   A violation of 625 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/6-303, driving while
driver's license, permit or privilege to operate a motor vehicle is suspended
or revoked, of the vehicle code, except a person whose driver's license, permit
or privilege to operate a motor vehicle is suspended only for a violation of
625 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/13 et seq., the emissions inspection law;
      4.   A violation of 625 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/11-204, fleeing or
attempting to elude a peace officer, 625 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/11-501,
driving under the influence of alcohol, other drug or drugs, intoxicating
compound or compounds or any combination thereof, 625 Illinois Compiled
Statutes 5/11-503, reckless driving or aggravated reckless driving, 625
Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/11-506, street racing or aggravated street racing,
or 625 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/11-601.5, driving forty (40) miles an hour
or more in excess of applicable limit, of the vehicle code;
      5.   A person who is found to be in control of a motor vehicle against
whom a warrant has been issued by a circuit court;
      6.   A violation of 720 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/11-6, indecent
solicitation of a child, 720 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/12-2, aggravated
assault, 720 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/12-4, aggravated battery, 720
Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/12-4.2, aggravated battery with a firearm, 720
Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/12-4.3, aggravated battery of a child, 720
Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/12-4.6, aggravated battery of a senior citizen,
720 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/16A-3, retail theft, when the value of the
merchandise exceeds three hundred dollars ($300.00), 720 Illinois Compiled
Statutes 5/18-1, robbery, 720 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/18-2, armed robbery,
720 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/19-1, burglary, 720 Illinois Compiled Statutes
5/19-3, residential burglary, 720 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/20-1, arson, 720
Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/20-1.1, aggravated arson, 720 Illinois Compiled
Statutes 5/20-2, possession of explosives or explosive or incendiary devices,
720 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/21-1, criminal damage to property, or 720
Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/25-1, mob action, of the Illinois criminal code;
      7.   A violation of 720 Illinois Compiled Statutes 570/401, manufacture
or delivery unauthorized, 720 Illinois Compiled Statutes 570/401.1, controlled
substance trafficking, or 720 Illinois Compiled Statutes 570/402, possession
unauthorized, of the controlled substances act;
      8.   A violation of 720 Illinois Compiled Statutes 550/4, possession of
cannabis, 720 Illinois Compiled Statutes 550/5, manufacture or delivery of
cannabis, 720 Illinois Compiled Statutes 550/5.1, cannabis trafficking, 720
Illinois Compiled Statutes 550/5.2, delivery of cannabis on school grounds, or
720 Illinois Compiled Statutes 550/8, unauthorized production or possession of
Cannabis sativa plant, of the cannabis control act; or
      9.   A violation of 720 Illinois Compiled Statutes 600/3.5, possession of
drug paraphernalia, of the drug paraphernalia control act.
   B.   Any motor vehicle which is used in connection with the following shall
be declared a public nuisance and subject to seizure and impoundment under this
chapter: a violation of 720 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/24-1, unlawful use of
weapon, 720 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/24-3.1, unlawful possession of
firearms and firearm ammunition, or 720 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/24-3.3,
unlawful sale or delivery of firearms on the premises of any school. This
subsection shall not apply when the exemptions are satisfied as set forth in
720 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/24-2. (Ord. 1007, 11-4-2008; amd. Ord. 1319-
20, 2-4-2020; Ord. 1457-24, 5-7-2024)
10-6-2: SEIZURE AND IMPOUNDMENT:
Whenever a police officer has probable cause to believe that a motor vehicle is
subject to seizure and impoundment pursuant to this chapter, the police officer
shall provide for the towing of the motor vehicle according to police
department procedures. When the motor vehicle is towed, the police officer
shall notify the person who is found to be in control of the motor vehicle at
the time of the alleged violation, if there is such a person, of the fact of
the seizure and of the motor vehicle owner's right to request a preliminary
hearing. Said motor vehicle shall be impounded pending the completion of the
hearings provided for in this chapter, unless the owner of the motor vehicle
posts with the village a cash bond as set forth in section
10-6-3 of this chapter. (Ord. 1007, 11-4-2008)
10-6-3: ADMINISTRATIVE FEE:
The owner of record of such motor vehicle subject to seizure and impoundment
shall be liable to the village for an administrative fee of five hundred
dollars ($500.00) in addition to any towing and storage charges. This chapter
is in addition to and shall not replace or otherwise abrogate any existing
state or federal laws or any ordinance that relates to the seizure and/or
impoundment of motor vehicles, and any fee in this chapter shall be in addition
to any and all penalties that may be assessed or imposed by a court for any
criminal charges. This chapter shall not apply: (Ord. 1007, 11-4-2008; amd.
Ord. 1062, 4-20-2010)
   A.   If the motor vehicle used in the violation was stolen at that time and
the theft was reported to the appropriate police authorities within twenty four
(24) hours after the theft was discovered;
   B.   If the motor vehicle is operating as a common carrier and the violation
occurs without the knowledge of the person in control of the motor vehicle; or
   C.   If the motor vehicle is subject to successful forfeiture proceedings
under 725 Illinois Compiled Statutes 150/1 et seq., the drug asset forfeiture
procedure act, 720 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/36-1 et seq., the seizure and
forfeiture of vessels, vehicles and aircraft act, or state or federal
forfeiture laws.
For purposes of this chapter, the "owner of record" or "owner" of a motor
vehicle is the record titleholder as registered with the secretary of state,
state of Illinois, or similar entity in a different state. (Ord. 1007, 11-4-
2008)
10-6-4: VEHICLE POSSESSION:
   A.   Except as provided otherwise in this chapter, a motor vehicle shall
continue to be impounded until:
      1.   The administrative fee, plus any applicable towing and storage
charges, are paid, in which case possession of the motor vehicle shall be given
to the person who is legally entitled to possess the motor vehicle;
      2.   A finding that a violation of this chapter did not occur after a
preliminary hearing or an administrative hearing; or
      3.   The motor vehicle is sold or otherwise disposed of to satisfy a
judgment to enforce a lien as provided by law.
   B.   Except as otherwise specifically provided by law, no owner, lienholder
or other person shall be legally entitled to take possession of a motor vehicle
impounded under this chapter until the civil fees applicable under this chapter
have been paid. (Ord. 1007, 11-4-2008)
10-6-5: PRELIMINARY HEARING:
If the owner of a motor vehicle seized pursuant to this chapter requests a
preliminary hearing, said owner must make a request for said preliminary
hearing within forty eight (48) hours of the seizure and impoundment. Said
request shall be made in person and in writing at the police department
administrative offices, Monday through Friday, excluding holidays, nine o'clock
(9:00) A.M. through five o'clock (5:00) P.M. using the tow hearing request
form. If the request for a preliminary hearing is timely filed, the chief of
police or his designee shall conduct such preliminary hearing within twenty
four (24) hours after the request, or by a date mutually agreeable to the
parties, Monday through Friday, excluding holidays, nine o'clock (9:00) A.M.
through five o'clock (5:00) P.M. All interested persons shall be given a
reasonable opportunity to be heard at the preliminary hearing. The formal rules
of evidence will not apply and hearsay evidence shall be admissible. If, after
the preliminary hearing, the chief of police or his designee determines there
is probable cause to believe that the motor vehicle is subject to seizure and
impoundment pursuant to this chapter, the chief of police or his designee shall
order the continued impoundment of the motor vehicle, as provided in this
chapter, unless the owner of the motor vehicle posts with the village a cash
bond as set forth in section
10-6-3 of this chapter. However, if the chief of police or his designee finds
that no such violation occurred, the chief of police or his designee shall
order the return of the motor vehicle or cash bond, but the owner shall be
responsible for any towing and storage charges. (Ord. 1007, 11-4-2008)
10-6-6: ADMINISTRATIVE HEARING:
The hearing officer shall hold an administrative hearing if the owner, within
thirty (30) days of the motor vehicle seizure and impoundment, affirmatively
requests an administrative hearing in writing. Said request shall be made in
person and in writing at the Manhattan village hall, Monday through Friday,
excluding holidays, nine o'clock (9:00) A.M. through four thirty o'clock (4:30)
P.M. using the administrative hearing request form. The hearing shall be
conducted and held, unless the motor vehicle was subject to successful
forfeiture proceedings pursuant to applicable state or federal forfeiture laws,
no later than forty six (46) days after the motor vehicle was seized, unless
continued by the owner or by order of the hearing officer; or unless the motor
vehicle was subject to unsuccessful forfeiture proceedings, in which case the
hearing shall be conducted and held, unless continued by the owner or by order
of the hearing officer, no later than forty six (46) days after the conclusion
of the forfeiture proceedings. All interested persons shall be given a
reasonable opportunity to be heard at the hearing. At any time prior to the
hearing date, the hearing officer may, at the request of either party, direct
witnesses to appear and give testimony at the hearing. The formal rules of
evidence will not apply at the hearing and hearsay evidence shall be
admissible. If, after the hearing, the hearing officer determines by a
preponderance of evidence that the motor vehicle, operated with the permission,
express or implied, of the owner, was used in the commission of any of the
violations set forth in this chapter, and that none of the exceptions apply,
the hearing officer shall enter an order finding the owner of record of the
motor vehicle civilly liable to the village for an administrative fee in the
amount as set forth in section
10-6-3 of this chapter, which shall constitute a debt due and owing to the
village. If the owner of record fails to appear at the hearing, the hearing
officer shall enter a default order finding the owner of record of the motor
vehicle civilly liable to the village for an administrative fee in the amount
as set forth in section
10-6-3 of this chapter, which shall constitute a debt due and owing to the
village, and a copy of which default order shall be sent to the registered
owner via certified mail, return receipt requested. If a cash bond has been
posted, the bond shall be applied. If a motor vehicle has been impounded when
such administrative fee is imposed, the village may seek to obtain a judgment
on the debt and enforce such judgment against the motor vehicle as provided by
law. However, if the hearing officer finds that no such violation occurred, the
hearing officer shall order the return of the motor vehicle or cash bond, but
the owner shall be responsible for any towing and storage charges. (Ord. 1007,
11-4-2008)
10-6-7: FAILURE TO PAY:
If the administrative fee and towing and storage charges are not paid:
   A.   After the time to request an administrative hearing has expired for an
owner of record who did not request an administrative hearing, or
   B.   Within thirty (30) days after entry of an administrative fee against an
owner of record who requested a hearing and the owner did not file a petition
for judicial review, or
   C.   Within thirty (30) days after an action seeking judicial review has
been resolved in favor of the village,
the village shall be authorized to dispose of said vehicle (including contents
and license plates) in the manner provided by law for the disposition of
unclaimed motor vehicles. (Ord. 1007, 11-4-2008)
10-6-8: RIGHT TO APPEAL:
Upon a finding after an administrative hearing that the motor vehicle was used
in the commission of any of the violations set forth in this chapter and that
the owner of record of the motor vehicle is civilly liable to the village for
an administrative fee, the owner has a right to petition for judicial review
within thirty (30) days of the finding. If a petition for judicial review is
filed, a copy must be provided to the village no later than seventy two (72)
hours after filing said petition. (Ord. 1007, 11-4-2008)
CHAPTER 7
GOLF CARTS AND RECREATIONAL OFF-HIGHWAY VEHICLES
SECTION:
10-7-1: Definitions
10-7-2: Requirements
10-7-3: Annual Registration
10-7-4: Registration Fee
10-7-5: Penalty
10-7-1: DEFINITIONS:
 
COUNTY       Any road under the jurisdiction of Will County highway department.
ROADS:
             A vehicle specifically designed and intended for the purposes of transporting
             one or more persons and their golf clubs or maintenance equipment while engaged
GOLF CART:   in the playing of golf, supervising the playing of golf or maintaining the
             condition of the grounds on a public or private golf course and having a maximum
             speed of twenty (20) miles per hour.
             Any motorized off-highway device designed to travel primarily off-highway, 64
RECREATIONAL inches or less in width, having a manufacturer’s dry weight of 2,000 pounds or
OFF-HIGHWAY  less for gas-powered engines or 3,000 pounds or less for electric-powered
VEHICLE:     engines, traveling on 4 or more non-highway tires, designed with a non-straddle
             seat and a steering wheel for steering control, except equipment such as
             lawnmowers.
STATE ROADS: Any road under the jurisdiction of the Illinois department of transportation.
             State roads include U.S. Route 52 and North Street.
TOWNSHIP     Any road under the jurisdiction of Manhattan Township road district.
ROADS:
             Any of the streets within the boundaries of the village of Manhattan except for
VILLAGE      state roads and county roads, but including township roads within the village
STREETS:     limits of the village of Manhattan and subject to a village of Manhattan and
             Manhattan Township road district agreement. (Ord. 1404-22, 7-19-2022; amd. Ord.
             1443-23, 12-5-2023)
 
10-7-2: REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   Golf carts and recreational off-highway vehicles may be operated on
village streets subject to the following:
      1.   The driver is subject to the mandatory vehicle liability insurance
requirements of Illinois and must carry proof of such insurance, specifically
insuring the golf cart or recreational off-highway vehicle.
      2.   The driver must have a valid driver’s license issued by the Illinois
secretary of state or by a foreign jurisdiction.
      3.   When operated on village, county, township or state streets, a golf
cart or recreational off-highway vehicle shall have its headlights and
taillamps illuminated at all times, including, but not limited to, times when
rain, snow, fog or other atmospheric conditions require the use of windshield
wipers and at any other time when, due to insufficient light or unfavorable
atmospheric conditions, persons and vehicles on the street, road or highway are
not clearly discernible at a distance of one thousand feet (1,000').
      4.   The golf cart or recreational off-highway vehicle shall be equipped
with brakes, a steering wheel apparatus, tires, a rearview mirror, red
reflective warning devices on the front and rear, an approved slow moving
vehicle emblem on the rear of the golf cart or recreational off-highway
vehicle, a headlight that emits a white light visible from a distance of five
hundred feet (500') to the front, a taillamp that emits a red light visible
from at least one hundred feet (100') from the rear, brake lights, turn
signals, side marker lights, and seatbelts or safety seats if transporting
children under the age of eight (8).
      5.   The capacity (the number of occupants) of the golf cart or
recreational off-highway vehicle shall not exceed the manufacture’s
specifications. Drivers are required to comply with child passenger safety
laws. The transportation of a child under the age of eight (8) years old is
prohibited, unless the child is accompanied by an adult (21 or older).
Appropriate seat belts and safety seats are required to transport children as
required under the Illinois Compiled Statutes and village ordinances.
      6.   The golf cart or recreational off-highway vehicle driver shall obey
all traffic laws of the state of Illinois and the village of Manhattan with
regard to the movement, operation, parking, and storage of vehicles on the
streets, roadways and private property.
      7.   Golf carts or recreational off-highway vehicles may only be operated
on streets with posted speed limits of thirty five (35) miles per hour or less.
This subsection A7 does hereby prohibit a golf cart or recreational off-highway
vehicle from crossing a village street at an intersection where the village
street has a posted speed limit of more than thirty five (35) miles per hour,
unless as set forth in subsection A9 of this section.
      8.   Golf carts or recreational off-highway vehicles may be operated only
on Manhattan-Monee Road between and including the intersections of Railroad
Street and Wabash Street and Route 52 between and including the intersections
of Front Street and Wabash Street (attached to the ordinance codified herein
and incorporated herein as exhibit A is a map of streets on which golf carts
may be operated).
      9.   Drivers of a golf cart or recreational off-highway vehicle may make
a direct crossing upon or across a street or road if the street or road has a
speed limit of thirty five (35) miles per hour or higher only if the crossing
is made at an intersection controlled by a traffic signal or a four-way stop
sign.
      10.   The driver of the golf cart or recreational off-highway vehicle
shall not exceed any posted speed limit.
      11.   A driver or person in actual physical control of the golf cart or
recreational off-highway vehicle on a street or road while under the influence
of alcohol or drugs is subject to section 11-500 through 11-502 of the Illinois
vehicle code statutes, and applicable village of Manhattan ordinances.
      12.   Golf carts or recreational off-highway vehicles may not be operated
on sidewalks, bike paths, ATV trails, snowmobile trails or other public
property not accessible to or authorized for vehicular traffic.
      13.   No “nonhighway” vehicle as defined by 625 Illinois Compiled
Statutes 5/11-1426.1 is permitted on village streets, roads or highways except
golf carts or recreational off-highway vehicles.
      14.   All crossings of streets, roads and highways must be direct
crossings made at an intersection.
      15.   All golf carts or recreational off-highway vehicles in order to be
operated as provided herein must register annually with the village of
Manhattan and have a current registration sticker purchased from the village of
Manhattan.
      16.   The requirements of this chapter apply to golf carts or
recreational off-highway vehicles within the village of Manhattan that are
intended to be used on village streets as provided herein. (Ord. 1404-22, 7-19-
2022; amd. Ord. 1443-23, 12-5-2023)
10-7-3: ANNUAL REGISTRATION:
   A.   All golf carts or recreational off-highway vehicles, in order to be
driven on village streets, must be registered annually with the village of
Manhattan. All registrations shall be issued by the police department unless
otherwise specifically provided, and shall be for the term of one year,
expiring on May 31 of each year. The registration sticker shall be displayed on
the rear of the vehicle in the center of the reflective slow moving vehicle
emblem.
   B.   Golf carts or recreational off-highway vehicles possessing valid
registration from another community and participating in an organized event or
parade within the village of Manhattan are exempt from registration for the day
of the event only. (Ord. 1404-22, 7-19-2022; amd. Ord. 1443-23, 12-5-2023)
10-7-4: REGISTRATION FEE:
   A.   The annual registration fee for a golf cart or recreational off-highway
vehicle in the village shall be twenty-five dollars ($25.00). (Ord. 1404-22, 7-
19-2022; amd. Ord. 1443-23, 12-5-2023)
10-7-5: PENALTY:
   A.   Any person who violates any provision of this chapter shall upon
conviction be subject to a fine as established in section
1-4-1 of this code. (Ord. 1404-22, 7-19-2022; amd. Ord. 1443-23, 12-5-2023)
