VILLAGE CODE
of
MANTENO, ILLINOIS
1974
Code current through:
Ord. 25-22, passed 10-6-2025
 
Published by:
American Legal Publishing
525 Vine Street, Suite 310
Cincinnati, Ohio 45202
Tel: (800) 445-5588
Internet: http://www.amlegal.com
PREFACE
This code of the Village of Mateno, as supplemented, contains ordinances up to
and including ordinance 25-22, passed October 6, 2025. Ordinances of the
Village adopted after said ordinance supersede the provisions of this code to
the extent that they are in conflict or inconsistent therewith. Consult the
Village office in order to ascertain whether any particular provision of the
code has been amended, superseded or repealed.
American Legal Publishing
Cincinnati, Ohio
ORDINANCES PENDING REVIEW FOR CODIFICATION
Listed ordinances have been passed, but they are pending review by the
publisher, and they may not affect the code of ordinances. Additionally,
ordinances listed in this section may not show the original ordinances in their
entirety. Please contact the office of the clerk if there are any questions
concerning any listed ordinances.
ADOPTING ORDINANCE
ORDINANCE NO. 74-10
AN ORDINANCE ADOPTING THE VILLAGE CODE OF MANTENO, ILLINOIS
   SECTION 1. From and after the date of passage of this Ordinance, the Village
Code of the Village of Manteno, Illinois, prepared by Sterling Codifiers, Inc.,
under the direction of the Governing Body of the Village, containing all
ordinances of a general nature in effect at the time of such codification,
shall be accepted in all courts without question as the official Code and Law
of the Village as enacted by the President and Board of Trustees.
   SECTION 2. There is hereby adopted, as a method of perpetual codification,
the loose-leaf type of binding together with the continuous supplement service
provided by Sterling Codifiers, Inc., whereby each newly adopted ordinance of a
general and permanent nature amending, altering, adding to or deleting
provisions of the Official Village Code is identified by the proper catchline
and is inserted in the proper place in each of the official copies. Each such
new provision shall become effective upon the passage of the ordinance and the
insertion of the proper replacement pages in the copies of the Code, three (3)
copies of which shall be maintained in the office of the Village Clerk,
certified as to correctness and available for inspection at any and all times
that said office is regularly open.
   SECTION 3. All ordinances of a general nature included in this Official
Village Code shall be considered as a continuation of said ordinance provision,
and the fact that some provisions have been deliberately eliminated by the
Governing Body shall not serve to cause any interruption in the continuous
effectiveness of ordinances included in said Official Village Code.
All ordinances of a special nature, such as tax levy ordinances, bond
ordinances, franchises, vacating ordinances and annexation ordinances shall
continue in full force and effect unless specifically repealed or amended by a
provision of the Village Code. Such ordinances are not intended to be included
in the Official Village Code.
   SECTION 4. It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to
change or amend by additions or deletions, any part or portion of such Code, or
to insert or delete pages or portions thereof, or to alter or tamper with such
Code in any manner whatsoever which will cause the law of the Village to be
misrepresented thereby.
Any person, firm or corporation violating this Section shall be punished as
provided in Section
1-4-1 of the Village Code of Manteno, Illinois.
   SECTION 5. All ordinances or parts of ordinances in conflict herewith are,
to the extent of such conflict, hereby repealed.
   SECTION 6. This Ordinance and the Code adopted by the same shall be in full
force and effect from and after its passage and approval in accordance with
law, as printed and published in book form by order of the President and Board
of Trustees of the Village.
   PASSED this 15th day of July, 1974.
   APPROVED this 15th day of July, 1974.
VILLAGE OF MANTENO
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/a52ddd8667179438dfe82ac8fd74e09d8c5052bc/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2687.gif]
TITLE 1
ADMINISTRATIVE
CHAPTER 1
OFFICIAL VILLAGE CODE
SECTION:
1-1-1: Title
1-1-2: Acceptance
1-1-3: Amendments
1-1-4: Interpretations
1-1-5: Code Alteration
1-1-6: Distribution Of Code
1-1-7: Intent
1-1-8: Invalidation Of Part
1-1-9: Conformity With Illinois Municipal Code
1-1-1: TITLE:
Upon adoption by the board of trustees this code is hereby declared to be and
shall hereafter constitute the official village code of the village of Manteno.
This code of ordinances shall be known and cited as the Manteno municipal code,
and it is hereby published by authority of the board of trustees and shall be
kept up to date as provided in section
1-1-3 of this chapter under the direction of the village attorney, acting for
said village board of trustees. Any reference to the number of any section
contained herein shall be understood to refer to the position of the same
number, its appropriate chapter and title heading, and to the general penalty
clause relating thereto, as well as to the section itself, when reference is
made to this code by title in any legal document. (1974 Code)
1-1-2: ACCEPTANCE:
This code, as hereby presented in printed form, shall hereafter be received
without further proof in all courts and in all administrative tribunals of this
state as the ordinances of the village of general and permanent effect, except
the excluded ordinances enumerated in section
1-2-1 of this title 1 . (1974 Code)
 
Notes
1 1. 65 ILCS 5/1-2-6.
1-1-3: AMENDMENTS:
Any ordinance amending this code shall set forth the title, chapter and section
number of the section or sections to be amended, and this shall constitute a
sufficient compliance with any statutory requirement pertaining to the
amendment or revision by ordinance of any part of this code. All such
amendments or revisions by ordinance shall be immediately forwarded to the
codifiers and the said ordinance material shall be prepared for insertion in
its proper place in each copy of this code. Each such replacement page shall be
properly identified and shall be inserted in each individual copy of this code
within thirty (30) days from the date of its final passage. (1974 Code)
1-1-4: INTERPRETATIONS:
In the determination of the provisions of each section of this code the
following rules shall be observed:
   (A)   Intent To Defraud: Whenever an intent to defraud is required in order
to constitute an offense, it shall be sufficient if an intent appears to
defraud any person.
   (B)   Liability Of Employers And Agents: When the provisions of any section
of this code prohibits the commission of an act, not only the person actually
doing the prohibited act or omitting the directed act, but also the employer
and all other persons concerned with or in aiding or abetting the said person
shall be guilty of the offense described and liable to the penalty set forth.
(1974 Code)
1-1-5: CODE ALTERATION:
It shall be deemed unlawful for any person to alter, change, replace or deface
in any way any section or any page of this code in such a manner that the
meaning of any phrase or order may be changed or omitted. Replacement pages may
be inserted according to the official instructions when so authorized by the
village board. The clerk shall see that the replacement pages are properly
inserted in the official copies maintained in the office of the clerk.
Any person having in his custody an official copy of this code shall make every
effort to maintain said code in an up to date and efficient manner. He shall
see to the immediate insertion of new or replacement pages when such are
delivered to him or made available to him through the office of the village
clerk. Said code books, while in actual possession of officials and other
interested persons, shall be and remain the property of the village and shall
be returned to the office of the clerk when directed so to do by order of the
village board. (1974 Code)
1-1-6: DISTRIBUTION OF CODE:
All printed copies of this code shall be deposited with the village clerk. He
shall deliver one copy thereof to the president of the board of trustees, one
copy to each trustee, two (2) copies to the village attorney, two (2) copies to
the police chief and to such other persons as the president of the board of
trustees may designate from time to time. The village clerk shall sell printed
copies of said code at such price as the president and board of trustees may
fix and determine from time to time. (1956 Code, Sec. 1-5)
1-1-7: INTENT:
All general provisions, terms, phrases and expressions contained in this code
shall be liberally construed in order that the true intent and meaning of the
board of trustees may be fully carried out. (1956 Code, Sec. 1-14)
1-1-8: INVALIDATION OF PART:
If any part, section, sentence or clause of this code shall be adjudged void
and of no effect, such decision shall not affect the validity of the remaining
portion of the code. (1956 Code, Sec. 1-15)
1-1-9: CONFORMITY WITH ILLINOIS MUNICIPAL CODE:
It is the intention of the president and board of trustees of the village that
this code conform in all respects with the Illinois municipal code, chapter 65,
Illinois Compiled Statutes, as amended. Any section of this code not so
conforming shall be read and interpreted so as to conform. (1956 Code, Sec. 1-
17; amd. 1974 Code)
CHAPTER 2
SAVING CLAUSE
SECTION:
1-2-1: Repeal Of General Ordinances
1-2-2: Repeal Of Repealing Ordinance
1-2-3: Public Utility Ordinances
1-2-4: Court Proceedings
1-2-1: REPEAL OF GENERAL ORDINANCES:
All general ordinances of the village passed prior to the adoption of this code
are hereby repealed, except such as are referred to herein as being still in
force or are by necessary implication herein reserved from repeal (subject to
the saving clauses contained in the following sections), from which are
excluded the following ordinances which are not hereby repealed: tax levy
ordinances; appropriation ordinances; ordinances relating to boundaries and
annexations; franchise ordinances and other ordinances granting special rights
to persons or corporations; contract ordinances and ordinances authorizing the
execution of a contract or the issuance of warrants; salary ordinances;
ordinances establishing, naming or vacating streets, alleys or other public
places; improvement ordinances; bond transfer or acceptance of real estate by
or from the village; the zoning ordinance and subdivision control ordinance,
both passed April 1, 1968, and any amendments thereto; and all special
ordinances. (1974 Code)
1-2-2: REPEAL OF REPEALING ORDINANCE:
When any ordinance repealing a former ordinance, clause or provision, shall be
itself repealed, such repeal shall not be construed to revive such former
ordinance, clause or provision. (1956 Code, Sec. 1-13)
1-2-3: PUBLIC UTILITY ORDINANCES:
No ordinance relating to railroads or railroad crossings with streets and other
public ways, or relating to the conduct, duties, service or rates of public
utilities shall be repealed by virtue of the adoption of this code or by virtue
of the preceding section, excepting as this code may contain provisions for
such matters, in which case this code shall be considered as amending such
ordinance or ordinances in respect to such provisions only. (1974 Code)
1-2-4: COURT PROCEEDINGS:
No new ordinance shall be construed or held to repeal a former ordinance,
whether such former ordinance is expressly repealed or not, as to any offense
committed against such former ordinance or as to any act done, any penalty,
forfeiture or punishment so incurred, or any right accrued or claim arising
under the former ordinance, or in any way wherever to affect any such offense
or act so committed or so done, or any penalty, forfeiture or punishment so
incurred or any right accrued or claim arising before the new ordinance takes
effect, save only that the proceedings thereafter shall conform to the
ordinance in force at the time of such proceeding, so far as practicable. If
any penalty, forfeiture or punishment be mitigated by any provision of a new
ordinance, such provision may be, by the consent of the party affected, applied
to any judgment announced after the new ordinance takes effect.
This section shall extend to all repeals, either by express words or
implication, whether the repeal is in the ordinance making any new provisions
upon the same subject or in any other ordinance.
Nothing contained in this chapter shall be construed as abating any action now
pending under or by virtue of any general ordinance of the village herein
repealed and the provisions of all general ordinance contained in this code
shall be deemed to be continuing provisions and not a new enactment of the same
provision; nor shall this chapter be deemed as discontinuing, abating,
modifying or altering any penalty accrued or to accrue, or any right of the
village under any ordinance or provision thereof in force at the time of the
adoption of this code. (1974 Code)
CHAPTER 3
DEFINITIONS
SECTION:
1-3-1: Construction Of Words
1-3-2: Definitions, General
1-3-3: Catchlines
1-3-1: CONSTRUCTION OF WORDS:
Whenever any word in any section of this code importing the plural number is
used in describing or referring to any matters, parties or persons, any single
matter, party or person shall be deemed to be included, although distributive
words may not have been used.
When any subject matter, party or person is referred to in this code by words
importing the singular number only, or the masculine gender, several matters,
parties or persons and females as well as males and bodies corporate shall be
deemed to be included; provided, that these rules of construction shall not be
applied to any section of this code which contains any express provision
excluding such construction or where the subject matter or content may be
repugnant thereto. (1974 Code)
1-3-2: DEFINITIONS, GENERAL:
Whenever the following words or terms are used in this code they shall have the
meanings herein ascribed to them, unless the context makes such meaning
repugnant thereto:
AGENT: A person acting on behalf of another.
BOARD: Unless otherwise indicated, shall mean the board of trustees of the
village.
CODE: The municipal code of Manteno and amendments thereto.
COUNTY: The county of Kankakee.
EMPLOYEES: Whenever reference is made in this code to a village employee by
title only, this shall be construed as though followed by the words "of the
village of Manteno".
FEE: A sum of money charged by the village for the carrying on of a business,
profession or occupation.
KNOWINGLY: Imports only a knowledge that the facts exist which bring the act or
omission within the provisions of this code. It does not require any knowledge
of the unlawfulness of such act or omission.
LICENSE: The permission granted for the carrying on of a business, profession
or occupation.
MISDEMEANOR: Any offense deemed a violation of the provisions of this code
which is a lesser offense than a felony as defined by state law.
NEGLIGENT: The word "negligent" as well as "neglect", "negligence" and
"negligently" imports a want of such attention to the nature of probable
consequences of the act or omission as a prudent man ordinarily bestows in
acting in his own concern.
NUISANCE: Anything offensive or obnoxious to the health and welfare of the
inhabitants of the village; or an act or thing repugnant to, or creating a
hazard to, or having a detrimental effect on the property of another person or
to the community.
OCCUPANT: Applied to a building or land shall include any person who occupies
the whole or any part of such building or land whether alone or with others.
OFFENSE: Any act forbidden by any provision of this code or the omission of any
act required by the provisions of this code.
OFFICERS: Whenever reference is made in this code to a village officer by title
only, this shall be construed as though followed by the words "of the village
of Manteno".
OPERATOR: The person who is in charge of any operation, business or profession.
OWNER: Applied to a building or land shall include any part owner, joint owner,
tenant in common, joint tenant or lessee of the whole or of a part of such
building or land.
PERSON: Any natural individual, firm, trust, partnership, association or
corporation in his or its own capacity or as administrator, conservator,
executor, trustee, receiver or other representative appointed by the court.
Whenever the word "person" is used in any section of this code prescribing a
penalty or fine as applied to partnerships or associations, the word shall
include the partners or members thereof, and such word as applied to
corporations shall include the officers, agents or employees thereof who are
responsible for any violation of said section.
PERSONAL PROPERTY: Shall include every description of money, goods, chattels,
effects, evidence of rights in action and all written instruments by which any
pecuniary obligation, right or title to property is created, acknowledged,
transferred, increased, defeated, discharged or diminished and every right or
interest therein.
RETAILER: Unless otherwise specifically defined shall be understood to relate
to the sale of goods, merchandise, articles or things in small quantities
direct to the consumer.
STATE: Unless otherwise indicated, shall mean the state of Illinois.
STREET: Shall include alleys, lanes, courts, boulevards, public squares, public
places and sidewalks.
TENANT: Applied to a building or land shall include any person who occupies the
whole or any part of such building or land whether alone or with others.
VILLAGE: The village of Manteno, county of Kankakee, state of Illinois.
WHOLESALER: The words "wholesaler" and "wholesale dealer", unless otherwise
specifically defined, shall be understood to relate to the sale of goods,
merchandise, articles or things in quantity to persons who purchase for the
purpose of resale.
WILFULLY: When applied to the intent with which an act is done or omitted,
implies simply a purpose or willingness to commit the act or make the omission
referred to. It does not require any intent to violate law, or to injure
another, or to acquire an advantage.
WRITTEN, IN WRITING: The terms "written" or "in writing" may include printing
and any other mode of representing words and letters, but when the written
signature of any person is required by law to any official or public writing or
bond required by law, it shall be in the proper handwriting of such person, or
in case he is unable to write, by his proper mark. (1974 Code)
1-3-3: CATCHLINES:
The catchlines of the several sections of this code are intended as mere
catchwords to indicate the content of the section and shall not be deemed or
taken to be titles of such sections, nor as any part of the section, nor unless
expressly so provided, shall they be so deemed when any of such sections,
including the catchlines, are amended or reenacted. (1974 Code)
CHAPTER 4
GENERAL PENALTY
SECTION:
1-4-1: Penalty
1-4-2: License
1-4-3: Application
1-4-4: Liability Of Officers
1-4-5: Past Due Obligations
1-4-1: PENALTY:
Unless otherwise set forth in this Code, any person found to be in violation of
any section of this Code shall be fined as follows:
   (A)   Any person found in violation of title 7, chapter 6, "Stopping,
Standing, Parking", of this Code as follows:
      1.   Not less than fifty dollars ($50.00) and not more than seven hundred
fifty dollars ($750.00), except that the violator shall be relieved of
responsibility for the balance of the fine if twenty dollars ($20.00) is paid
within forty eight (48) hours of the ticket's issuance;
      2.   Three hundred dollars ($300.00) for a violation of section
7-6-14 of this Code, except that the violator shall be relieved of
responsibility for the balance of the fine if two hundred fifty dollars
($250.00) is paid within forty eight (48) hours of the ticket's issuance; and,
      3.   Three hundred dollars ($300.00) for a violation of section
7-6-16 of this Code, except that the violator shall be relieved of
responsibility for the balance of the fine if one hundred dollars ($100.00) is
paid within forty eight (48) hours of the ticket's issuance.
   (B)   Any person found in violation of any other section of this Code shall
be fined not less than two hundred dollars ($200.00) and not more than seven
hundred fifty dollars ($750.00), except that the violator shall be relieved of
responsibility for the balance of the fine if one hundred dollars ($100.00) is
paid within forty eight (48) hours of the ticket's issuance.
   (C)   Each day a violation exists or continues shall constitute a separate
and distinct offense. (Ord. 19-12, 8-5-2019)
1-4-2: LICENSE:
When a person is convicted of a violation of any section of this Code, any
license previously issued him by the Village may be revoked by the court or by
the Board of Trustees. (1974 Code)
1-4-3: APPLICATION:
The penalty provided in this chapter shall be applicable to every section in
this Code the same as though it were a part of each and every separate section.
Any person convicted of a violation of any section of this Code where any duty
is prescribed or obligation imposed, or where any act which is of a continuing
nature or declared to be unlawful, shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor. A
separate offense shall be deemed committed upon each day such duty or
obligation remains unperformed or such act continues, unless otherwise
specifically provided in this Code.
In all cases where the same offense is made punishable or is created by
different clauses or sections of this Code the prosecuting officer may elect
under which to proceed; but not more than one recovery shall be had against the
same person for the same offense; provided, that the revocation of a license or
permit shall not be considered a recovery or penalty so as to bar any other
penalty being enforced.
Whenever the doing of any act or the omission to do any act constitutes a
breach of any section or provision of this Code and there shall be no fine or
penalty specifically declared for such breach, the provisions of this chapter
shall apply and a separate offense shall be deemed committed upon each day
during or on which a breach or violation occurs or continues. (1974 Code)
1-4-4: LIABILITY OF OFFICERS:
No provision of this Code designating the duties of any officer or employee
shall be so construed as to make such officer or employee liable for any fine
or penalty provided for a failure to perform such duty, unless the intention of
the Board of Trustees to impose such fine or penalty on such officer or
employee is specifically and clearly expressed in the section creating the
duty. (1974 Code)
1-4-5: PAST DUE OBLIGATIONS:
Any person, firm, or corporation which fails to pay within thirty (30) days any
obligation due the Village shall be liable to the Village for interest on said
indebtedness at the rate of nine percent (9%) per annum. (Ord. 95-16, 1-15-
1996)
CHAPTER 5
VILLAGE PRESIDENT
SECTION:
1-5-1: Election; Qualifications
1-5-2: Bond
1-5-3: Executive Duties; Compensation
1-5-4: President Pro Tempore
1-5-5: Appointment And Removal Of Appointed Officers
1-5-6: General Duties
1-5-7: Approval And Veto Of Ordinances
1-5-8: Sign Licenses, Permits And Commissions
1-5-9: Warrants Signed By President
1-5-10: Release Prisoners
1-5-11: Tax Titles; Conveyance
1-5-12: Powers As To Litigation
1-5-13: Inspections Of Records
1-5-14: Additional Powers
1-5-15: Emergency Powers
1-5-1: ELECTION; QUALIFICATIONS:
There shall be elected a president of the village, who shall hold his office
for four (4) years and until his successor is elected and qualified; he shall
be a citizen of the United States, a qualified elector, and shall have resided
within the corporate limits of the village at least one year next preceding the
election at which he is a candidate. (1974 Code)
1-5-2: BOND:
The president of the village shall before he enters upon the duties of his
office execute a bond to the village in the penal sum of one thousand dollars
($1,000.00) with sureties to be approved by the board of trustees, conditioned
as prescribed by law. (1974 Code)
1-5-3: EXECUTIVE DUTIES; COMPENSATION:
The president of the board of trustees shall perform the duties and exercise
the powers conferred upon the mayor of a city and may use the title of "mayor"
or "village president".
The president shall devote such time to the duties of his office as the
faithful discharge thereof may require, and shall receive compensation for his
services in the amount of eight thousand dollars ($8,000.00) per annum,
commencing upon election at the 2005 consolidated election. Such compensation
shall be payable in periodic amounts the same as other elected officials.
The president of the board of trustees may exercise the same veto powers, and
with like effect, as the mayor of a city; and the board of trustees may pass
ordinances over such veto in the like manner as a city council. (Ord. 03-40, 4-
26-2004)
1-5-4: PRESIDENT PRO TEMPORE:
During a temporary absence of the president or his inability to act, the board
of trustees shall elect one of its members to act as president pro tempore who,
during his absence or disability, shall possess the powers of the president.
(1974 Code)
1-5-5: APPOINTMENT AND REMOVAL OF APPOINTED OFFICERS:
   (A)   Unless otherwise provided by statute, all appointed officers of the
village shall be appointed by the president with the advice and consent of the
board of trustees. Appointed officers shall hold their office for such term as
may be established and until their successor has been chosen and has qualified.
   (B)   Vacancies in all appointed offices may be filled in the same manner as
original appointments.
   (C)   An appointed officer may resign from his or her office. If an
appointed officer resigns, he or she shall continue in office until a successor
has been chosen and has qualified.
   (D)   If there is a failure to appoint an officer, or the person fails to
qualify, the appointed officer then holding the office shall continue in the
office until a successor has been chosen and has been qualified.
   (E)   If an appointed officer ceases to perform the duties of or to hold an
office by reason of death, permanent physical or mental disability, conviction
of a disqualifying crime, or dismissal from or abandonment of office, the
president may appoint a temporary officer to fill the office. The term for any
temporary officer appointed shall be thirty (30) days. No person shall be
eligible to be appointed or to fill an office as a temporary officer more than
two (2) times in any one (1) fiscal year.
   (F)   Except as otherwise provided by law, the president may remove any
appointed officer on any written charge whenever he is of the opinion that the
interests of the village demand removal. The president shall report the reasons
for the removal to the board of trustees at a special or regular board of
trustees meeting to be held not less than five (5) no more than ten (10) days
after the removal. If the president fails or refuses to report to the board of
trustees the reasons for the removal, or if the board of trustees by two-thirds
(2/3) vote disapproves of the removal, the officer shall thereupon be restored
to the office from which the officer was removed. Upon restoration, the officer
shall give a new bond and take a new oath of office. No officer shall be
removed a second time for the same offense. (1974 Code; amd. Ord. 24-18, 2-3-
2025)
1-5-6: GENERAL DUTIES:
The president shall supervise the conduct of all appointed officers and see
that they faithfully and efficiently discharge the duties of their respective
offices; he shall inquire into all reasonable complaints made against them and
cause all their neglects or violations of duties to be promptly corrected, and
he shall, from time to time, give the board of trustees such information
relative to the affairs of the village as he may deem proper and recommend to
their consideration any measure he may deem expedient, tending to the well
being, security and improvement of the village. (1974 Code)
1-5-7: APPROVAL AND VETO OF ORDINANCES:
The president shall carefully inspect all ordinances passed by the board of
trustees and fix his official signature to such as he may approve and return
them to the village clerk; such ordinances as he shall not approve shall be
returned to the board of trustees, with his objections thereto in writing, at
the next regular meeting of the board of trustees, occurring after the passage
thereof. Such veto may extend to any one or more items or appropriations
contained in any ordinance making appropriations, or to the entire ordinance
and in case the veto only extends to a part of such ordinance, the residue
thereof shall take effect and be in force; but in case the president shall fail
to return any ordinance with his objections thereto by the time aforesaid, he
shall be deemed to have approved such ordinance and the same shall take effect
accordingly. (1974 Code)
1-5-8: SIGN LICENSES, PERMITS AND COMMISSIONS:
The president shall sign all commissions, licenses, permits and warrants
granted, issued or ordered by the board of trustees or authorized by the
ordinances of the village, except for permits provided to be issued by or under
the signature of the health officer or other proper officer, and may revoke any
such licenses for the causes hereinafter provided. (1974 Code)
1-5-9: WARRANTS SIGNED BY PRESIDENT:
All warrants drawn upon the treasurer must be signed by the president of the
village and countersigned by the village clerk and must state the particular
fund to which same is chargeable and the person to whom payable, and for what
purpose the same was drawn and no money shall be otherwise paid than upon
warrants so drawn. (1974 Code)
1-5-10: RELEASE PRISONERS:
The president may for good and sufficient reasons release any person imprisoned
for violation of any provision of this code. The president shall cause a proper
record thereof to be made and shall report such release with the cause therefor
to the board of trustees at its first session thereafter. (1974 Code)
1-5-11: TAX TITLES; CONVEYANCE:
Upon such terms as may be agreed upon with the consent of the finance committee
and the board of trustees, the president and village treasurer may sell and
convey any and all lots and parcels of land to which a title is held by the
village under sale and conveyance for the village taxes or assessments. (1974
Code)
1-5-12: POWERS AS TO LITIGATION:
The president shall sign, and is hereby authorized to sign in behalf of the
village all instruments necessary to the prompt prosecution or defense of any
or all actions brought by or against the village, including bonds for
injunction. (1974 Code)
1-5-13: INSPECTIONS OF RECORDS:
The president shall have power at all times to examine and inspect the books,
records and papers of any agent, employee or officer of the village. (1974
Code)
1-5-14: ADDITIONAL POWERS:
In addition to the above, the president shall perform all such other duties and
have all additional powers that are or may be prescribed by the laws of the
state, or the provisions of this code. (1974 Code)
1-5-15: EMERGENCY POWERS:
The president shall be ex officio coordinator of activities in cases of
emergency resulting from any explosion, fire, flood, riot, storm or other cause
requiring concerted measures for the maintenance of public peace and order, the
preservation of life and property and the relief of suffering or for any of
these purposes. (1956 Code, Sec. 3-6)
CHAPTER 6
BOARD OF TRUSTEES
SECTION:
1-6-1: Legislative Body
1-6-2: Regular Meetings
1-6-3: Special Meetings
1-6-4: Quorum
1-6-5: Rules, Order Of Business
1-6-6: Compensation
1-6-7: Suspension Of Rules
1-6-8: Omnibus Vote
1-6-9: Public Participation
1-6-1: LEGISLATIVE BODY:
The legislative and governing body of the village shall consist of the
president of the village and six (6) trustees, elected for a four (4) year
term, according to the method provided by statute, who shall possess the
qualifications for office, be elected by the legal voters of the municipality,
take the oath of office and perform the duties provided by the Illinois
statutes. (1974 Code)
1-6-2: REGULAR MEETINGS:
Regular meetings of the president and board of trustees shall be held on the
first and third Mondays of each month at the hour of six o'clock (6:00) P.M. at
the village board room. In case such meeting should fall on a legal holiday,
then such meeting shall be held the following day after such legal holiday.
(Ord. 01-04, 6-4-2001; amd. Ord. 22-16, 12-19-2022)
1-6-3: SPECIAL MEETINGS:
Special meetings may be held at any time on call of the president or any two
(2) or more trustees; such call shall be in writing, duly signed, and shall be
presented to the clerk, who shall proceed immediately to cause notice of the
same to be served upon the president and trustees in person or by registered
letter, and such notice shall describe in brief the nature or object of the
call. (1974 Code)
1-6-4: QUORUM:
A majority of the corporate authorities shall constitute a quorum to do
business, but a smaller number may adjourn from time to time, and may compel
the attendance of absentees under such penalties as may be prescribed by
ordinance. (1974 Code)
1-6-5: RULES, ORDER OF BUSINESS:
The following rules of order for conduct of village business by the president
and board of trustees of the village are hereby adopted:
Rule 1. The president shall, if present, take the chair at the hour appointed
for the meeting of the board; if he be not present the board of trustees shall
elect a temporary chairman from among themselves who shall act in his stead.
The meeting being called to order, the roll of members shall be called, and if
a quorum be present the presiding officer shall cause the journal of the last
preceding meeting or meetings to be read unless such reading be dispensed with
by vote of the board.
Rule 2. The president shall preserve order and decorum. He may speak to points
of order in preference to any member and shall decide points of order subject
to an appeal of the board of trustees by any two (2) members, on which appeal
no member shall speak more than once unless by leave of the board.
Rule 3. Every question shall be distinctly stated by the president before it is
open for debate. Every motion shall be reduced to writing if the president or
any member shall so demand.
Rule 4. The president may call on any member to perform the duties of chairman;
no such substitution, however, shall extend beyond the adjournment of the
particular meeting.
Rule 5. Every member previous to speaking to any question shall audibly address
the presiding officer as "Mr. President" or "Mr. Mayor". Such member shall not,
however, speak further until he is recognized and named. (1974 Code)
Rule 6. (Rep. by Ord. 04-16, 8-2-2004)
Rule 7. The passage of all ordinances for whatever purpose and of any
resolution or motion: a) to create any liability against the village or b) for
the expenditures or appropriation of its money, shall require the concurrence
of a majority of all members elected to the village board, including the
president. The yeas and nays shall be taken upon the question of the passage of
the designated ordinances, resolutions or motions and recorded in the journal
of the village board. Likewise, the yeas and nays shall be taken upon the
passage of any other resolution or motion at the request of any trustee, and
shall be recorded in the journal.
Rule 8. Every member present when a vote is taken shall vote unless excused by
the board of trustees, or unless he shall be directly interested in the matter
pending, in which case such member shall not vote. Any member refusing to vote
or passing his vote shall be counted as voting with the majority. (1974 Code)
Rule 9. Standing committees shall be appointed by the president from the
members of the board of trustees with the advice and consent of the board at or
before the second regular meeting after a municipal election, or as soon
thereafter as may be practicable. Vacancies, if any occur, shall be filled in
the same manner. Each committee shall consist of two (2) members of the board
of trustees and the president, who shall, ex officio, be a member of each
committee. One member shall be designated by the president as chairman. There
shall be six (6) standing committees as follows:
      General government.
      Finance.
      Public works and utilities.
      Properties and recreation.
      Public safety and health.
      Planning and zoning.
Rule 10. Standing committees shall be responsible to the village board as
follows:
      1.   General government committee: This committee shall advise on policy
matters pending before the village board related to the general management of
the village, including legal services, risk management, cable television,
refuse rates, general personnel policies, intergovernmental relations, and
other matters generally related to the village manager's office.
      2.   Finance committee: This committee shall advise on policy matters
pending before the village board related to the financial and data processing
management of the village, including corporate plan and operating budget,
accounting, cash management, data processing, and financial auditing and
reporting. (Ord. 04-15, 7-19-2004)
      3.   Public works and utilities committee: This committee shall advise on
policy matters pending before the village board related to the general
management of certain of the municipal services departments of the village,
including streets, sewerage systems, and related equipment and vehicles. (Ord.
07-13, 8-6-2007)
      4.   Properties and recreation committee: This committee shall advise on
policy matters pending before the village board related to the general
management of certain of the municipal services departments of the village,
including buildings and grounds, forestry, commuter facilities, public parks,
Manteno municipal golf course, recreation and the Leo Hassett Community Center.
      5.   Public safety and health committee: This committee shall advise on
policy matters pending before the village board related to the general
management of the law enforcement services department and the emergency
services and disaster agency. (Ord. 04-15, 7-19-2004)
      6.   Planning and zoning committee: This committee shall advise on policy
matters that were pending before the village board related to inspectional
services, land use planning, zoning, transportation systems, and other matters
that were referred to the plan commission. (Ord. 04-15, 7-19-2004; amd. Ord.
05-01, 5-16-2005)
Rule 11. Special committees may be appointed by the president for the
consideration of any particular question or matter.
Rule 12. All committees to whom any matter may be referred shall report in
writing if requested by any member. Minority reports may be submitted signed by
the dissenting member or members.
Rule 13. On the acceptance of a final report from a special committee, such
committee shall stand discharged without vote unless it be otherwise ordered.
All reports made by committees or officers of the village, all resolutions
adopted, all ordinances as presented and passed, all communications, petitions
and the like received, and generally all papers presented to be acted on, shall
be filed and carefully preserved by the clerk.
Rule 14. All petitions or communications shall be addressed to the president
and board of trustees and shall be in writing and filed with the clerk.
Rule 15. When a member wishes to present a communication, petition, order,
resolution or other original matter, he shall briefly state its nature before
presenting the same.
Rule 16. No person, except a member of the board, shall be permitted to address
the president or the board without the consent of the president.
Rule 17. All standing committees shall have the power in case of emergency to
correct the cause of such emergency, the cost of which shall not exceed one
hundred fifty dollars ($150.00).
Rule 18. The order of business of this board shall be as follows:
      1.   Calling the roll of members.
      2.   Minutes of last meeting or meetings.
      3.   Reports of committees and officers.
      4.   Old business.
      5.   New business.
      6.   Adjournment.
Rule 19. The president shall decide all questions of order, and, in all cases
not covered by these rules or where they are not applicable, the board shall be
governed by parliamentary law as laid down in the current edition of "Robert's
Rules Of Order".
Rule 20. When a question is before the board, no motions shall be in order but
to adjourn; lay on the table; previous question; postpone indefinitely;
postpone to a certain time, to commit; and amend. These motions shall be
privileged and have precedence in the order named.
Rule 21. In case of the want of a quorum at any time of the village board, a
majority of the trustees present may direct the president or presiding officer
to direct any police officer to go out and notify any and all absent members,
who can be found in the village and who are not unable through sickness to
attend. After notice and request by such officer and such member shall refuse
to attend, such officer shall, without warrant, arrest such member and bring
him in. (1974 Code)
1-6-6: COMPENSATION:
Each member of the board of trustees shall receive compensation as determined
from time to time by the president and board of trustees, for each meeting of
the board actually attended to include regularly scheduled board meetings, and
special board meetings. Effective May 1, 2015, this rate will be one hundred
dollars ($100.00) per meeting.
Board of trustees members serving on standing committees appointed by the
president shall receive the same rate of compensation for meetings attended up
to a maximum of three (3) committee meetings per month per trustee.
Documentation of attendance must be reported by the committee chairman to the
village clerk. These standing committees are listed in section
1-6-5, rule 9 of this chapter. (Ord. 14-25, 10-20-2014)
1-6-7: SUSPENSION OF RULES:
The rules of order, other than those prescribed by statute, may be suspended at
any time by the consent of the majority of the members present at any meeting.
(1956 Code § 4-5)
1-6-8: OMNIBUS VOTE:
In addition to the voting requirements set forth above, the president and board
of trustees at any meeting may, by unanimous consent, agree to take a single
vote, by yeas and nays, on several questions of any two (2) or more designated
ordinances, resolutions or motions placed together for voting purposes in and
under the designation, "Omnibus Vote", and in such event, the village clerk may
enter the words "Omnibus Vote" in the journal in each case in lieu of entering
the names of the president and village trustees voting aye and those voting nay
on the passage of each of the designated ordinances, orders, resolutions and
motions included in such omnibus group.
The taking of such single or omnibus vote and such entries of the words
"Omnibus Vote" in the journal shall be a sufficient compliance of the
requirements of this section to all intents and purposes and with like effect
as if the vote in each case had been taken separately by yeas and nays on the
question of each ordinance, order, resolution and motion included in such
omnibus vote, and separately recorded in the journal. Likewise, the yeas and
nays shall be taken upon the question of the passage of any other resolution or
motion at the request of any trustee and shall be recorded in the journal.
(Ord. 04-07, 6-21-2004)
1-6-9: PUBLIC PARTICIPATION:
   (A)   Authority: The Illinois Open Meetings Act provides that members of the
public must be given an opportunity to address public officials at open
meetings and provides that public comment may be subject to the rules
established and recorded by the public body.
   (B)   Purpose: Public participation at meetings of all boards, commissions,
and bureaus of the village shall be governed by the rules provided in this
section. Notwithstanding the above, any board, commission, or bureau of the
Village may, in its discretion, supplement or adopt different rules for public
participation at meetings as may be appropriate.
   (C)   Posting: These rules shall be posted at the area where members of the
public sign up to address the public body at meetings/hearings.
   (D)   Expulsion: Any person may be expelled from the board room for the
remainder of a meeting by the chairman or a majority vote of the public body if
that person:
      1.   Repeatedly or purposefully violates any rule provided in this
section; or,
      2.   Acts in a disorderly manner so as to disrupt the ability of the
public body to efficiently conduct its meeting.
   (E)   Procedure:
      1.   Members of the public who want to address the public body shall sign
up before the start of the meeting and identify themselves by name. Members of
the public shall be called to speak in the order they signed up.
      2.   Alternatively, in circumstances when there is anticipated a large
number of speakers, no sign-up sheet shall be required and members of the
public may be called to speak in the order they line up in groups of five or
such other manner or order as will be most efficient to time and circumstances.
      3.   Speakers shall address the public body from the podium/microphone
and state their name for the record before beginning their remarks.
   (F)   Limitations:   
      1.   Each person shall only be permitted to speak once.
      2.   Speakers shall limit their remarks to no more than three (3) minutes
unless additional time is granted by the chairman or by a majority vote of the
public body.
      3.   Speakers will be informed when their allotted time has expired. Upon
the expiration of the allotted time, speakers shall stop speaking and leave the
podium/microphone. If a speaker fails to stop speaking or does not leave the
podium/microphone, the microphone will be shut off and the person shall be
removed from the podium/microphone area.
      4.   Proxies or the yielding or granting of time in whole or in part to
another person shall not be permitted.
      5.   Public participation shall be limited to no more than thirty (30)
minutes in total unless extended for a time certain by the chairman or by a
majority vote of the public body, or unless there are more speakers desirous of
addressing the public body than time will allow.
      6.   Groups of speakers should, whenever possible, consolidate their
comments and avoid repetition through the use of representative speakers.
      7.   Speakers shall face and direct their remarks to the public body as a
whole and not to any individual board member, staff member, third party, or the
audience.
      8.   Speakers may ask questions during their time but there shall be no
obligation for individual board members or staff to respond.
      9.   Conversations, questions, and debates between speakers and other
audience members is prohibited.
      10.   Speakers shall refrain from harassing or directing threats or
personal attacks at board members, staff, other speakers or members of the
audience.
      11.   Members of the audience shall maintain decorum and refrain from
noisy outbursts or other distracting actions such as yelling, applauding,
cheering, or booing during or at the conclusion of any remarks made by any
speaker, staff member or public body member.
   (G)   Exceptions: The rules stated herein shall only govern public
participation during the public forum portion of a meeting. Nothing herein
shall be construed to apply to limit the participation of board members, staff
members, taxing agency representatives, or other persons when allotted separate
time to address the public body. (Ord. 10-21, 3-21-2011; amd. Ord. 23-18, 2-5-
2024)
CHAPTER 7
OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES
SECTION:
1-7-1: Election; Appointment
1-7-2: Bonds
1-7-3: Oath
1-7-4: Resignations (Rep. by Ord. 24-18, 2-3-2025)
1-7-5: Terms
1-7-6: Vacancies (Rep. by Ord. 24-18, 2-3-2025)
1-7-7: Village Property
1-7-8: Compensation
1-7-9: Reports
1-7-10: Arrests
1-7-11: Illinois Municipal Retirement Fund
1-7-12: Personnel Policy
1-7-13: Public Works Employees; Prevailing Wage
1-7-14: Reimbursement Of Travel, Meals And Lodging Expenses
1-7-1: ELECTION; APPOINTMENT:
The officers of the village shall consist of a president, a board of trustees
consisting of six (6) members and a village clerk, all of whom shall be elected
by the electors of the village as provided by law. In addition, there shall be
such appointed officers filling such offices as are created and as deemed
necessary and convenient to carry out the purposes of village government. (1956
Code § 13-1; amd. Ord. 24-18, 2-3-2025)
1-7-2: BONDS:
   (A)   Before entering the duties of their respective offices, all elected
and appointed officials, excepting trustees, shall execute a bond payable to
the village in such penal amounts as are set forth below, conditioned upon the
faithful performance of the duties of their respective offices and payment of
all money received by them, according to the law and provision of this code.
   (B)   The penal amount of such bonds shall be as follows:
      1.   President - three thousand dollars ($3,000.00).
      2.   Village Clerk - fifty thousand dollars ($50,000).
      3.   Village Treasurer - the greater of fifty thousand dollars ($50,000)
or an amount equivalent to three (3) times the latest Federal census population
or any subsequent census figure of the village used for Motor Fuel Tax Purpose.
      4.   All other offices - one hundred dollars ($100.00).
   (C)   All bond premiums shall be payable from the village treasury.
   (D)   All bonds shall be filed with the village clerk, except that the bond
of the village clerk shall be filed with the village treasurer.
   (E)   The village may purchase blanket bonds in lieu of individual bonds.
   (F)   A bond shall be deemed approved by the board of trustees when payment
of bond premium is made and the bond is filed. (1956 Code § 13-8; amd. Ord. 24-
18, 2-3-2025)
1-7-3: OATH:
Every officer of the village shall, before entering upon his official duties,
take the oath prescribed by statute. (1956 Code § 13-11)
1-7-4: RESIGNATIONS:
(Rep. by Ord. 24-18, 2-3-2025)
1-7-5: TERMS:
   (A)   The terms of office for all elected officers shall be four (4) years
and until their successor has been elected and has qualified. The terms of all
elected officers shall commence at the first regular or special board of
trustees meeting following the receipt of the official election results from
the Kankakee County Clerk of the regular election at which such officers were
elected. The swearing in of such elected officers at such meeting shall occur
immediately following the consideration of the minutes for the next preceding
board of trustees meeting.
   (B)   Unless a different length of term is specified in this code or by
statute, the term of office for all appointed officers shall be one (1) year
and until their successor has been chosen and has qualified. The terms of all
appointed officers shall commence on May 1. (1956 Code § 13-3; amd. Ord. 24-18,
2-3-2025)
1-7-6: VACANCIES:
(Rep. by Ord. 24-18, 2-3-2025)
1-7-7: VILLAGE PROPERTY:
Every person retiring from office after having been an officer of the village,
shall within five (5) days after notification and request, deliver to his
successor in office all property, books and effects of every description in his
possession belonging to the village or appertaining to his office. (1956 Code §
13-5)
1-7-8: COMPENSATION:
The salaries of all officers and employees of the village shall be determined
and fixed by the village board in the annual appropriation ordinance. (1956
Code § 13-6)
1-7-9: REPORTS:
All village officers shall make a monthly report to the village board covering
the activities financial and otherwise of their office during the previous
month. In addition thereto, each officer shall make a yearly report to the
village board at the close of each fiscal year reflecting a complete statement
of the activities of said office for the year. (1956 Code § 13-9)
1-7-10: ARRESTS:
The village president, members of the village board, members of the fire
department, village police chief and all of his deputies are hereby declared to
be conservators of the peace by statute. (1956 Code § 13-10)
1-7-11: ILLINOIS MUNICIPAL RETIREMENT FUND:
   (A)   Participation: The village of Manteno, county of Kankakee, Illinois,
does hereby elect to participate in the Illinois municipal retirement fund,
effective January 1, 1976. (Ord. 75-7, 8-1-1975)
   (B)   Residency Requirements: All policemen of the village are hereby
allowed to reside outside of the corporate limits of the village, both at the
time of appointment, and while serving as said policeman. This section in no
way prevents or prohibits the board of trustees from making residence condition
of employment of any policeman. (Ord. 76-11, 11-1-1976)
1-7-12: PERSONNEL POLICY:
There is hereby adopted for the purpose of establishing rules and regulations
governing village employees that certain handbook known as the "Village Of
Manteno Employee Handbook", issue date February 20, 1995, to be the personnel
policy manual for all employees of the village of Manteno, Kankakee County,
Illinois, being the current edition, and any amendments thereto, of which not
less than three (3) copies have been and are now filed in the office of the
village clerk, and the same is hereby adopted and incorporated as fully as if
set out at length herein. (Ord. 94-24, 2-27-1995)
1-7-13: PUBLIC WORKS EMPLOYEES; PREVAILING WAGE:
As legislated by ordinance 98-02 there is hereby adopted by reference that act
1  which regulates the wages of laborers, mechanics and other workers employed
in any public works by state, county, city or any public body or any political
subdivision or by anyone under contract for public works, the prevailing rates
of wages as established by the Illinois department of labor for Kankakee County
to be the prevailing rates of wages in and for all public works employees of
the village, and such current rates are adopted and incorporated as fully as if
set out at length herein. (Ord. 97-16, 11-17-1997; amd. Ord. 98-02, 6-15-1998)
 
Notes
1 1. 820 ILCS 130/1 et seq., as amended.
1-7-14: REIMBURSEMENT OF TRAVEL, MEALS AND LODGING EXPENSES:
   (A)   Definitions: The following words and phrases shall have the meanings
ascribed to them herein unless the context or use clearly connotes a different
meaning:
      CORPORATE AUTHORITIES: The president and board of trustees.
      ENTERTAINMENT: Shows, amusements, theaters, circuses, sporting events, or
any other public or private entertainment or amusement.
      REQUIRED DOCUMENTATION:
         1.   A supported estimate of the cost of travel, meals, or lodging if
such expenses have not been incurred or contracts and receipts for such expense
if already incurred; and
         2.   A supported explanation of the purpose of the expense incurred in
relation to the village of Manteno.
      TRAVEL: Any expenditure directly incident to official travel by employees
and officers of the village or by wards or charges of the village involving
reimbursement to travelers or direct payment to private agencies providing
transportation or related services.
      VILLAGE: The village of Manteno, Kankakee County, Illinois.
   (B)   Authorization Required: No officer or employee of the village shall be
reimbursed with village funds for any expense incurred unless authorized and in
accordance with the provisions herein specified.
   (C)   Reimbursement Amounts: The village, upon receipt of an expense
reimbursement request form accompanied by any required documentation, may
reimburse the travel, meal, and lodging expenses of any officer or employee up
to the amounts hereinafter specified:
Lodging (per night):        
.Hotel                     $300.00
Meals (per diem):           
Breakfast                  15.00
Lunch                      20.00
Dinner                     30.00
Daily (noncumulative) per diem - up to $65.00; this allotment may be prorated
up to $35.00 for partial day
Transportation:             
Private vehicle (per mile) IRS mileage rate
Rental car (per diem)      $100.00
Airplane                   Published coach fare
Transportation fares       At then published rates
 
   (D)   Reimbursement For Relevant Expenses Only: No officer or employee may
be reimbursed for expenses unless they are actually incurred by the officer or
employee in relation to, or in the course of, official village business, job or
office related training or education, attendance or participation at any event
or function as a representative or agent of the village, or such other matters
as may be preapproved by the corporate authorities.
   (E)   Entertainment Expenses: No officer or employee shall be reimbursed for
an entertainment expense unless such expense is ancillary to the purpose of a
program or function otherwise qualifying for reimbursement.
   (F)   Reimbursement Above Schedule: No expense reimbursement in excess of
the amounts set forth above shall be made to any officer or employee without
the approval of the corporate authorities by a separate roll call vote.
   (G)   Reimbursement To Elected Officials: No expense reimbursement in any
amount shall be made to any person holding an elected office without the
approval of the corporate authorities by a separate roll call vote. (Ord. 16-
29, 1-17-2017, eff. 3-1-2017)
CHAPTER 8
VILLAGE CLERK
SECTION:
1-8-1: Election, Term
1-8-2: Duties
1-8-3: Vacancy
1-8-4: Compensation
1-8-5: Deputy Clerk
1-8-1: ELECTION, TERM:
The village clerk shall be elected and serve for a four (4) year term and until
his successor is elected and qualified, as is provided by statute. (1956 Code,
Sec. 5-1)
1-8-2: DUTIES:
   (A)   Attestation: The village clerk shall seal and attest all contracts of
the village and all licenses, permits and such other documents as shall require
this formality. (1956 Code, Sec. 5-2)
   (B)   Money: The clerk shall turn all money received by him on behalf of the
village to the village treasurer promptly upon receipt of same; and with such
money he shall indicate the source thereof. (1956 Code, Sec. 5-3)
   (C)   Accounts: The clerk shall keep accounts showing all money received by
him and the source and disposition thereof; and such other accounts as may be
required by statute or ordinance. (1956 Code, Sec. 5-4)
   (D)   Records: In addition to the record of ordinances and other records
which the clerk is required by statute to keep, he shall keep a register of all
licenses and permits issued; and the payments thereon; a record showing all of
the officers and employees of the village and such other records as may be
required by the board. (1956 Code, Sec. 5-5)
   (E)   Seal: The clerk shall be the custodian of the village seal, and shall
affix its impression on all documents where same is required. (1956 Code, Sec.
5-6)
   (F)   Documents: The clerk shall be the custodian of all village documents
which have not been assigned to any other village official. (1956 Code, Sec. 5-
7)
   (G)   Code: The clerk shall maintain correct copies of this code as amended
in accordance with section
1-1-3 of this code. (1956 Code, Sec. 5-8)
   (H)   Elections: The clerk shall provide a sufficient number of ballots,
ballot boxes, cards of instruction and other blanks and forms for the use of
judges and clerks of election, which shall conform in all respects to the
requirements of law. (1956 Code, Sec. 5-9)
   (I)   Additional Duties: In addition to the duties herein provided the clerk
shall perform such other duties as called for by statute or this code. (1956
Code, Sec. 5-10)
1-8-3: VACANCY:
If the office of the village clerk shall become vacant the president and board
of trustees shall appoint a successor as is provided by statute. (1956 Code,
Sec. 5-11)
1-8-4: COMPENSATION:
   (A)   The village clerk shall receive compensation for his services in the
amount of four thousand dollars ($4,000.00) per annum, commencing with the 2001
term of office. Said amount shall be payable in equal monthly installments.
(Ord. 88-9, 1-17-1989; amd. Ord. 98-08, 9-21-1998)
   (B)   The deputy clerk shall receive compensation for his services in the
amount of one thousand five hundred dollars ($1,500.00) per annum, commencing
with the 2001 term of office. Said amount shall be payable in equal monthly
installments. (Ord. 88-10, 1-17-1989; amd. Ord. 98-08, 9-21-1998; Ord. 24-18,
2-3-2025)
1-8-5: DEPUTY CLERK:
   (A)   The village clerk may appoint one deputy clerk, which deputy clerk
shall have power and duty to execute all documents required by law or ordinance
to be executed by the village clerk and to affix the seal of the village
thereto, whenever required.
   (B)   The appointment of the deputy clerk shall be made by the village clerk
and the deputy clerk shall serve at the pleasure of and perform such duties as
directed by the village clerk.
   (C)   In signing any document as described in subsection A of this section,
the deputy clerk shall sign the name of the clerk followed with the word "by"
and the deputy clerk's own name, and the words "deputy clerk".
   (D)   When a deputy's signature is duly authorized as provided herein and is
affixed by a deputy in the manner prescribed herein on any document (including
but not limited to contracts, bonds, or other obligations of the Village), the
document shall have the same effect as if the document had been signed by the
village clerk in person.
   (E)   The powers and duties of a deputy clerk shall be exercised only in the
absence of the village clerk from the place where the clerk's office is
maintained, and only when either written direction has been given by the
village clerk to that deputy to exercise a power or the corporate authorities
have determined by resolution that the village clerk is temporarily or
permanently incapacitated to perform that function. (Ord. 24-18, 2-3-2025)
CHAPTER 9
DEPARTMENT OF LAW
SECTION:
1-9-1: Department Established
1-9-2: Office Created
1-9-3: Powers And Duties
1-9-4: Legislative Counsel
1-9-1: DEPARTMENT ESTABLISHED:
There is hereby established an executive department of the municipal government
of the village which shall be known as the department of law. (1956 Code, Sec.
6-1)
1-9-2: OFFICE CREATED:
The office of village attorney is hereby created and established. The village
attorney shall be appointed by the president with the advice and consent of the
board of trustees. The office of village attorney may be filled with an
individual lawyer or a law firm. (1956 Code, Sec. 6-2; amd. Ord. 24-18, 2-3-
2025)
1-9-3: POWERS AND DUTIES:
   (A)   Duties: The village attorney shall perform the following duties:
      1.   Superintend and conduct all the law business of the village;
      2.   Appear for and protect the rights and interests of the village in
all actions, suits and proceedings brought by or against it or any village
officer, board or department, including actions for damages when brought
against such officer in his official capacity;
      3.   Such other matters as may properly be assigned by the president or
board of trustees. (1956 Code, Sec. 6-3)
   (B)   The Village Code: The village attorney shall have general supervision
of the revisions of this code. (1956 Code, Sec. 6-4)
   (C)   Advice: The village attorney shall be the legal advisor of the village
and shall render legal advice on all proper questions when requested to do so.
(1956 Code, Sec. 6-5)
   (D)   Written Opinions: The village attorney shall, when requested to do so
furnish written opinions upon subjects submitted to him by the president,
board, committee or department. (1956 Code, Sec. 6-6)
1-9-4: LEGISLATIVE COUNSEL:
In addition to any other attorneys authorized by this chapter, and without
regard to the method of selection of such attorneys, the board of trustees, by
action of a majority of the trustees, shall have the ability to engage the
services of legislative counsel, who shall advise the board of trustees
regarding issues involving their legislative duties which may include, but are
not limited to, the drafting of ordinances, contract documents, opinions on the
powers of the legislative branch, analysis of the validity of actions taken by
the village, review of litigation issues and providing other advice on matters
within the purview of the legislative branch of municipal government. (Ord. 01-
05, 6-18-2001)
CHAPTER 10
DEPARTMENT OF FINANCE
SECTION:
1-10-1: Department Created
1-10-2: Treasurer, Duties
1-10-3: Collector
1-10-4: Money
1-10-5: Collector's Duties
1-10-6: Fiscal, Municipal Year
1-10-7: Books Of Account
1-10-8: Appropriations
1-10-9: Deposits
1-10-1: DEPARTMENT CREATED:
There is hereby established an executive department of the municipal government
of the village which shall be known as the department of finance and shall
embrace the offices of the village treasurer and village collector. (1956 Code,
Sec. 7-1)
1-10-2: TREASURER, DUTIES:
   (A)   The office of village treasurer is hereby created and established. The
village treasurer shall be appointed by the president with the advice and
consent of the board of trustees.
   (B)   The village treasurer shall receive all monies belonging to the
village, and shall render at the end of each month, and more often if required
by the president or village board, a statement under oath showing the state of
the treasury at the date of such account and the balance of money in the
treasury. Such statement shall set forth all the monies received by him and
from whom, and on what account such monies shall have been received. It shall
also show all monies paid out by him and on what account the same shall have
been paid.
   The village treasurer shall cause books of account to be kept in such manner
as to show with entire accuracy all monies received by him, and from whom, and
on what account they shall have been received; and all monies paid out by him,
and on what account they shall have been paid; and the same shall be shown in
such manner that such books may be readily understood and investigated. Such
books, and all files and papers of his office shall at all times be open to
inspection by the president, finance committee or any member of the village
board.
   The village treasurer shall have such other duties and responsibilities as
set forth in the Illinois Municipal Code. (1956 Code, Sec. 7-2; amd. Ord. 24-
18, 2-3-2025)
1-10-3: COLLECTOR:
The office of village collector is hereby created and established. The village
clerk shall hold the office of village collector. (1956 Code, Sec. 7-3; amd.
Ord. 24-18, 2-3-2025)
1-10-4: MONEY:
All payments of money not specifically provided for shall be paid directly to
the village collector, and such payments shall be transmitted promptly by him
to the village treasurer. (1956 Code, Sec. 7-4)
1-10-5: COLLECTOR'S DUTIES:
The village collector shall cause investigations to be made to determine
whether all persons required by the provisions of this code to take out
licenses have complied with such provisions and have, from time to time,
procured the same as required by law. In cases of evasion of payment or neglect
to observe such license provisions the village collector shall serve notices of
delinquency and institute proceedings to enforce said provisions and the
collection of all license fees subject to the directions of the village
attorney.
The village collector shall file with the village board a monthly statement of
all monies received by him showing from whom and on what account they were
received. It shall be the duty of the collector to keep books of account which
shall show all monies received by him and other matters pertaining to his
office. Such books and accounts shall be kept in a clear, intelligible and
methodical condition.
The village collector shall have such other duties and responsibilities as set
forth in the Illinois Municipal Code. (1956 Code, Sec. 7-5; amd. Ord. 24-18, 2-
3-2025)
1-10-6: FISCAL, MUNICIPAL YEAR:
The fiscal year and the municipal year of the village shall commence on May 1
of each year. (1956 Code, Sec. 7-6; amd. Ord. 04-21, 8-16-2004)
1-10-7: BOOKS OF ACCOUNT:
The books of account and all other public records and all documents of the
village pertaining to finance shall conform to the requirements established
from time to time by the finance committee. (1956 Code, Sec. 7-7)
1-10-8: APPROPRIATIONS:
The finance committee shall meet annually, before April 15 of each year, to
consider and examine the reports and statements of the village treasurer and
other village officers and departments. Said committee shall also submit to the
village board a report of the estimates of the funds necessary to defray the
expenses of the village government during the fiscal year about to begin. Said
committee shall in such report classify the different objects and branches of
village expenditures, giving, as nearly as may be, the amount required for
each. For this purpose the committee is authorized to require of all village
officers and heads of departments, their statement of the condition and expense
of their respective departments and offices, with any proposed improvements and
the probable expense thereof, of contracts already made and unfinished and the
amount of any unexpended appropriation of the preceding year.
Said committee in said report shall show the aggregate income of the preceding
fiscal year from all sources, liabilities outstanding together with all such
information as may be necessary to enable the village board to prepare and pass
the annual appropriation ordinance in the manner prescribed by statute and so
that the village board may fully understand the money exigencies and demands of
the village for the year for which appropriations are to be made.
In the preparations and submission of said report the finance committee shall
have the aid and assistance of the village clerk and the village treasurer.
(1956 Code, Sec. 7-8)
1-10-9: DEPOSITS:
No village money shall be deposited in any bank until it has been designated by
the village board as a depository. The village treasurer shall deposit daily
all monies received by him as village treasurer during the banking hours and
all such monies as he may have received on the day previous after banking
hours, in one of the banks which may have been designated by the village board
as depositories pursuant to law. (1956 Code, Sec. 7-9)
CHAPTER 11
VILLAGE POLICE DEPARTMENT AND POLICE CHIEF
SECTION:
1-11-1: Police Department Created
1-11-2: Chief Of Police
1-11-3: Chain Of Command
1-11-4: Custodian
1-11-5: Records
1-11-6: Power Of Arrest
1-11-7: Process
1-11-8: Fire Aid
1-11-9: Resistance
1-11-10: Part Time Police Officers
1-11-1: POLICE DEPARTMENT CREATED:
There is hereby established a police department for the village of Manteno.
That department shall consist of a chief of police, one lieutenant, four (4)
sergeants, and such patrol officers as shall be authorized by the annual
budget. The chief of police and all sworn officers are hereby declared to be
conservators of the peace. (Ord. 05-55, 3-20-2006)
1-11-2: CHIEF OF POLICE:
There is hereby created the office of chief of police who shall be in charge of
the police department and have supervision over all members thereof. The chief
of police shall be appointed by the village president with the advice and
consent of the board of trustees for a term which shall not exceed that of the
village president at the time of appointment.
The chief of police shall be responsible for the performance of the police
department and all persons who are members thereof shall serve subject to his
orders. The chief of police may make or prescribe such rules, regulations and
orders as deemed necessary with respect to the conduct of the police
department. (Ord. 05-55, 3-20-2006)
1-11-3: CHAIN OF COMMAND:
The chief of police shall direct the operations of the police department under
the administration of the village president and all such actions shall comply
fully with municipal ordinances. The chief of police shall establish a chain of
command in which the lieutenant shall be second in the chain of command. (Ord.
05-55, 3-20-2006)
1-11-4: CUSTODIAN:
The chief of police shall have custody and control of all equipment, books,
records and other property belonging to his office, and all lost, stolen or
abandoned property. (Ord. 05-55, 3-20-2006)
1-11-5: RECORDS:
The chief of police shall cause the following books of record to be kept:
persons arrested; accounts of monies received and expended and the purposes
thereof; all properties placed in his charge; and such other books and records
as shall be required by the business of this office. (Ord. 05-55, 3-20-2006)
1-11-6: POWER OF ARREST:
The chief of police and any and all sworn officers shall have the power to
arrest all persons in the village found in the act of violating any law or
provision of this code or aiding and abetting in any such violation, and shall
arrest any person found under circumstances which would warrant a reasonable
man in believing that such person had committed or is about to commit a crime.
(Ord. 05-55, 3-20-2006)
1-11-7: PROCESS:
The chief of police and any and all sworn officers shall have power and
authority and it shall be their duty to serve and execute warrants and other
process in the village for the summoning, apprehension and commitment of any
person charged with violation of any provision of this code, or with any crime
or misdemeanor, or offense against the laws of the village or state. (Ord. 05-
55, 3-20-2006)
1-11-8: FIRE AID:
It shall be the duty of the chief of police and any and all sworn officers to
aid the Manteno community fire protection district by giving alarm in case of
fire and by clearing the streets and grounds in the immediate vicinity of a
fire so that members of the Manteno community fire protection district shall
not be hindered or obstructed in the performance of their duties. (Ord. 05-55,
3-20-2006)
1-11-9: RESISTANCE:
It shall be unlawful for any person to resist any sworn officer in the
discharge of his duties, or in any way interfere with, hinder or prevent him
from discharging his duties as a sworn officer. It shall be unlawful for any
person to assist another to escape or attempt to escape from the custody of a
sworn officer. (Ord. 05-55, 3-20-2006)
1-11-10: PART TIME POLICE OFFICERS:
   (A)   Employment: The village may employ part time police officers from time
to time as deemed necessary.
   (B)   Duties: Part time police officers shall have the same duties and
responsibilities as full time police officers, and as specifically delineated
in the rules and the general orders of the Manteno police department, but the
hours part time police officers may work within a calendar year shall be
restricted. Part time police officers shall not be assigned to supervise or
direct full time police officers. Part time police officers shall be trained in
accordance with the Illinois police training act 1  and the rules and
regulations of the Illinois law enforcement training standards board.
   (C)   Hiring Standards: Any person employed as a part time police officer
must meet the following standards:
      1.   Be of good moral character, of temperate habits, of sound health,
and physically and mentally able to perform assigned duties.
      2.   Be at least twenty one (21) years of age.
      3.   Pass a medical examination.
      4.   Possess a high school diploma or GED certificate.
      5.   Possess a valid state of Illinois driver's license.
      6.   Possess no prior felony convictions.
      7.   Any individual who has served in the U.S. military must have been
honorably discharged.
   (D)   Discipline: The chief of police shall have the authority to
discipline, suspend or terminate part time police officers with or without
cause. Part time police officers shall serve in an "at will" capacity and may
be suspended or terminated by the chief of police without notice, without the
filing of charges and without a hearing. (Ord. 11-30, 3-19-2012)
 
Notes
1 1. 50 ILCS 705/1 et seq.
CHAPTER 12
SUPERINTENDENT OF PUBLIC WORKS
SECTION:
1-12-1: Office Created
1-12-2: Powers, Duties
1-12-3: Employees
1-12-4: Property
1-12-1: OFFICE CREATED:
The office of superintendent of public works is hereby created and established.
The superintendent of public works shall be appointed by the president with the
advice and consent of the board of trustees. (1956 Code, Sec. 11-1; amd. Ord.
24-18, 2-3-2025)
1-12-2: POWERS, DUTIES:
   (A)   Streets: The superintendent of public works shall have charge of the
construction and care of all public streets, alleys and sidewalks in the
village, and the duty of keeping the same clean. (1956 Code, Sec. 11-2)
   (B)   Sewers: The superintendent of public works shall have charge and
custody of sanitary and storm sewer systems in the village, and he shall see to
it that the same are kept in good condition and repair and that they function
properly. (1956 Code, Sec. 11-3)
   (C)   Lighting: The superintendent of public works shall supervise the
lighting of public streets and alleys, and shall keep the lighting system in
good condition and repair. (1956 Code, Sec. 11-4)
1-12-3: EMPLOYEES:
All officers and employees assigned to public works shall perform their duties
subject to the orders and under the supervision of the superintendent of public
works. (1956 Code, Sec. 11-6)
1-12-4: PROPERTY:
The superintendent of public works shall be the custodian of all village
property which is not assigned to the care or custody of any other officer.
(1956 Code, Sec. 11-7)
CHAPTER 13
CORPORATE SEAL
SECTION:
1-13-1: Seal
1-13-2: Private Use
1-13-1: SEAL:
The seal provided and authorized for the village shall be the one heretofore in
use containing the impression "The Village of Manteno, Illinois", and the word
"Seal", and the same is hereby declared to be the official seal of the village.
(1956 Code, Sec. 2-1)
1-13-2: PRIVATE USE:
No person shall fraudulently forge, deface, corrupt or counterfeit the seal of
the village, nor shall any person, other than the duly authorized public
official make use of said seal. (1956 Code, Sec. 2-2)
CHAPTER 14
VILLAGE CHAPLAIN
SECTION:
1-14-1: Office Created
1-14-2: Duties
1-14-3: Appointment
1-14-1: OFFICE CREATED:
The office of village chaplain is hereby created and established. The village
chaplain shall be appointed by the president with the advice and consent of the
board of trustees. (Ord. 84-2, 6-4-1984; amd. Ord. 24-18, 2-3-2025)
1-14-2: DUTIES:
The village chaplain shall be at the disposal of the president of the board of
trustees, police and any other department head that requests his services. He
shall provide comfort and counseling to any resident of the village at the
request of the president of the board of trustees. (Ord. 84-2, 6-4-1984)
1-14-3: APPOINTMENT:
The village chaplain shall be appointed by the president of the board of
trustees as provided for in the appointment of other officers within the
village. (Ord. 84-2, 6-4-1984)
CHAPTER 15
VILLAGE ELECTRICIAN
SECTION:
1-15-1: Office Created; Appointment; Term; Compensation
1-15-2: Powers And Duties
1-15-3: Qualifications
1-15-4: Inspections Generally
1-15-1: OFFICE CREATED; APPOINTMENT; TERM; COMPENSATION:
The office of village electrician is hereby created. He shall be appointed by
the president, with the approval of the village board by May 1 of each year and
shall serve until his successor shall be appointed and qualified. He shall
receive compensation as may be provided by ordinance. (Ord. 85-13, 3-17-1986)
1-15-2: POWERS AND DUTIES:
The village electrician shall enforce all laws relating to the installation,
alteration and use of electrical equipment; to see that the construction,
maintenance and control of all electrical appliances and apparatus and systems
of electrical wiring and systems of poles for the carriage of said electrical
wires and the electrical wiring of all buildings in the village, either public
or private, and electric or illuminated signs or billboards shall conform to
and comply with the rules and regulations established by the village. The
village electrician, in the discharge of his official duties, and upon proper
identification shall have authority to enter any building, structure or
premises at any reasonable hour. In dangerous situations, the village
electrician shall have the authority to order service discontinued to any
property until such conditions are corrected. The village electrician in the
work of his office shall have the same powers as a police officer. All
inspections shall be made by the village electrician, or his authorized agent.
The village electrician shall supervise the maintenance and installation of
electrical equipment owned by the village. (Ord. 85-13, 3-17-1986)
1-15-3: QUALIFICATIONS:
The person appointed to the office of village electrician shall be reasonably
well skilled in the various departments of electricity and have had not less
than four (4) years' experience as a journeyman electrician, or the equivalent
of construction experience. (Ord. 85-13, 3-17-1986)
1-15-4: INSPECTIONS GENERALLY:
   (A)   The village electrician shall within one working day of notification
of completion by the contractor make his inspection. No work in connection with
an electric wiring system shall be covered or concealed until it has been
inspected and permission to do so has been granted by the village electrician,
and he is hereby authorized to demand the removal of any flooring, lathing,
plaster, sheet metal or other material which may conceal any electrical wiring
or apparatus contrary to the provisions of this chapter. It shall be the duty
of the village electrician to post a notice of first inspection on the building
and the notice shall be considered as an express permission to conceal the
electrical wiring and apparatus, but no concealment shall take place until such
notice has been posted by the village electrician.
   (B)   On completion of the work, the village electrician shall post a notice
of final inspection. It is the duty of the contractor to notify the village
electrician as to the final completion of the work.
   (C)   No electrical current shall be turned on to electrical equipment, nor
shall any company wires be connected to service, until such permission is given
by the village electrician. Any work which is rejected by the village
electrician shall be corrected and reinspected within thirty (30) days.
   (D)   Upon complaint in writing of any resident of this village as to the
unsafe condition of any part of any such electrical system within the village,
it shall be the duty of the village electrician to inspect such complaint, and
if he finds that such complaint is well founded, he shall require the person at
fault in the matter to put such part in proper condition, and it shall then be
the duty of such person to put such defective part in proper condition.
   (E)   The foregoing requirements shall relate only to new construction,
renovating of electrical service in an existing structure and providing new
electrical service to an existing structure. (Ord. 85-13, 3-17-1986)
CHAPTER 16
CODE ENFORCEMENT OFFICER 1
(Rep. by Ord. 04-45, 4-4-2005)
 
Notes
1 1. See chapter 22 of this title.
CHAPTER 17
ADMINISTRATIVE ADJUDICATION
SECTION:
1-17-1: Code Hearing Unit Established
1-17-2: Hearing Officer; Appointment
1-17-3: Hearing Officer; Qualifications
1-17-4: Hearing Officer; Duties And Powers
1-17-5: Institution Of Administrative Proceedings
1-17-6: Representation
1-17-7: Default
1-17-8: Adjudication By Mail
1-17-9: Continuances
1-17-10: Rules And Regulations
1-17-11: Subpoenas
1-17-12: Findings, Decision, And Order
1-17-13: Review Under Administrative Review Law
1-17-14: Judgment On Findings, Decision, And Order
1-17-15: Combined Code Hearing Unit Authorized
1-17-1: CODE HEARING UNIT ESTABLISHED:
There is hereby created a code hearing unit which shall be known as the
"village of Manteno code hearing unit". The village of Manteno code hearing
unit is established to provide a fair and efficient method of enforcing this
code. The village of Manteno code hearing unit may adjudicate any violation of
this code under this chapter except: a) building code violations 1  that must
be adjudicated pursuant to division 31.1 of article 11 of the Illinois
municipal code; and b) any offense under the Illinois vehicle code or a similar
offense that is a traffic regulation governing the movement of vehicles and
except for any reportable offense under section 6-204 of the Illinois vehicle
code. The village reserves its right to employ all other means and methods
available under the law to enforce its municipal code, including direct
application to the courts. (Ord. 13-04, 5-6-2013)
 
Notes
1 1. See title 8, chapter 10 of this code.
1-17-2: HEARING OFFICER; APPOINTMENT:
There is hereby created the office of hearing officer. The village president,
with the advice and consent of the board of trustees, shall appoint a hearing
officer to preside over the adjudication of code violations under this chapter.
(Ord. 13-04, 5-6-2013)
1-17-3: HEARING OFFICER; QUALIFICATIONS:
No person shall be appointed hearing officer unless he/she is an attorney
licensed to practice law in the state of Illinois for at least three (3) years.
Prior to conducting proceedings under this chapter, a hearing officer shall
successfully complete a formal training program that includes the following: a)
instruction on the rules of procedure for the hearings that they will conduct;
b) orientation to each subject area of the municipal code of the village of
Manteno that he/she will administer; c) observation of administrative hearings;
and d) participation in hypothetical cases, including rules on evidence and
issuance of final orders. (Ord. 13-04, 5-6-2013)
1-17-4: HEARING OFFICER; DUTIES AND POWERS:
A hearing officer shall have the following duties and powers under this
chapter:
   (A)   All duties set forth by state statute including:
      1.   Preside at an administrative hearing called to determine whether or
not a code violation exists;
      2.   Hear testimony and accept evidence from all interested parties
relevant to the existence of a code violation;
      3.   Preserve and authenticate the transcript and record of the hearing
and all exhibits and evidence introduced at the hearing;
      4.   Issue and sign a written finding, decision, and order stating
whether a code violation exists; and
      5.   Imposing penalties consistent with applicable code provisions.
   (B)   Hold preliminary conferences for the settlement or simplification of
issues.
   (C)   Administer oaths and affirmations.
   (D)   Rule upon motions, objections, and the admissibility of evidence.
   (E)   Issue subpoenas for the attendance of witnesses or the production of
documents or other tangible items.
   (F)   Exercise all powers and duties necessary and proper to the
administration of fair and impartial hearing under this chapter. (Ord. 13-04,
5-6-2013)
1-17-5: INSTITUTION OF ADMINISTRATIVE PROCEEDINGS:
The following shall govern the commencement of administrative adjudication
proceedings under this chapter:
   (A)   When a police officer or other individual authorized to issue a code
violation finds a code violation to exist, he or she shall note the violation
on a multiple copy violation notice and report form that indicates: 1) the name
and address of the defendant; 2) the type and nature of the violation; 3) the
date and time the violation was observed; and 4) the names of witnesses to the
violation.
   (B)   The violation report form shall be forwarded to the village of Manteno
code hearing unit where a docket number shall be stamped on all copies of the
report and a hearing date shall be noted in the blank spaces provided for that
purpose on the form. The hearing date shall not be less than thirty (30) nor
more than forty (40) days after the violation is reported.
   (C)   One copy of the violation report shall be maintained in the files of
the village of Manteno code hearing unit and shall become a part of the record.
One copy of the report shall be returned to the individual representing the
municipality so that he/she may prepare evidence of the code violation for
presentation at the hearing. Finally, one copy of the report form shall be
served by first class mail to the defendant along with a summons commanding the
defendant to appear at the hearing. (Ord. 13-04, 5-6-2013)
1-17-6: REPRESENTATION:
The village's case may be presented by an attorney or by any other municipal
employee that is not an employee of the village of Manteno code hearing unit.
The case for the defendant may be presented by the defendant, his/her attorney,
or any other agent or representative of the defendant. (Ord. 13-04, 5-6-2013)
1-17-7: DEFAULT:
In the event a defendant or his/her attorney fails to appear at a hearing, the
hearing officer shall find the defendant in default and proceed with the
hearing and accept evidence relevant to the existence of a code violation.
(Ord. 13-04, 5-6-2013)
1-17-8: ADJUDICATION BY MAIL:
A defendant may elect to contest a violation without personally appearing at
the hearing. To do so, the defendant must send a letter to the village of
Manteno code hearing unit identifying his/her case, the date of the hearing,
his/her desire to proceed in absentia, and a short argument as to why a finding
of nonliability for the code violation is appropriate. To be considered, the
letter must be received by the village of Manteno code hearing unit no later
than five (5) days before the hearing date. A notarized affidavit shall be
submitted with the letter setting forth the facts that support the defendant's
defense. The defendant may also include any other evidence which he/she
believes supports a finding of nonliability. (Ord. 13-04, 5-6-2013)
1-17-9: CONTINUANCES:
No continuances shall be authorized by the hearing officer unless it is
absolutely necessary to protect the rights of the defendant. Lack of
preparation shall not be grounds for a continuance. Any continuance authorized
by the hearing officer shall not exceed twenty five (25) days. (Ord. 13-04, 5-
6-2013)
1-17-10: RULES AND REGULATIONS:
Parties shall be provided with an opportunity to present witnesses, evidence
and to cross examine other witnesses. The formal and technical rules of
evidence shall not apply at the hearings authorized by this chapter. Provided,
however, evidence, including hearsay, shall only be admitted if it is of the
type commonly relied upon by reasonably prudent person in the conduct of their
affairs. Any other rules and regulations promulgated for the conduct of
administrative hearings shall be developed by the hearing officer and shall be
published and kept on file in the office of the village clerk where they shall
be available to the public for inspection and copying during normal business
hours. (Ord. 13-04, 5-6-2013)
1-17-11: SUBPOENAS:
The hearing officer may, at the request of either party, issue a subpoena
compelling the appearance of a witness to testify or for the production of
documents or other tangible items. Requests shall be made in writing to the
village of Manteno code hearing unit. No subpoena issued pursuant to this
chapter shall be valid unless signed by the hearing officer. No subpoena shall
be issued by a hearing officer unless it is relevant to the contested issues in
the case. All subpoenas issued shall identify: a) the person or entity to which
it is directed; b) the documents or other items to be produced; c) the person
that is to appear; d) the date and time for the witness' appearance or by which
the production is to be made; and e) the location at which the witness is to
appear or at which the production is to be made. No subpoenas issued under this
chapter shall require the appearance of a witness, or the production of
documents or other tangible items, sooner than seven (7) days after service of
the subpoena. (Ord. 13-04, 5-6-2013)
1-17-12: FINDINGS, DECISION, AND ORDER:
At the conclusion of the hearing, the hearing officer shall make a
determination based on the evidence presented at the hearing as to whether or
not a code violation exists. The determination shall be in writing and shall be
designated as findings, decision, and order. The findings, decision, and order
shall include: a) the hearing officer's findings of fact; b) a decision of
whether or not a code violation exists based upon the findings of fact; and c)
an order that states the sanction or dismisses the case if a violation is not
proved. A monetary sanction for a violation under this chapter shall not exceed
seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00). A copy of the findings, decision, and
order shall be served on the defendant within five (5) days after it is issued.
Service shall be in the same manner that the report form and summons are served
under section
1-17-5 of this chapter. (Ord. 13-04, 5-6-2013)
1-17-13: REVIEW UNDER ADMINISTRATIVE REVIEW LAW:
The findings, decision, and order of the hearing officer shall be subject to
review in the circuit court of Kankakee County. The provisions of the
administrative review law, and the rules adopted pursuant thereto, shall apply
to and govern every action for the judicial review of the findings, decision
and order of a hearing officer under this chapter. (Ord. 13-04, 5-6-2013)
1-17-14: JUDGMENT ON FINDINGS, DECISION, AND ORDER:
The defendant shall pay the penalty assessed no later than five (5) business
days after the exhaustion of, or the failure to exhaust, judicial review
procedures. All penalties assessed shall be a debt due and owing the village
and may be collected in accordance with the law. Penalties not paid in a timely
manner shall accrue interest in the amount of five percent (5%) per annum.
After expiration of the period within which judicial review under the
administrative review law may be sought for a final determination of the code
violation, the village may commence a proceeding in the circuit court of
Kankakee County for the purposes of obtaining a judgment on the findings,
decision, and order. (Ord. 13-04, 5-6-2013)
1-17-15: COMBINED CODE HEARING UNIT AUTHORIZED:
The corporate authorities of the village of Manteno are authorized to combine
its code hearing unit with any code hearing unit of a nearby unit of local
government by intergovernmental agreement. (Ord. 13-04, 5-6-2013)
CHAPTER 18
LOCALLY IMPOSED AND ADMINISTERED TAX RIGHTS AND RESPONSIBILITY
SECTION:
1-18-1: Short Title
1-18-2: Scope
1-18-3: Definitions
1-18-4: Notices
1-18-5: Late Payment
1-18-6: Payment
1-18-7: Certain Credits And Refunds
1-18-8: Audit Procedure
1-18-9: Appeal
1-18-10: Hearing
1-18-11: Interest And Penalties
1-18-12: Abatement
1-18-13: Installment Contracts
1-18-14: Statute Of Limitations
1-18-15: Voluntary Disclosure
1-18-16: Publication Of Tax Ordinances
1-18-17: Internal Review Procedure
1-18-18: Application
1-18-1: SHORT TITLE:
This chapter shall be known as, and may be cited as, the LOCALLY IMPOSED AND
ADMINISTERED TAX RIGHTS AND RESPONSIBILITY ORDINANCE. (Ord. 00-29, 1-2-2001)
1-18-2: SCOPE:
The provisions of this chapter shall apply to the village's procedures in
connection with all of the village's locally imposed and administered taxes.
(Ord. 00-29, 1-2-2001)
1-18-3: DEFINITIONS:
Certain words or terms herein shall have the meanings ascribed to them as
follows:
ACT: The "local government taxpayers' bill of rights act".
CORPORATE AUTHORITIES: The village's president and board of trustees.
LOCAL TAX ADMINISTRATOR: The village's treasurer, is charged with the
administration and collection of the locally imposed and administered taxes,
including staff, employees or agents to the extent they are authorized by the
local tax administrator to act in the local tax administrator's stead. The
local tax administrator shall have the authority to implement the terms of this
chapter to give full effect to this chapter. The exercise of such authority by
the local tax administrator shall not be inconsistent with this chapter and the
act.
LOCALLY IMPOSED AND ADMINISTERED TAX OR TAX: Each tax imposed by the village
that is collected or administered by the village not an agency or department of
the state. It does not include any taxes imposed upon real property under the
property tax code or fees collected by the village other than infrastructure
maintenance fees.
NOTICE: Each audit notice, collection notice or other similar notice or
communication in connection with each of the village's locally imposed and
administered taxes.
TAX ORDINANCE: Each ordinance adopted by the village that imposes any locally
imposed and administered tax.
TAXPAYER: Any person required to pay any locally imposed and administered tax
and generally includes the person upon whom the legal incidence of such tax is
placed and with respect to consumer taxes includes the business or entity
required to collect and pay the locally imposed and administered tax to the
village.
VILLAGE: The village of Manteno, Illinois. (Ord. 00-29, 1-2-2001)
1-18-4: NOTICES:
Unless otherwise provided, whenever notice is required to be given, the notice
is to be in writing mailed seven (7) calendar days prior to the day fixed for
any applicable hearing, audit or other scheduled act of the local tax
administrator. The notice shall be sent by the local tax administrator as
follows:
   (A)   First class or express mail, or overnight mail, addressed to the
persons concerned at the persons' last known address, or
   (B)   Personal service or delivery. (Ord. 00-29, 1-2-2001)
1-18-5: LATE PAYMENT:
Any notice, payment, remittance or other filing required to be made to the
village pursuant to any tax ordinance shall be considered late unless it is: a)
physically received by the village on or before the due date, or b) received in
an envelope or other container displaying a valid, readable U.S. postmark dated
on or before the due date, properly addressed to the village, with adequate
postage prepaid. (Ord. 00-29, 1-2-2001)
1-18-6: PAYMENT:
Any payment or remittance received for a tax period shall be applied in the
following order: a) first to the tax due for the applicable period; b) second
to the interest due for the applicable period; and c) third to the penalty for
the applicable period. (Ord. 00-29, 1-2-2001)
1-18-7: CERTAIN CREDITS AND REFUNDS:
   (A)   The village shall not refund or credit any taxes voluntarily paid
without written protest at the time of payment in the event that a locally
imposed and administered tax is declared invalidly enacted or unconstitutional
by a court of competent jurisdiction. However, a taxpayer shall not be deemed
to have paid the tax voluntarily if the taxpayer lacked knowledge of the facts
upon which to protest the taxes at the time of payment or if the taxpayer paid
the taxes under duress.
   (B)   The statute of limitations on a claim for credit or refund shall be
four (4) years after the end of the calendar year in which payment in error was
made. The village shall not grant a credit or refund of locally imposed and
administered taxes, interest, or penalties to a person who has not paid the
amounts directly to the village.
   (C)   The procedure for claiming a credit or refund of locally imposed and
administered taxes, interest or penalties paid in error shall be as follows:
      1.   The taxpayer shall submit to the local tax administrator in writing
a claim for credit or refund together with a statement specifying:
         (a)   The name of the locally imposed and administered tax subject to
the claim;
         (b)   The tax period for the locally imposed and administered tax
subject to the claim;
         (c)   The date of the tax payment subject to the claim and the
canceled check or receipt for the payment;
         (d)   The taxpayer's recalculation, accompanied by an amended or
revised tax return, in connection with the claim; and
         (e)   A request for either a refund or a credit in connection with the
claim to be applied to the amount of tax, interest and penalties overpaid, and,
as applicable, related interest on the amount overpaid; provided, however, that
there shall be no refund and only a credit given in the event the taxpayer owes
any monies to the village.
      2.   Within ten (10) days of the receipt by the local administrator of
any claim for a refund or credit, the local tax administrator shall either:
         (a)   Grant the claim; or
         (b)   Deny the claim, in whole or in part, together with a statement
as to the reason for the denial or the partial grant and denial.
      3.   In the event the local tax administrator grants, in whole or in
part, a claim for refund or credit, the amount of the grant for refund or
credit shall bear interest at the rate of 5.0 percent per annum, based on a
year of three hundred sixty five (365) days and the number of days elapsed,
from the date of the overpayment to the date of mailing of a refund check or
the grant of a credit. (Ord. 00-29, 1-2-2001)
1-18-8: AUDIT PROCEDURE:
Any request for proposed audit pursuant to any local administered tax shall
comply with the notice requirements of this chapter.
   (A)   Each notice of audit shall contain the following information:
      1.   The tax;
      2.   The time period of the audit; and
      3.   A brief description of the books and record to be made available for
the auditor.
   (B)   Any audit shall be conducted during normal business hours and if the
date and time selected by the local tax administrator is not agreeable to the
taxpayer, another date and time may be required by the taxpayer within thirty
(30) days after the originally designated audit and during normal business
hours.
   (C)   The taxpayer may request an extension of time to have an audit
conducted. The audit shall be conducted not less than seven (7) days nor more
than thirty (30) days from the date the notice is given, unless the taxpayer
and the local tax administrator agreed to some other convenient time. In the
event taxpayer is unable to comply with the audit on the date in question, the
taxpayer may request another date within the thirty (30) days, approved in
writing, that is convenient to the taxpayer and the local tax administrator.
   (D)   Every taxpayer shall keep accurate books and records of the taxpayer's
business or activities, including original source documents and books of entry
denoting the transactions which had given rise or may have given rise to any
tax liability, exemption or deduction. All books shall be kept in the English
language and shall be subject to and available for inspection by the village.
   (E)   It is the duty and responsibility of every taxpayer to make available
its books and records for inspection by the village. If the taxpayer fails to
provide the documents necessary for audit within the time provided, the local
tax administrator may issue a tax determination and assessment based on the tax
administrator's determination of the best estimate of the taxpayer's tax
liability.
   (F)   If an audit determines there has been an overpayment of a locally
imposed and administered tax as a result of the audit, written notice of the
amount of overpayment shall be given to the taxpayer within thirty (30) days of
the village's determination of the amount of overpayment.
   (G)   In the event a tax payment was submitted to the incorrect local
governmental entity, the local tax administrator shall notify the local
governmental entity imposing such tax. (Ord. 00-29, 1-2-2001)
1-18-9: APPEAL:
   (A)   The local tax administrator shall send written notice to a taxpayer
upon the local tax administrator's issuance of a protestable notice of tax due,
a bill, a claim denial, or a notice of claim reduction regarding any tax. The
notice shall include the following information:
      1.   The reason for the assessment;
      2.   The amount of the tax liability proposed;
      3.   The procedure for appealing the assessment; and
      4.   The obligations of the village during the audit, appeal, refund and
collection process.
   (B)   A taxpayer who receives written notice from the local tax
administrator of a determination of tax due or assessment may file with the
local tax administrator a written protest and petition for hearing, setting
forth the basis of the taxpayer's request for a hearing. The written protest
and petition for hearing must be filed with the local tax administrator within
forty five (45) days of receipt of the written notice of the tax determination
and assessment.
   (C)   If a timely written notice and petition for hearing is filed, the
local tax administrator shall fix the time and place of hearing and shall give
written notice to the taxpayer. The hearing shall be scheduled for a date
within fourteen (14) days of receipt of the written protest and petition for
hearing, unless the taxpayer requests a later date convenient to all parties.
   (D)   If a written protest and petition for hearing is not filed within the
forty five (45) day period, the tax determination, audit or assessment shall
become a final bill due and owing without further notice.
   (E)   Upon the showing of reasonable cause by the taxpayer and the full
payment of the contested tax liability along with interest accrued as of the
due date of the tax, the local tax administrator may reopen or extend the time
for filing a written protest and petition for hearing. In no event shall the
time for filing a written protest and petition for hearing be reopened or
extended for more than ninety (90) days after the expiration of the forty five
(45) day period. (Ord. 00-29, 1-2-2001)
1-18-10: HEARING:
   (A)   Whenever a taxpayer or a tax collector has filed a timely written
protest and petition for hearing under section
1-18-9 of this chapter, the local tax administrator shall preside and shall
conduct a hearing regarding any appeal.
   (B)   No continuances shall be granted except in cases where a continuance
is absolutely necessary to protect the rights of the taxpayer. Lack of
preparation shall not be grounds for a continuance. Any continuance granted
shall not exceed fourteen (14) days.
   (C)   At the hearing the local tax administrator shall preside and shall
hear testimony and accept any evidence relevant to the tax determination, audit
or assessment. The strict rules of evidence applicable to judicial proceedings
shall not apply.
   (D)   At the conclusion of the hearing, the local tax administrator shall
make a written determination on the basis of the evidence presented at the
hearing. The taxpayer or tax collector shall be provided with a copy of the
written decision. (Ord. 00-29, 1-2-2001)
1-18-11: INTEREST AND PENALTIES:
In the event a determination has been made that a tax is due and owing, through
audit, assessment or other bill sent, the tax must be paid within the time
frame otherwise indicated.
   (A)   Interest: The village hereby provides for the amount of interest to be
assessed on a late payment, underpayment, or nonpayment of the tax, to be 5.0
percent per annum, based on a year of three hundred sixty five (365) days and
the number of days elapsed.
   (B)   Late Filing And Payment Penalties: If a tax return is not filed within
the time and manner provided by the controlling tax ordinance, a late filing
penalty, of five percent (5%) of the amount of tax required to be shown as due
on a return shall be imposed; and a late payment penalty of five percent (5%)
of the tax due shall be imposed. If no return is filed within the time or
manner provided by the controlling tax ordinance and prior to the village
issuing a notice of tax delinquency or notice of tax liability, then a failure
to file penalty shall be assessed equal to twenty five percent (25%) of the
total tax due for the applicable reporting period for which the return was
required to be filed. A late filing of payment penalty shall not apply if a
failure to file penalty is imposed by the controlling ordinance. (Ord. 00-29,
1-2-2001)
1-18-12: ABATEMENT:
The local tax administrator shall have the authority to waive or abate any late
filing penalty, late payment penalty or failure to file penalty if the local
tax administrator shall determine reasonable cause exists for delay or failure
to make a filing. (Ord. 00-29, 1-2-2001)
1-18-13: INSTALLMENT CONTRACTS:
The village may enter into an installment contract with the taxpayer for the
payment of taxes under the controlling tax ordinance. The local tax
administrator may not cancel any installment contract so entered unless the
taxpayer fails to pay any amount due and owing. Upon written notice by the
local tax administrator that the payment is thirty (30) days' delinquent, the
taxpayer shall have fourteen (14) working days to cure any delinquency. If the
taxpayer fails to cure the delinquency within the fourteen (14) day period or
fails to demonstrate good faith in restructuring the installment contract with
the local administrator, the installment contract shall be canceled without
further notice to the taxpayer. (Ord. 00-29, 1-2-2001)
1-18-14: STATUTE OF LIMITATIONS:
The village, through the local tax administrator, shall review all tax returns
in a prompt and timely manner and inform taxpayers of any amounts due and
owing. The taxpayer shall have forty five (45) days after receiving notice of
the reviewed tax returns to make any request for refund or provide any tax
still due and owing.
   (A)   No determination of tax due and owing may be issued more than four (4)
years after the end of the calendar year for which the return for the
applicable period was filed or for the calendar year in which the return for
the applicable period was due, whichever occurs later.
   (B)   If any tax return is not filed or if during any four (4) year period
for which a notice of tax determination or assessment may be issued by the
village, the tax paid was less than seventy five percent (75%) of the tax due,
the statute of limitations shall be six (6) years maximum after the end of the
calendar year in which return for the applicable period was due or end of the
calendar year in which the return for the applicable period was filed.
   (C)   No statute of limitations shall apply if a fraudulent tax return was
filed by the taxpayer. (Ord. 00-29, 1-2-2001)
1-18-15: VOLUNTARY DISCLOSURE:
For any locally imposed and administered tax for which a taxpayer has not
received a written notice of an audit, investigation, or assessment from the
local tax administrator, a taxpayer is entitled to file an application with the
local tax administrator for a voluntary disclosure of the tax due. A taxpayer
filing a voluntary disclosure application must agree to pay the amount of tax
due, along with interest of one percent (1%) per month, for all periods prior
to the filing of the application but not more than four (4) years before the
date of filing the application. A taxpayer filing a valid voluntary disclosure
application may not be liable for any additional tax, interest, or penalty for
any period before the date the application was filed. However, if the taxpayer
incorrectly determined and underpaid the amount of tax due, the taxpayer is
liable for the underpaid tax along with applicable interest on the underpaid
tax, unless the underpayment was the result of fraud on the part of the
taxpayer, in which case the application shall be deemed invalid and void. The
payment of tax and interest must be made by no later than ninety (90) days
after the filing of the voluntary disclosure application or the date agreed to
by the local tax administrator. However, any additional amounts owed as a
result of an underpayment of tax and interest previously paid under this
section must be paid within ninety (90) days after a final determination and
the exhaustion of all appeals or the additional amount owed or the date agreed
to by the local tax administrator, whichever is longer. (Ord. 00-29, 1-2-2001)
1-18-16: PUBLICATION OF TAX ORDINANCES:
Any locally administered tax ordinance shall be published via normal or
standard publishing requirements. The posting of a tax ordinance on the
internet shall satisfy the publication requirements. Copies of all tax
ordinances shall be made available to the public upon request at the village
clerk's office. (Ord. 00-29, 1-2-2001)
1-18-17: INTERNAL REVIEW PROCEDURE:
The local tax administrator shall establish an internal review procedure
regarding any liens filed against any taxpayers for unpaid taxes. Upon a
determination by the local tax administrator that the lien is valid, the lien
shall remain in full force and effect. If the lien is determined to be
improper, the local tax administrator shall:
   (A)   Timely remove the lien at the village's expense;
   (B)   Correct the taxpayer's credit record; and
   (C)   Correct any public disclosure of the improperly imposed lien. (Ord.
00-29, 1-2-2001)
1-18-18: APPLICATION:
This chapter shall be liberally construed and administered to supplement all of
the village's tax ordinances. To the extent that any tax ordinance is in
conflict with or inconsistent with this chapter, this chapter shall be
controlling. (Ord. 00-29, 1-2-2001)
CHAPTER 19
VILLAGE ADMINISTRATOR
SECTION:
1-19-1: Office Created
1-19-2: Appointment
1-19-3: Residency
1-19-4: Removal
1-19-5: Duties
1-19-6: Bond
1-19-7: Acting Administrator
1-19-8: Interference
1-19-9: Authority Of Other Officers
1-19-10: Salary
1-19-1: OFFICE CREATED:
There is hereby created the office of village administrator. (Ord. 03-37, 3-29-
2004)
1-19-2: APPOINTMENT:
The village administrator shall be appointed by the president, with the advice
and consent of the board of trustees. The appointment shall be made on the
basis of education and professional ability, without regard to political
considerations, race, religion, age, or sex. (Ord. 03-37, 3-29-2004)
1-19-3: RESIDENCY:
Within six (6) months of appointment, the village administrator shall establish
residence within ten (10) miles of the corporate boundary of the village. (Ord.
03-37, 3-29-2004)
1-19-4: REMOVAL:
The village administrator may be removed by the president in accordance with
the Illinois municipal code, 65 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/3.1-35-10. (Ord.
03-37, 3-29-2004)
1-19-5: DUTIES:
In discharging this responsibility, the village administrator shall:
   (A)   Coordinate and supervise the activities of all the various
departments, commissions and boards of the village.
   (B)   Direct the day to day activities of each department through the
appropriate department head.
   (C)   Assist the president and committee chairmen with the preparation of
the agenda for meetings of the village board and committees.
   (D)   Keep the president and trustees informed of the activities of the
various departments.
   (E)   Keep the president and trustees informed of the fiscal condition of
each of the village's funds.
   (F)   Act as purchasing agent for the village within limitations and under
conditions as established from time to time by the village trustees.
   (G)   Assume the duties of budget officer of the village as defined in the
Illinois municipal code. There shall be no additional remuneration for acting
as budget officer of the village.
   (H)   Appoint and when necessary, suspend or remove all employees other than
department heads and officers appointed by the village president. All
appointments shall be based solely upon merit and fitness for the job, and all
suspensions and dismissals shall be for cause, without regard to race, sex,
religious convictions, or political belief or affiliation. (Ord. 03-37, 3-29-
2004)
   (I)   Attend and participate in all meetings of the president and trustees,
and planning commission, unless excused from attending. Participation does not
include the right to vote. (Ord. 03-37, 3-29-2004; amd. Ord. 05-01, 5-16-2005)
   (J)   Effectively and efficiently administer the policies adopted by the
president and trustees.
   (K)   Recommend various courses of action to the president and trustees,
along with possible alternatives.
   (L)   Promote good relations with other governmental agencies and the
public.
   (M)   Enforce, or oversee the enforcement of this code.
   (N)   Perform such other tasks as may be required by the president and
trustees.
   (O)   Oversee in the ordinary course of business all purchases of materials
and supplies necessary for the village as provided for in the annual
appropriation ordinance; provided, that on purchases of more than three
thousand dollars ($3,000.00), he/she shall first procure the approval of the
trustees before making such purchases, and in all cases he/she shall comply
with the statutory provisions as to solicitations of bids.
   (P)   Whenever, in the judgment of the village administrator, exigency shall
require the making of any purchases for a price in excess of three thousand
dollars ($3,000.00), but less than ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00), prior to
the next regular meeting of the trustees, the village administrator, with the
written approval of the president, may make such purchase without waiting for
formal approval of the specific purchase by the board as a whole; provided that
such purchase shall not violate any relevant statutory requirement as to
solicitation of bids.
   (Q)   Recommend to the trustees a classification pay and benefit plan, or
recommend other courses of action and possible alternatives that are in the
best interest of the village.
   (R)   Promulgate administrative rules and regulations as long as they are
not in conflict with other local or state law.
   (S)   Adhere to the code of ethics of the International City Management
Association. The village administrator may also be referred to as the village
manager. (Ord. 03-37, 3-29-2004)
1-19-6: BOND:
The village administrator shall furnish a surety bond in the amount of ten
thousand dollars ($10,000.00) to be approved by the president and trustees. The
bond shall be conditioned on the faithful performance of the duties of the
office. The premium for the bond shall be paid by the village. (Ord. 03-37, 3-
29-2004)
1-19-7: ACTING ADMINISTRATOR:
If, because of a temporary absence, disability or illness, the village
administrator is unable to carry out the functions of this office, the
president, with the advice and consent of the board of trustees, may appoint a
member of the village's senior administrative staff, or other qualified person,
to serve as acting administrator and carry out the duties of the administrator
during the administrator's absence. (Ord. 03-37, 3-29-2004)
1-19-8: INTERFERENCE:
No citizen or elected officer of the village shall dictate the appointment of
any person to, or their removal from, office by the village administrator or by
any of the administrator's subordinates. Except for the purpose of inquiry,
elected village officials shall not give orders to any subordinates of the
village administrator, either publicly or privately. (Ord. 03-37, 3-29-2004)
1-19-9: AUTHORITY OF OTHER OFFICERS:
Nothing in this chapter shall be deemed to diminish or detract from the
statutory powers and authority of the village's elected officials. (Ord. 03-37,
3-29-2004)
1-19-10: SALARY:
The salary of the village administrator shall be determined by the president
and trustees on an annual basis. (Ord. 03-37, 3-29-2004)
CHAPTER 20
ETHICAL CONDUCT
SECTION:
1-20-1: Definitions
1-20-2: Prohibited Political Activities
1-20-3: Gift Ban
1-20-4: Penalties
1-20-1: DEFINITIONS:
For purposes of this chapter, the following terms shall be given these
definitions:
CAMPAIGN FOR ELECTIVE OFFICE: Any activity in furtherance of an effort to
influence the selection, nomination, election, or appointment of any individual
to any federal, state, or local public office or office in a political
organization, or the selection, nomination, or election of presidential or vice
presidential electors, but does not include activities: a) relating to the
support or opposition of any executive, legislative, or administrative action,
b) relating to collective bargaining, or c) that are otherwise in furtherance
of the person's official duties.
CANDIDATE: A person who has filed nominating papers or petitions for nomination
or election to an elected office, or who has been appointed to fill a vacancy
in nomination, and who remains eligible for placement on the ballot at a
regular election, as defined in section 1-3 of the election code 1 .
COLLECTIVE BARGAINING: Has the same meaning as that term is defined in section
3 of the Illinois public labor relations act 2 .
COMPENSATED TIME: With respect to an employee, any time worked by or credited
to the employee that counts toward any minimum work time requirement imposed as
a condition of his or her employment, but for purposes of this chapter, does
not include any designated holidays, vacation periods, personal time,
compensatory time off or any period when the employee is on a leave of absence.
With respect to officers or employees whose hours are not fixed, "compensated
time" includes any period of time when the officer is on premises under the
control of the employer and any other time when the officer or employee is
executing his or her official duties, regardless of location.
COMPENSATORY TIME OFF: Authorized time off earned by or awarded to an employee
to compensate in whole or in part for time worked in excess of the minimum work
time required of that employee as a condition of his or her employment.
CONTRIBUTION: Has the same meaning as that term is defined in section 9-1.4 of
the election code 3 .
EMPLOYEE: A person employed by the employer, whether on a full time or part
time basis or pursuant to a contract, whose duties are subject to the direction
and control of an employer with regard to the material details of how the work
is to be performed, but does not include an independent contractor.
EMPLOYER: The village of Manteno.
GIFT: Any gratuity, discount, entertainment, hospitality, loan, forbearance, or
other tangible or intangible item having monetary value including, but not
limited to, cash, food and drink, and honoraria for speaking engagements
related to or attributable to government employment or the official position of
an officer or employee.
LEAVE OF ABSENCE: Any period during which an employee does not receive: a)
compensation for employment, b) service credit towards pension benefits, and c)
health insurance benefits paid for by the employer.
OFFICER: A person who holds, by election or appointment, an office created by
statute or ordinance, regardless of whether the officer is compensated for
service in his or her official capacity.
POLITICAL ACTIVITY: Any activity in support of or in connection with any
campaign for elective office or any political organization, but does not
include activities: a) relating to the support or opposition of any executive,
legislative, or administrative action, b) relating to collective bargaining, or
c) that are otherwise in furtherance of the person's official duties.
POLITICAL ORGANIZATION: A party, committee, association, fund, or other
organization (whether or not incorporated) that is required to file a statement
of organization with the state board of elections or a county clerk under
section 9-3 of the election code 4 , but only with regard to those activities
that require filing with the state board of elections or a county clerk.
PROHIBITED POLITICAL ACTIVITY:
   (A)   Preparing for, organizing, or participating in any political meeting,
political rally, political demonstration, or other political event.
   (B)   Soliciting contributions, including, but not limited to, the purchase
of, selling, distributing, or receiving payment for tickets for any political
fundraiser, political meeting, or other political event.
   (C)   Soliciting, planning the solicitation of, or preparing any document or
report regarding anything of value intended as a campaign contribution.
   (D)   Planning, conducting, or participating in a public opinion poll in
connection with a campaign for elective office or on behalf of a political
organization for political purposes or for or against any referendum question.
   (E)   Surveying or gathering information from potential or actual voters in
an election to determine probable vote outcome in connection with a campaign
for elective office or on behalf of a political organization for political
purposes or for or against any referendum question.
   (F)   Assisting at the polls on election day on behalf of any political
organization or candidate for elective office or for or against any referendum
question.
   (G)   Soliciting votes on behalf of a candidate for elective office or a
political organization or for or against any referendum question or helping in
an effort to get voters to the polls.
   (H)   Initiating for circulation, preparing, circulating, reviewing, or
filing any petition on behalf of a candidate for elective office or for or
against any referendum question.
   (I)   Making contributions on behalf of any candidate for elective office in
that capacity or in connection with a campaign for elective office.
   (J)   Preparing or reviewing responses to candidate questionnaires.
   (K)   Distributing, preparing for distribution, or mailing campaign
literature, campaign signs, or other campaign material on behalf of any
candidate for elective office or for or against any referendum question.
   (L)   Campaigning for any elective office or for or against any referendum
question.
   (M)   Managing or working on a campaign for elective office or for or
against any referendum question.
   (N)   Serving as a delegate, alternate, or proxy to a political party
convention.
   (O)   Participating in any recount or challenge to the outcome of any
election.
PROHIBITED SOURCE: Any person or entity who:
   (A)   Is seeking official action: 1) by an officer or 2) by an employee, or
by the officer or another employee directing that employee;
   (B)   Does business or seeks to do business: 1) with the officer or 2) with
an employee, or with the officer or another employee directing that employee;
   (C)   Conducts activities regulated: 1) by the officer or 2) by an employee,
or by the officer or another employee directing that employee; or
   (D)   Has interests that may be substantially affected by the performance or
nonperformance of the official duties of the officer or employee. (Ord. 03-44,
5-3-2004)
 
Notes
1 1. 10 ILCS 5/1-3.
2 2. 5 ILCS 315/3.
3 1. 10 ILCS 5/9-1.4.
4 2. 10 ILCS 5/9-3.
1-20-2: PROHIBITED POLITICAL ACTIVITIES:
   (A)   No officer or employee shall intentionally perform any prohibited
political activity during any "compensated time", as defined herein. No officer
or employee shall intentionally use any property or resources of the employer
in connection with any prohibited political activity.
   (B)   At no time shall any officer or employee intentionally require any
other officer or employee to perform any prohibited political activity: 1) as
part of that officer's or employee's duties, 2) as a condition of employment,
or 3) during any compensated time off (such as holidays, vacation or personal
time off).
   (C)   No officer or employee shall be required at any time to participate in
any prohibited political activity in consideration for that officer or employee
being awarded additional compensation or any benefit, whether in the form of a
salary adjustment, bonus, compensatory time off, continued employment or
otherwise, nor shall any officer or employee be awarded additional compensation
or any benefit in consideration for his or her participation in any prohibited
political activity.
   (D)   Nothing in this section prohibits activities that are permissible for
an officer or employee to engage in as part of his or her official duties, or
activities that are undertaken by an officer or employee on a voluntary basis
which are not prohibited by this chapter.
   (E)   No person either: 1) in a position that is subject to recognized merit
principles of public employment or 2) in a position the salary for which is
paid in whole or in part by federal funds and that is subject to the federal
standards for a merit system of personnel administration applicable to grant in
aid programs, shall be denied or deprived of employment or tenure solely
because he or she is a member or an officer of a political committee, of a
political party, or of a political organization or club. (Ord. 03-44, 5-3-2004)
1-20-3: GIFT BAN:
   (A)   Except as permitted by this section, no officer or employee, and no
spouse of or immediate family member living with any officer or employee
(collectively referred to herein as "recipients"), shall intentionally solicit
or accept any gift from any "prohibited source", as defined herein, or which is
otherwise prohibited by law or this chapter. No prohibited source shall
intentionally offer or make a gift that violates this section.
   (B)   The provisions of subsection (A) of this section shall not be
applicable to the following:
      1.   Opportunities, benefits, and services that are available on the same
conditions as for the general public.
      2.   Anything for which the officer or employee, or his or her spouse or
immediate family member, pays the fair market value.
      3.   Any: a) contribution that is lawfully made under the election code
or b) activities associated with a fundraising event in support of a political
organization or candidate.
      4.   Educational materials and missions.
      5.   Travel expenses for a meeting to discuss business.
      6.   A gift from a relative, meaning those people related to the
individual as father, mother, son, daughter, brother, sister, uncle, aunt,
great aunt, great uncle, first cousin, nephew, niece, husband, wife,
grandfather, grandmother, grandson, granddaughter, father-in-law, mother-in-
law, son-in-law, daughter-in-law, brother-in-law, sister-in-law, stepfather,
stepmother, stepson, stepdaughter, stepbrother, stepsister, half brother, half
sister, and including the father, mother, grandfather, or grandmother of the
individual's spouse and the individual's fiance or fiancee.
      7.   Anything provided by an individual on the basis of a personal
friendship unless the recipient has reason to believe that, under the
circumstances, the gift was provided because of the official position or
employment of the recipient or his or her spouse or immediate family member and
not because of the personal friendship. In determining whether a gift is
provided on the basis of personal friendship, the recipient shall consider the
circumstances under which the gift was offered, such as: a) the history of the
relationship between the individual giving the gift and the recipient of the
gift, including any previous exchange of gifts between those individuals; b)
whether to the actual knowledge of the recipient the individual who gave the
gift personally paid for the gift or sought a tax deduction or business
reimbursement for the gift; and c) whether to the actual knowledge of the
recipient the individual who gave the gift also at the same time gave the same
or similar gifts to other officers or employees, or their spouses or immediate
family members.
      8.   Food or refreshments not exceeding seventy five dollars ($75.00) per
person in value on a single calendar day; provided that the food or
refreshments are: a) consumed on the premises from which they were purchased or
prepared or b) catered. For the purposes of this section, "catered" means food
or refreshments that are purchased ready to consume which are delivered by any
means.
      9.   Food, refreshments, lodging, transportation, and other benefits
resulting from outside business or employment activities (or outside activities
that are not connected to the official duties of an officer or employee), if
the benefits have not been offered or enhanced because of the official position
or employment of the officer or employee, and are customarily provided to
others in similar circumstances.
      10.   Intragovernmental and intergovernmental gifts. For the purpose of
this chapter, "intragovernmental gift" means any gift given to an officer or
employee from another officer or employee, and "intergovernmental gift" means
any gift given to an officer or employee by an officer or employee of another
governmental entity.
      11.   Bequests, inheritances, and other transfers at death.
      12.   Any item or items from any one prohibited source during any
calendar year having a cumulative total value of less than one hundred dollars
($100.00).
Each of the exceptions listed above is mutually exclusive and independent of
every other.
   (C)   An officer or employee, his or her spouse or an immediate family
member living with the officer or employee, does not violate this section if
the recipient promptly takes reasonable action to return a gift from a
prohibited source to its source or gives the gift or an amount equal to its
value to an appropriate charity that is exempt from income taxation under
section 501(c)(3) of the internal revenue code of 1986, as now or hereafter
amended, renumbered, or succeeded. (Ord. 03-44, 5-3-2004)
1-20-4: PENALTIES:
   (A)   A person who intentionally violates any provision of section
1-20-2 of this chapter shall be punished by a term of incarceration in a penal
institution other than a penitentiary for a period of not more than three
hundred sixty four (364) days, and may be fined in an amount not to exceed two
thousand five hundred dollars ($2,500.00).
   (B)   A person who intentionally violates any provision of section
1-20-3 of this chapter is subject to a fine in an amount of not less than one
thousand one dollars ($1,001.00) and not more than five thousand dollars
($5,000.00).
   (C)   Any person who intentionally makes a false report alleging a violation
of any provision of this chapter to the local enforcement authorities, the
state's attorney or any other law enforcement official may be punished by a
term of incarceration in a penal institution other than a penitentiary for a
period of not more than three hundred sixty four (364) days, and may be fined
in an amount not to exceed two thousand five hundred dollars ($2,500.00).
   (D)   A violation of section
1-20-2 of this chapter shall be prosecuted as a criminal offense by an attorney
specially appointed by the employer by filing in the circuit court an
information, or sworn complaint, charging such offense. The prosecution shall
be under and conform to the rules of criminal procedure. Conviction shall
require the establishment of the guilt of the defendant beyond a reasonable
doubt.
   (E)   A violation of section
1-20-3 of this chapter may be prosecuted as a quasi-criminal offense by an
attorney specially appointed by the employer.
   (F)   In addition to any other penalty that may be applicable, whether
criminal or civil, an officer or employee who intentionally violates any
provision of section
1-20-2 or
1-20-3 of this chapter is subject to discipline or discharge. (Ord. 03-44, 5-3-
2004)
CHAPTER 21
CONTRACTS, PURCHASES AND FINANCIAL REGULATIONS (ILLINOIS BUDGET ACT)
SECTION:
1-21-1: Fiscal Year
1-21-2: Finance Committee
1-21-3: Annual Budget And Budget Officer
1-21-4: Special Assessments
1-21-5: Payment Of Bills
1-21-6: Purchases And Purchasing Agent
1-21-7: Public Improvements (Rep. by Ord. 05-45, 1-16-2006)
1-21-8: Contracts (Rep. by Ord. 05-45, 1-16-2006)
1-21-9: Bids
1-21-10: Contractor's Bond
1-21-11: Conflict Of Interest
1-21-1: FISCAL YEAR:
The fiscal year of the village shall commence on May 1 of each year. (Ord. 04-
21, 8-16-2004)
1-21-2: FINANCE COMMITTEE:
The finance committee shall:
   (A)   Examine the annual budget prepared by the village administrator and
budget officer, if separate individuals, and provide oversight for all matters
pertaining to the receipts and disbursements of the village;
   (B)   Assure that all investments of village funds, insofar as such
investments may be permitted by provisions of this code and the laws of the
state comply with the village's investment policies;
   (C)   Provide oversight for all transactions pertaining to the acquisition
or leasing of real property by the village;
   (D)   Provide oversight for the issuance and sale of the bonds and
obligations of the village; and
   (E)   Provide oversight for the preparation of the annual tax levy ordinance
of the village. (Ord. 04-21, 8-16-2004)
1-21-3: ANNUAL BUDGET AND BUDGET OFFICER:
   (A)   Statutes Adopted: The village hereby adopts 65 Illinois Compiled
Statutes 5/8-2-9.1 through and including 5/8-2-9.10, providing for an annual
municipal budget in lieu of the passage of an annual appropriation ordinance.
   (B)   Budget Officer:
      1.   Office Created; Duties: The office of budget officer is hereby
created and established. The budget officer shall be appointed by the president
with the advice and consent of the board of trustees.
      2.   Bond: The budget officer shall execute a bond as provided by section
1-7-2  of this title, or such other sum as may be required by statute.
      3.   Duties: The budget officer shall compile a budget pursuant to the
above sections of the Illinois Compiled Statutes as they are now, or may
hereafter be amended, containing estimates of the revenues available before the
beginning of the fiscal year to which it applies, together with recommended
expenditures for the municipality and all of its boards, commissions and
departments, with said budget being adopted by the board of trustees prior to
May 1 of each fiscal year.
   (C)   Preliminary Budget: Copies of the preliminary annual budget shall be
made available for public inspection in typewritten form in the office of the
village clerk for at least ten (10) days prior to the passage of the annual
budget, and not less than one (1) week after the budget is available for
inspection, and prior to final action on the budget at least one (1) public
hearing shall be held on the budget by the president and board of trustees.
Notice of this hearing shall be given by publication in a newspaper having
general circulation in the village at least one (1) week prior to the time of
the hearing.
   (D)   Budget Revisions:
      1.   Authority: The board of trustees may delegate authority to the
village administrator, budget officer or director of finance to delete, add to,
or change items previously budgeted to the department, board or commission,
subject to such limitation or requirement for prior approval by the village
manager as the board of trustees, upon a two-thirds (2/3) vote of members, may
establish. The village administrator may revise or alter the annual budget by
changing line items in the same category without board approval.
      2.   Vote On Revisions: The annual budget may be revised by a vote of
two-thirds (2/3) of the board of trustees by deleting, adding to or changing
budgeted items.
      3.   Restrictions On Revisions: No revision of the budget items shall be
made which results in increasing the total budget unless funds are available to
effectuate the purpose of the revision.
      4.   Emergency Budget Revisions; Borrowing Money:
         (a)   Notwithstanding the limitation of this section, the president
and board of trustees, by two-thirds (2/3) vote, may make emergency revisions
to the annual budget for: 1) improvements or restorations made necessary by any
casualty or accident; 2) to meet any unforeseen emergency requiring immediate
action to prevent the spread of disease or avoid imminent danger to persons or
property.
         (b)   For this purpose, the president and board of trustees, by a like
vote, may authorize the president and the finance committee to borrow the
amount of money necessary therefor for a space of time not extending beyond the
close of the next fiscal year. The sum so borrowed and the interest thereon
shall be added to and included in the amount authorized to be raised in the
next general tax levy.
         (c)   Should any judgment be obtained against the village, the
president and the finance committee, under sanction of the board of trustees,
may borrow a sufficient amount to pay the same for a space of time expiring not
later than the close of the next fiscal year, which sum and interest shall, in
like manner, be added to and included in the amount authorized to be raised in
the general tax levy of the next year. (Ord. 04-21, 8-16-2004; amd. Ord. 24-18,
2-3-2025)
1-21-4: SPECIAL ASSESSMENTS:
   (A)   Funds; Applications: All monies received on any special assessment
shall be held by the treasurer as a special fund to be applied to the payment
for the improvement for which the assessment was made, and said money shall be
used for no other purpose whatsoever, unless to reimburse the village for money
expended for such improvement.
   (B)   Interest; Application: The treasurer is hereby directed to segregate
and to keep in an account to be known as "interest from special assessment
funds", all money received by the village by way of interest upon special
assessment funds in its hands which have been deposited in a bank, and all
monies hereafter accumulated in said account shall be used in retiring
outstanding special assessment vouchers and bonds that may be delinquent by
reason of any deficiency in the fund out of which such vouchers or bonds are to
be paid, or for paying interest or deficiency in interest upon outstanding
vouchers or bonds where there is a deficiency in the fund out of which interest
should be paid. (Ord. 04-21, 8-16-2004)
1-21-5: PAYMENT OF BILLS:
Every bill against the village shall first be submitted to the village
administrator or his designee, who shall examine it, and if he finds it
correct, shall approve it in writing. The board of trustees shall receive at
their regular monthly meeting a list of all bills approved by the village
administrator, which have been paid or are to be paid since the prior regular
meeting, showing name of vendor, purpose, amount and fund to which the
disbursement is chargeable. Upon reading of the bills, except those disallowed,
the board of trustees will approve action of the village treasurer in paying
obligations against the village. The provisions of this section shall apply to
all bills and expenses incurred by the village except salaries and wages of
village officers and employees; these shall be paid by the treasurer biweekly
in accordance with the salary and wage schedules approved from time to time by
the board of trustees. (Ord. 04-21, 8-16-2004)
1-21-6: PURCHASES AND PURCHASING AGENT:
   (A)   Unless otherwise authorized, no purchase or contract for equipment,
goods, materials, property, services, supplies, vehicles, or work shall be
approved, valid, or binding on the village unless included as an anticipated
expenditure in the current budget.
   (B)   Unless otherwise authorized, no purchase or contract for equipment,
goods, materials, property, services, supplies, vehicles, or work shall be
approved, valid, or binding on the Village unless authorized by the corporate
authorities of the village.
   (C)   The village administrator shall be and act as the purchasing agent for
the village. The village administrator shall have the authority, when so
authorized by the corporate authorities, to purchase or contract for all
equipment, goods, materials, property, services, supplies, vehicles, and work
needed by the village.
   (D)   The village administrator may, in his/her discretion, without the
specific prior approval of the corporate authorities, purchase or contract for
all equipment, goods, materials, property, services, supplies, vehicles, and
work in an amount not to exceed twenty-five thousand dollars ($25,000.00)
provided such expense is included as an anticipated expenditure in the current
budget.
   (E)   Notwithstanding anything herein to the contrary, no purchase or
contract for work or other public improvement to be constructed in excess of
twenty-five thousand dollars ($25,000.00) shall be made unless authorized by a
contract awarded to the lowest responsible bidder after due advertisement for
bids, except that any such contract may be entered into by the proper officers
without advertising for bids, if authorized by a vote of two-thirds of the
board of trustees. "Due advertisement" means an invitation to bid published in
a newspaper of general circulation in the village at least ten (10) days before
the bid response date. A "responsible bidder" is a person or entity who has the
capability in all respects to perform fully the contract requirements, with the
perseverance, experience, integrity, reliability, resources, capacity,
facilities, equipment, and credit to assure good faith performance. In
determining which bidder is the "lowest responsible bidder," the village may
consider, in addition to the amount of the bid/contract price: (i) the ability,
capacity and skill to perform the contract and provide the supplies, materials
or work; (ii) whether the bidder can perform the contract in the manner
specified by the contract documents without delay or interference; (iii) the
character, integrity, reputation, judgment, experience and efficiency of the
bidder; (iv) the quality of performance on previous contracts with the village
or other governmental agencies; (v) the history and current compliance with all
laws and ordinances related to the contract; (vi) the financial resources to
perform the contract; (vii) the quality, availability and adaptability of the
contractual supplies, materials or work to the use required; (viii) the ability
of the bidder to provide future maintenance or warranty work required by the
contract; (ix) the number and scope of conditions imposed by the bidder; and,
(x) whether the bidder has a place of business within the jurisdictional
boundaries of the village.
   (F)   Following an award of a contract for work or public improvement to be
constructed, no change order or construction change directive shall be approved
or executed by any village official, employee, or agent, including any
engineer, architect, or construction manager, that increases, or would have the
effect of increasing, the contract price by more than five thousand dollars
($5,000) or five (5%) percent (excluding allowances in the contract), whichever
is greater, without the prior approval of the board of trustees announced at a
regular or special meeting held for such purpose.
   (G)   No change order or construction change directive shall be approved or
executed that necessitates an increase in the contract price by fifty (50%)
percent or more of the original contract price without resubmitting that
portion to bidding in the same manner in which the original contract was bid in
accordance with the Illinois Public Works Contract Change Order Act (50 ILCS
525/1, et seq.).
   (H)   In the case of an emergency, the village president, or his/her
designee, with the prior consensus of not less than four (4) trustees, shall
have the authority to purchase or contract for equipment, goods, materials,
property, services, supplies, vehicles, or work, provided such purchase or
contract is ratified by the corporate authorities at their next regularly
scheduled meeting to be held not less than forty-eight (48) hours thereafter.
(Ord. 05-45, 1-16-2006; amd. Ord. 25-09, 7-7-2025)
1-21-7: PUBLIC IMPROVEMENTS:
(Rep. by Ord. 05-45, 1-16-2006)
1-21-8: CONTRACTS:
(Rep. by Ord. 05-45, 1-16-2006)
1-21-9: BIDS:
   (A)   Advertisement For Bids: Unless otherwise specified by the board of
trustees, any contract requiring bidding shall be let after advertising for
bids by publication not less than one time at least ten (10) days prior to the
date of the bid opening.
   (B)   Prevailing Wage Act: All contracts subject to the prevailing wage act
shall be deemed to include the requirements thereof whether or not specifically
detailed in the bid specifications.
   (C)   Waiver: The board of trustees reserves the right to reject any and all
bids or to waive any technicalities, whether or not specifically detailed in
the bid specifications.
   (D)   Bid Opening: Unless otherwise specified by the board of trustees bids
shall be opened in the office of the village clerk during regular business
hours with the report thereof forwarded to the board of trustees for action.
   (E)   Bid Security: No bid deposit or bond shall be required unless required
in the bid specifications. (Ord. 05-45, 1-16-2006)
1-21-10: CONTRACTOR'S BOND:
   (A)   Sureties: Whenever any work or improvement is let by contract to any
person, the officers of the village letting the same shall, in all cases, take
a bond from such person, with a corporate surety company as surety, in such
amount as shall not only be adequate to insure the performance of the work in
the time and manner required in such contract, but also to indemnify and save
harmless the said village against all liabilities, judgments, costs and
expenses which may in any way accrue against the village in consequence of
granting such contract, or which may in any way result from the negligence or
misfeasance of such person, his agents or employees.
   (B)   Execution: All contractors' bonds taken shall be executed in duplicate
and the village shall be the obligee. One executed copy of such bond and all
statements of financial responsibility shall be filed with the village clerk.
(Ord. 04-21, 8-16-2004)
1-21-11: CONFLICT OF INTEREST:
No officer or employee of the village shall be interested directly or
indirectly in any contract made and entered into under the provisions of this
chapter for any work to be done or any materials to be furnished, nor in the
purchase of any real estate or other property belonging to the village, or
which shall be sold for taxes or assessments or by virtue of legal process at
the suit of the village, and all contracts so made in which such officer or
employee shall be so interested may, at the option of the village, be declared
unlawful and void and of no binding effect whatsoever, and such officer or
employee interested in any such contract shall thereby forfeit his office and
be removed therefrom on proof of his delinquency. (Ord. 04-21, 8-16-2004)
CHAPTER 22
DIRECTOR OF BUILDING AND ZONING
SECTION:
1-22-1: Office Created; Appointment; Term; Compensation
1-22-2: Powers And Duties
1-22-3: Qualifications
1-22-4: Code Enforcement Officer
1-22-1: OFFICE CREATED; APPOINTMENT; TERM; COMPENSATION:
The office of director of building and zoning is hereby created. Such officer
shall be appointed by the village president with the advice and consent of the
board of trustees. Such officer shall serve until his successor has been
appointed and qualified, and shall receive such compensation as approved by the
board of trustees. (Ord. 04-45, 4-4-2005)
1-22-2: POWERS AND DUTIES:
The director of building and zoning directs and supervises all employees of the
building and zoning department; including interviewing, recommending hires, and
training employees, planning, assigning, and directing work; appraising
performance; rewarding and disciplining employees; addressing complaints and
resolving complaints. Specific functions include, but are not limited to:
   (A)   Oversees, performs and reviews building permit applications and
issuance, construction drawings, zoning inquiries, on site building and zoning
inspection. Ensures the maintenance of accurate and complete records of the
department.
   (B)   Interprets and administers village codes and regulations regarding
planning, subdivision, zoning, building, and floodplain.
   (C)   Receives, reviews, and answers inquiries regarding all aspects of the
department. Resolves complex and sensitive customer service issues, either
personally, by telephone, or in writing.
   (D)   Responsible for researching, drafting and updating of plans,
ordinances and regulations such as the zoning ordinance, comprehensive plan,
building code, floodplain, and subdivision regulations.
   (E)   Assists in the development of short and long range plans and projects,
gathers, interprets, and prepares data for studies, reports and
recommendations, coordinates department activities with other departments and
agencies as needed.
   (F)   Provides staff support to various boards and commissions, as needed
and assigned.
   (G)   Attends professional development workshops, conferences, and
continuing education workshops, to maintain certifications and keep abreast of
trends and developments in the field of code enforcement and planning.
   (H)   Prepares the annual building and zoning department budget.
   (I)   Inspects buildings during various stages of construction, alterations
and repair including, but not limited to, excavations, setbacks, soils,
footings, foundation, framing, electrical, mechanical, nailing and roofing to
ensure the use of proper construction techniques and materials.
   (J)   Reviews building plans and specifications to ensure compliance with
codes and approved construction practices and calculates appropriate permit
fee, lists construction deficiencies in the plan which must be resolved before
the issuance of a permit.
   (K)   Issues certificates of occupancy upon completion of favorable final
inspections.
   (L)   Serves as plat officer for the village, reviews plats for compliance
with various village and state ordinances and regulations, works with
developers to assist them in conforming with the various ordinances and
regulations, and makes recommendations to the building committee. (Ord. 04-45,
4-4-2005)
   (M)   Reviews all applications and procedures for variation, amendment,
rezoning, and special use to be heard by the planning commission; acts as the
planning commission secretary; compiles data needed by the planning commission
to make decisions; makes presentation; provides technical advice and formulates
reports and findings of fact after completion of hearings to be submitted to
the village board. (Ord. 04-45, 4-4-2005; amd. Ord. 05-01, 5-16-2005)
   (N)   Assists in preparation of annexation agreements.
   (O)   Acts as building official with respect to all codes promulgated by the
International Code Council.
   (P)   Additional duties as assigned by the village board. (Ord. 04-45, 4-4-
2005)
1-22-3: QUALIFICATIONS:
The person appointed to the office of director of building and zoning shall
have the knowledge and experience necessary to perform all of the powers and
duties of such office. (Ord. 04-45, 4-4-2005)
1-22-4: CODE ENFORCEMENT OFFICER:
Any reference to the code enforcement officer in this code shall mean the
director of building and zoning. (Ord. 04-45, 4-4-2005)
CHAPTER 23
EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT LIAISON
SECTION:
1-23-1: Office Created
1-23-2: Appointment; Term
1-23-3: Compensation
1-23-4: Powers And Duties
1-23-1: OFFICE CREATED:
The office of emergency management liaison is hereby created. (Ord. 05-65, 4-
17-2006)
1-23-2: APPOINTMENT; TERM:
The emergency management liaison shall be appointed by the village president
with the advice and consent of the board of trustees. Such officer shall serve
until his successor has been appointed and qualified. (Ord. 05-65, 4-17-2006)
1-23-3: COMPENSATION:
The salary of the emergency management liaison shall be determined by the
president and board of trustees on an annual basis. (Ord. 05-65, 4-17-2006)
1-23-4: POWERS AND DUTIES:
In discharging this responsibility, the emergency management liaison shall:
   (A)   Be under the control and supervision of the chief of police for the
village of Manteno;
   (B)   Act as counselor to the village president, along with the chief of
police, concerning the management of emergency situations;
   (C)   Provide assistance with the coordination and activation of the village
emergency management center;
   (D)   Act as head liaison between the village of Manteno and other emergency
agencies;
   (E)   Maintain and revise, as needed, the village emergency action plan;
   (F)   Develop, schedule and conduct annual table top exercises; and
   (G)   Attend emergency planning meetings (county, state, etc.) as needed for
continued education and to be familiar with current emergency management
issues. (Ord. 05-65, 4-17-2006)
TITLE 2
BOARDS, COMMISSIONS AND BUREAUS
CHAPTER 1
BOARD OF HEALTH
(Rep. by Ord. 24-18, 2-3-2025)
CHAPTER 2
FIRE PREVENTION BUREAU
SECTION:
2-2-1: Creation
2-2-2: Office; Appointment
2-2-3: Duties
2-2-4: Powers
2-2-5: Compensation
2-2-1: CREATION:
There is hereby established an executive department of the municipal government
of the village which shall be known as the fire prevention bureau. (1956 Code,
Sec. 10-1)
2-2-2: OFFICE; APPOINTMENT:
The office of chief of the fire prevention bureau is hereby created and
established. The chief of the fire prevention bureau shall be appointed by the
president with the advice and consent of the board of trustees. (1956 Code,
Sec. 10-2; amd. Ord. 24-18, 2-3-2025)
2-2-3: DUTIES:
The chief of the fire prevention bureau shall have the duty of investigating
and suppressing any and all fire hazards within the village and to this end he
shall be vested with full police powers.
He shall cause periodic investigations to be made within the village with
respect to compliance with all laws of the village, county or state regarding
fire prevention and control.
He shall have the authority to go anywhere within the village for purposes of
making investigations of compliance with fire provisions of this code and to
enter any structure within the village. (1956 Code, Sec. 10-3)
2-2-4: POWERS:
If the said chief of the fire prevention bureau shall find any violations or
any conditions likely to create fire hazards he shall issue a notice to the
owner or person responsible for such violation or condition requesting
compliance within not more than fifteen (15) days. In the event of
noncompliance within such period the matter shall then be turned over to the
village attorney for prosecution. (1956 Code, Sec. 10-4)
2-2-5: COMPENSATION:
The chief of the fire prevention bureau shall be paid as directed by the
president and board of trustees. (1956 Code, Sec. 10-5)
CHAPTER 3
PLANNING COMMISSION
SECTION:
2-3-1: Purpose
2-3-2: Membership
2-3-3: Term Of Office
2-3-4: Procedure
2-3-5: Powers And Duties
2-3-6: Land Subdivision Or Resubdivision; Official Map
2-3-7: Improvements
2-3-8: Expenditures
2-3-9: Compensation
2-3-1: PURPOSE:
In order that adequate provisions be made for the preparation of a
comprehensive village plan for the guidance, direction and control of the
growth and development or redevelopment of the village and contiguous territory
not more than one and one-half (11/2) miles beyond the corporate limits and not
included in any municipality, a planning commission is hereby created under
authority of an act of the general assembly of the state entitled "Illinois
municipal code" approved May 29, 1961, and effective July 1, 1961, and as
amended. (1974 Code)
2-3-2: MEMBERSHIP:
The planning commission shall consist of seven (7) members, being residents of
the village. Members of the planning commission shall be appointed by the
president with the advice and consent of the board of trustees. (1974 Code;
amd. Ord. 24-18, 2-3-2025)
2-3-3: TERM OF OFFICE:
Of the seven (7) members first appointed two (2) shall serve for a period of
one year, two (2) for a period of two (2) years, and three (3) for a period of
three (3) years. Thereafter each member shall serve for a term of three (3)
years. Vacancies shall be filled by appointments for unexpired terms only. All
members of the commission shall serve without compensation except that, if the
board of trustees deems it advisable, they may receive such compensation as may
be fixed from time to time by the village and provided for in the appropriation
ordinance. The ex officio members shall serve for the terms of the elective
office. (1974 Code)
2-3-4: PROCEDURE:
The president with the approval of the board of trustees shall on an annual
basis appoint one of the members of the planning commission as chairman.
Immediately following their appointment the members of the planning commission
shall meet, organize, elect such other officers as it may deem necessary, and
adopt and later change or alter, rules and regulations of organization and
procedure consistent with provisions of this code and state laws. The
commission shall keep written records of its proceedings, which shall be open
at all times to public inspection. The commission shall also file an annual
report with the president and board of trustees setting forth its transactions
and recommendations. (Ord. 93-13, 2-14-1994)
2-3-5: POWERS AND DUTIES:
The planning commission shall have the following powers and duties:
   (A)   Comprehensive Plan:
      1.   To prepare and recommend to the president of the village a
comprehensive plan for the present and future development or redevelopment of
the village and contiguous unincorporated territory not more than one and one-
half (11/2) miles beyond the corporate limits of the village and not included
in any other municipality. Such plan may be adopted in whole or in separate
geographical or functional parts, each of which, when adopted shall be the
official comprehensive plan, or part thereof, of the village. Such plan shall
be advisory except as to such part thereof as has been implemented by
ordinances duly enacted by the board of trustees. All requirements for a public
hearing, filing of notice of adoption with the county recorder of deeds and
filing of said plan and ordinances with the clerk shall be complied with as
provided for by law.
      2.   To provide for the health, safety, comfort and convenience of the
inhabitants of the village and contiguous territory, such plan or plans shall
establish reasonable standards of design for subdivisions and for
resubdivisions of unimproved land and of areas subject to redevelopment in
respect to "public improvements" as herein defined and shall establish
reasonable requirements governing the location, width, course, and surfacing of
public streets and highways, alleys, ways for public service facilities, curbs,
gutters, sidewalks, streetlights, parks, playgrounds, school grounds, size of
lots to be used for residential purposes, storm water drainage, sanitary sewers
and sewage collection and treatment. The requirements specified herein shall
become regulatory only when adopted by ordinance. (Ord. 07-13, 8-6-2007)
   (B)   Annexation: To designate land suitable for annexation to the village
and the recommended zoning classification for such land upon annexation.
   (C)   Changes In Plan: To recommend to the board of trustees, from time to
time, such changes in the comprehensive plan, or any part thereof, as may be
deemed necessary. (1974 Code)
   (D)   Map And Text Amendments: To conduct hearings on petitions for map and/
or text amendments to the zoning ordinance or official zoning map for the
village, and to make recommendations to the village board regarding the same.
(Ord. 99-35, 3-6-2000)
   (E)   Special Use Permits: The planning commission shall be informed of all
special use permit applications and may evaluate the proposed use with respect
to officially adopted plans of the village. (Ord. 99-35, 3-6-2000; amd. Ord.
05-01, 5-16-2005)
   (F)   Specific Improvements: To prepare and recommend to the village board,
from time to time, plans and/or recommendations for specific improvements in
pursuance of the official comprehensive plan.
   (G)   Assist Officials: To give aid to the officials of the village charged
with the direction of projects for improvements embraced within the official
plan, or parts thereof, to further the making of such improvements and
generally to promote the realization of the official comprehensive plan.
   (H)   Publicity: To arrange and conduct any form of publicity relative to
its activities for the general purpose of public understanding.
   (I)   Cooperate: To cooperate with municipal or regional planning
commissions and other agencies or groups to further the local planning program
and to assure harmonious and integrated planning for the area.
   (J)   Exercise Other Powers: To exercise such other powers germane to the
powers granted under authority of an act of the general assembly of the state
entitled "Illinois municipal code" approved May 29, 1961, and effective July 1,
1961, and as amended, as may be conferred by the president of the village.
(1974 Code; amd. Ord. 99-35, 3-6-2000)
   (K)   Board Of Appeals: To function as the board of appeals for the village.
To hear and decide appeals from, and to review orders, decisions, or
determinations made by the director of building and zoning and to that end have
the power of the director of building and zoning with respect to such order,
decision, or determination.
   (L)   Variations: To hear, review, and offer its recommendations to the
village president and board of trustees on applications for variations from the
requirements of the Manteno zoning ordinance.
   (M)   Planned Unit Development: To hear, review, and offer its
recommendations to the village president and board of trustees on applications
for planned unit development approval.
   (N)   Site Plan Approval: To hear, review, and offer its recommendations to
the village president and board of trustees on applications for, or appeals
from the director of building and zoning denial of, site plan approval made to
the village president and board of trustees. (Ord. 05-01, 5-16-2005)
2-3-6: LAND SUBDIVISION OR RESUBDIVISION 1 ; OFFICIAL MAP:
At any time, before or after the formal adoption of the official comprehensive
plan by the corporate authorities, an official map may be designated by
ordinance, which may consist of the whole area included within the official
comprehensive plan, or one or more separate geographical or functional parts;
and may include all or any part of the contiguous unincorporated area within
one and one-half (11/2) miles from the corporate limits of the village. All
requirements for a public hearing, filing of notice of adoption with the county
recorder of deeds, and filing of said plan and ordinances, including the
official map, with the clerk shall be complied with as provided for by law. No
map or plat of any subdivision or resubdivision presented for recording
affecting land within the corporate limits of the village or within contiguous
territory which is not more than one and one-half (11/2) miles beyond the
corporate limits shall be entitled to be recorded or shall be valid unless the
subdivision shown thereon provides for standards of design, and standards
governing streets, alleys, public ways, ways for public service facilities,
streetlights, public grounds, size of lots to be used for residential purposes,
storm and flood water runoff channels and basins, sanitary sewers, and sewage
collection and treatment in conformity with the applicable requirements of this
code, including the official map. (Ord. 07-13, 8-6-2007)
 
Notes
1 1. See title 10 of this code.
2-3-7: IMPROVEMENTS:
The clerk shall furnish the planning commission, for its consideration, a copy
of all ordinances, plans and data relative to public improvements of any
nature. The planning commission may report in relation thereof if it deems a
report necessary or advisable, for the consideration of the board of trustees.
(1974 Code)
2-3-8: EXPENDITURES:
The commission may, at the discretion of the board of trustees, employ a paid
secretary or staff, or both, whose salaries, wages and other necessary expenses
shall be provided for by the board of trustees from the public funds. If said
planning commission shall deem it advisable to secure technical advice or
services, it may be done upon authority from the board of trustees and
appropriations by the board of trustees therefor. (1974 Code)
2-3-9: COMPENSATION:
Each member of the planning commission shall receive twenty five dollars
($25.00) as compensation for attendance at each meeting. (Ord. 98-08, 9-21-
1998)
CHAPTER 4
BOARD OF APPEALS
SECTION:
2-4-1: Duties Of The Board Of Appeals
2-4-1: DUTIES OF THE BOARD OF APPEALS:
All functions and duties of the board of appeals shall be performed by the
planning commission. (Ord. 05-01, 5-16-2005)
CHAPTER 5
BOARD OF LOCAL IMPROVEMENTS
(Rep. by Ord. 24-18, 2-3-2025)
CHAPTER 6
EMERGENCY SERVICES AND DISASTER AGENCY
SECTION:
2-6-1: Establishment
2-6-2: Coordinator
2-6-3: Mutual Aid Agreements
2-6-4: Compensation
2-6-5: Reimbursement By State
2-6-6: Purchases And Expenditures
2-6-7: Oath
2-6-8: Continuity In Office
2-6-1: ESTABLISHMENT:
   (A)   There is hereby created the village of Manteno emergency services and
disaster agency (ESDA) to prevent, minimize, repair and alleviate injury or
damage resulting from disaster caused by enemy attack, sabotage, or other
hostile action, or from natural or manmade disaster, in accordance with the
Illinois emergency management agency act.
   (B)   This ESDA shall consist of the coordinator, and such additional
members as may be selected by the coordinator and approved by the mayor. (Ord.
11-04, 6-20-2011)
2-6-2: COORDINATOR:
The coordinator of the ESDA shall be appointed by the mayor with the advice and
consent of the board of trustees.
The coordinator shall have direct responsibility for the organization,
administration, training and operation of the village of Manteno ESDA, subject
to the direction and control of the chief of police and mayor as provided by
statute. (Ord. 11-04, 6-20-2011)
2-6-3: MUTUAL AID AGREEMENTS:
The coordinator of ESDA may negotiate mutual aid agreements with other
villages, cities or political subdivisions of the state, but no such agreement
shall be effective until it has been approved by the village board and by the
state coordinator of ESDA. (Ord. 11-04, 6-20-2011)
2-6-4: COMPENSATION:
Members of the ESDA who are paid employees or officers of the village, if
called for training by the state coordinator of ESDA, shall receive for the
time spent in such training the same rate of pay as is attached to the position
held; members who are not such village employees or officers shall receive for
such training time such compensation as may be established by the village
board. (Ord. 11-04, 6-20-2011)
2-6-5: REIMBURSEMENT BY STATE:
The state treasurer may receive and allocate to the appropriate fund, any
reimbursement by the state or the village for expenses incident to training
members of the ESDA as prescribed by the state coordinator of ESDA,
compensation for services and expenses of members of a mobile support team
while serving outside the village in response to a call by the governor or
state coordinator of ESDA as provided by law, and any other reimbursement made
by the state incident to ESDA activities as provided by law. (Ord. 11-04, 6-20-
2011)
2-6-6: PURCHASES AND EXPENDITURES:
   (A)   The village board may, on recommendation of the local coordinator of
ESDA, authorize any purchase of contracts necessary to place the village in a
position to effectively combat any disaster resulting from the explosion of any
nuclear or other bomb or missile, and to protect the public health and safety,
protect property, and provide emergency assistance to victims in the case of
such disaster, or from manmade or natural disaster.
   (B)   In the event of enemy caused or other disaster, the local coordinator
of ESDA is authorized, on behalf of the village, to procure such services,
supplies, equipment or material as may be necessary for such purposes, in view
of the exigency without regard to the statutory procedures or formalities
normally prescribed by law pertaining to village contracts or obligations, as
authorized by state law; provided, that if the village board meets at such time
he shall act subject to the directions and restrictions imposed by that body.
(Ord. 11-04, 6-20-2011)
2-6-7: OATH:
Every person appointed to serve in any capacity in the ESDA organization shall,
before entering upon his duties, subscribe to the following oath, which shall
be filed with the local coordinator:
I,                  , do solemnly swear (or affirm) that I will support and
defend and bear true faith and allegiance to the constitution of the United
States and the constitution of the state of Illinois, and the territory,
institutions and facilities thereof, both public and private, against all
enemies, foreign and domestic; that I take this obligation freely, without any
mental reservation or purpose of evasion; and that I will well and faithfully
discharge the duties upon which I am about to enter. And I do further swear (or
affirm) that I do not advocate, nor am I nor have I been a member of any
political party or organization that advocates the overthrow of the government
of the United States or of this state by force or violence; and that during
such time as I am affiliated with the Village of Manteno ESDA organization, I
will not advocate nor become a member of any political party or organization
that advocates the overthrow of the government of the United States or of this
state by force or violence.
(Ord. 11-04, 6-20-2011)
2-6-8: CONTINUITY IN OFFICE:
In the event that at the time or as a consequence of any disaster or occurrence
described in section
2-6-1 of this chapter, the incumbent of any municipal office, position or place
of employment shall be killed or rendered incapable of performing the duties of
such office or position, such office or position shall be filled until such
time as a successor can be selected in the manner prescribed by law in the
following manner. Any such vacancy shall, for the emergency period, be filled
by appointment by the following in order of preference: the mayor, the
remaining members of the village board, the village clerk, the chief of police,
and the ESDA coordinator.
The person appointed in the manner prescribed above to fill any such office or
position shall exercise all the duties and powers of that position during the
emergency and until such time as a successor can be appointed or selected in
the manner provided by state law. (Ord. 11-04, 6-20-2011)
CHAPTER 7
GOLF COURSE COMMISSION
(Rep. by Ord. 05-07, 6-20-2005)
CHAPTER 8
RECREATION AND PARKS COMMISSION
(Rep. by Ord. 24-18, 2-3-2025)
CHAPTER 9
POLICE COMMISSION
SECTION:
2-9-1: Created; Composition
2-9-2: Appointment; Terms
2-9-3: Qualifications; Oath; Bond; Removal
2-9-4: Powers And Duties
2-9-5: Compensation Of Secretary And Members Of Board
2-9-1: CREATED; COMPOSITION:
There is hereby created a Manteno police commission consisting of three (3)
members. They shall be officers of the municipality as provided by statute.
(Ord. 95-21, 4-1-1996)
2-9-2: APPOINTMENT; TERMS:
The members of the police commission shall be appointed by the president of the
village by and with the consent of the board of trustees. The terms of office
of the members of the police commission shall be three (3) years and until
their respective successor shall be appointed and qualified; provided that no
such appointments shall be made by any president within thirty (30) days before
the expiration of his term of office; and, provided further, that the president
shall appoint the first members of such board, one of whom is appointed to
serve until the end of the current municipal year in which such appointment is
made, another shall serve until the end of the municipal year next ensuing, and
the third shall serve until the end of the municipal year second next ensuing;
provided that each of the first members of the board shall serve until his
successor is appointed and qualified. (Ord. 95-21, 4-1-1996)
2-9-3: QUALIFICATIONS; OATH; BOND; REMOVAL:
The members of the police commission shall have such qualifications as are now
or may hereafter be required of them by law. Each member of the police
commission shall take oath or affirmation of office and shall execute and
deliver to the village a bond in the sum of one thousand dollars ($1,000.00)
with such sureties as the president and board of trustees shall approve,
conditioned for the faithful performance of the duties of his office. The
members of the police commission shall be subject to removal from office in the
same manner as other officers of the village. (Ord. 95-21, 4-1-1996)
2-9-4: POWERS AND DUTIES:
The police commission shall have such powers and duties as are now, or as may
hereafter, be given to it by law. (Ord. 95-21, 4-1-1996)
2-9-5: COMPENSATION OF SECRETARY AND MEMBERS OF BOARD:
The members of the board of police commissioners shall serve with such
compensation as the corporate authorities may determine and provide by
ordinance. (Ord. 95-21, 4-1-1996)
CHAPTER 10
POLICE PENSION FUND AND BOARD
SECTION:
2-10-1: Creation Of Police Pension Fund
2-10-2: Definitions
2-10-3: Powers And Duties Of Board
2-10-4: Operation
2-10-1: CREATION OF POLICE PENSION FUND:
There is hereby created and established a police pension fund in and for the
village of Manteno, Kankakee County, Illinois, in accordance with 40 Illinois
Compiled Statutes 5/3-101 et seq. (article 3 of the Illinois pension code).
(Ord. 95-10, 9-25-1995)
2-10-2: DEFINITIONS:
For the purpose of this chapter the term "police" and "board" or "board of
trustees" are defined, respectively, as full time police officers or full time
police officers entitled to participate in the benefits of said pension fund as
provided by said article 3 of said Illinois pension code and the board of
trustees of said pension fund. (Ord. 95-10, 9-25-1995)
2-10-3: POWERS AND DUTIES OF BOARD:
The rights, powers, duties, and functions of said board and the members
thereof, as such, and the rights and benefits of the various beneficiaries of
the pension fund shall be and are hereby declared to be in accordance with the
law and particularly of article 3 of the Illinois pension code and all
amendments thereof. (Ord. 95-10, 9-25-1995)
2-10-4: OPERATION:
Such board shall be appointed and elected as therein provided; shall exercise
such powers and perform such duties that shall be required of them by law. All
monies and securities belonging to said fund shall be held by the municipal
treasurer subject to the order of the board of trustees of the pension fund. An
annual list of beneficiaries and report of funds shall be made as required by
law. Members of said board of trustees of the pension fund shall serve without
compensation. (Ord. 95-10, 9-25-1995)
TITLE 3
BUSINESS REGULATIONS
CHAPTER 1
LICENSES, GENERAL
SECTION:
3-1-1: License Required
3-1-2: Granting Of Licenses
3-1-3: Revocation
3-1-1: LICENSE REQUIRED:
It shall be unlawful for any person to conduct, engage in, maintain, operate,
carry on or manage a business or occupation for which a license is required by
any provision of this code without a license having first been procured for
such business or occupation. (1956 Code, Sec. 27-1)
3-1-2: GRANTING OF LICENSES:
In all cases where licenses are required to be procured, such licenses shall be
granted by the president of the board of trustees and attested by the village
clerk, except where provision is expressly made for the granting of licenses by
some other officer of the village. (1956 Code, Sec. 27-2)
3-1-3: REVOCATION:
The president of the board of trustees shall have the power to revoke any
license issued under the provisions of this code for good and sufficient cause.
(1956 Code, Sec. 27-3)
CHAPTER 2
AUCTIONEERS
SECTION:
3-2-1: Definition
3-2-2: License Required
3-2-3: License Application
3-2-4: License Fee
3-2-5: Auctions In Streets
3-2-6: Exemptions
3-2-1: DEFINITION:
An "auctioneer" is herein defined as any person who sells real or personal
property at private auction for another or for himself. (1974 Code)
3-2-2: LICENSE REQUIRED:
No person shall conduct an auction or do business as an auctioneer within the
village without first obtaining a license so to do. (1974 Code)
3-2-3: LICENSE APPLICATION:
Application for an auctioneer's license shall be made in writing and shall
state therein the place of business intended to be occupied and the names of
any employees, if any, who are to be authorized to conduct auctions under such
license. No license shall be issued to any person who is not of good moral
character. (1974 Code)
3-2-4: LICENSE FEE:
The annual fee for an auctioneer's license shall be twenty five dollars
($25.00), and the fee for holding a single auction by one who has not an annual
license shall be five dollars ($5.00) per day. (1956 Code, Sec. 29-2)
3-2-5: AUCTIONS IN STREETS:
No auction shall be conducted in any street or other public place within the
village. (1974 Code)
3-2-6: EXEMPTIONS:
The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to any public auction or sale
conducted by a public officer by virtue of any judicial or other process, or
conducted by virtue of a power contained in any mortgage or trust deed. (1974
Code)
CHAPTER 3
BUILDING CONTRACTORS
(Rep. by Ord. 03-38, 4-19-2004, eff. 5-1-2004)
CHAPTER 4
BOWLING ALLEYS
(Rep. by Ord. 75-6, 7-21-1975)
CHAPTER 5
TELECOMMUNICATIONS INFRASTRUCTURE MAINTENANCE FEE
SECTION:
3-5-1: Definitions
3-5-2: Registration Of Telecommunications Providers
3-5-3: Municipal Telecommunications Infrastructure Maintenance Fee
3-5-4: Collection, Enforcement, And Administration
3-5-5: Compliance With Other Laws
3-5-6: Existing Franchises And Licenses
3-5-7: Penalties
3-5-8: Enforcement
3-5-9: Severability
3-5-10: Conflict
3-5-11: Waiver And Fee Implementation
3-5-1: DEFINITIONS:
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the following meanings:
GROSS CHARGES: The amount paid to a telecommunications retailer for the act or
privilege of originating or receiving telecommunications within the village,
and for all services rendered in connection therewith, valued in money whether
paid in money or otherwise, including cash, credits, services, and property of
every kind or nature, and shall be determined without any deduction on account
of the cost of such telecommunications, the cost of the materials used, labor
or service costs, or any other expense whatsoever. In case credit is extended,
the amount thereof shall be included only as and when paid. "Gross charges" for
private line service shall include charges imposed at each channel point within
the village, charges for the channel mileage between each channel point within
the village, and charges for that portion of the interstate interoffice channel
provided within the village. However, "gross charges" shall not include:
   (A)   Any amounts added to a purchaser's bill because of a charge made
under: 1) the fee imposed by this section, 2) additional charges added to a
purchaser's bill under section 9-221 or 9-222 of the public utilities act, 3)
amounts collected under section 8-11-17 of the Illinois municipal code, 4) the
tax imposed by the telecommunications excise tax act, 5) 911 surcharges, or 6)
the tax imposed by section 4251 of the internal revenue code;
   (B)   Charges for a sent collect telecommunication received outside the
village;
   (C)   Charges for leased time on equipment or charges for the storage of
data or information or subsequent retrieval or the processing of data or
information intended to change its form or content. Such equipment includes,
but is not limited to, the use of calculators, computers, data processing
equipment, tabulating equipment, or accounting equipment and also includes the
usage of computers under a time sharing agreement;
   (D)   Charges for customer equipment, including such equipment that is
leased or rented by the customer from any source, wherein such charges are
disaggregated and separately identified from other charges;
   (E)   Charges to business enterprises certified under section 9-222.1 of the
public utilities act to the extent of such exemption and during the period of
time specified by the village;
   (F)   Charges for telecommunications and all services and equipment provided
in connection therewith between a parent corporation and its wholly owned
subsidiaries or between wholly owned subsidiaries, and only to the extent that
the charges between the parent corporation and wholly owned subsidiaries or
between wholly owned subsidiaries represent expense allocation between the
corporations and not the generation of profit other than a regulatory required
profit for the corporation rendering such services;
   (G)   Bad debts ("bad debt" means any portion of a debt that is related to a
sale at retail for which gross charges are not otherwise deductible or
excludable that has become worthless or uncollectible, as determined under
applicable federal income tax standards; if the portion of the debt deemed to
be bad is subsequently paid, the retailer shall report and pay the tax on that
portion during the reporting period in which the payment is made);
   (H)   Charges paid by inserting coins in coin- operated telecommunications
devices; or
   (I)   Charges for telecommunications and all services and equipment provided
to the village.
PUBLIC RIGHT OF WAY: Any municipal street, alley, water or public right of way
dedicated or commonly used for utility purposes, including utility easements
wherein the village has acquired the right and authority to locate or permit
the location of utilities consistent with telecommunications facilities.
"Public right of way" shall not include any real or personal village property
that is not specifically described in the previous sentence and shall not
include village buildings and other structures or improvements, regardless of
whether they are situated in the public right of way.
RETAILER MAINTAINING A PLACE OF BUSINESS IN THIS STATE (Or Any Like Term):
Means and includes any retailer having or maintaining within the state of
Illinois, directly or by a subsidiary, an office, distribution facilities,
transmission facilities, sales office, warehouse, or other place of business,
or any agent or other representative operating within this state under the
authority of the retailer or its subsidiary, irrespective of whether such place
of business or agent or other representative is located here permanently or
temporarily, or whether such retailer or subsidiary is licensed to do business
in this state.
SALE OF TELECOMMUNICATIONS AT RETAIL: The transmitting, supplying, or
furnishing of telecommunications and all services rendered in connection
therewith for a consideration, other than between a parent corporation and its
wholly owned subsidiaries or between wholly owned subsidiaries, when the gross
charge made by one such corporation to another such corporation is not greater
than the gross charge paid to the retailer for their use or consumption and not
for sale.
SERVICE ADDRESS: The location of telecommunications equipment from which
telecommunications services are originated or at which telecommunications
services are received. If this is not a defined location, as in the case of
wireless telecommunications, paging systems, maritime systems, air to ground
systems, and the like, "service address" shall mean the location of the
customer's primary use of the telecommunications equipment as defined by the
location in Illinois where bills are sent.
TELECOMMUNICATIONS: Includes, but is not limited to, messages or information
transmitted through use of local, toll, and wide area telephone service,
channel services, telegraph services, teletypewriter service, computer exchange
services, private line services, specialized mobile radio services, or any
other transmission of messages or information by electronic or similar means,
between or among points by wire, cable, fiber optics, laser, microwave, radio,
satellite, or similar facilities. Unless the context clearly requires
otherwise, "telecommunications" shall also include "wireless
telecommunications" as hereinafter defined. "Telecommunications" shall not
include value added services in which computer processing applications are used
to act on the form, content, code, and protocol of the information for purposes
other than transmission. "Telecommunications" shall not include purchase of
telecommunications by a telecommunications service provider for use as a
component part of the service provided by him or her to the ultimate retail
consumer who originates or terminates the end to end communications. Retailer
access charges, right of access charges, charges for use of intercompany
facilities, and all telecommunications resold in the subsequent provision and
used as a component of, or integrated into, end to end telecommunications
service shall not be included in gross charges as sales for resale.
"Telecommunications" shall not include the provision of cable services through
a cable system as defined in the cable communications act of 1984 (47 USC
section 521 and following) as now or hereafter amended or cable or other
programming services subject to an open video system fee payable to the village
through an open video system as defined in the rules of the federal
communications commission (47 CDF 76.1550 and following) as now or hereafter
amended.
TELECOMMUNICATIONS PROVIDER: a) Any telecommunications retailer; and b) any
person that is not a telecommunications retailer that installs, owns, operates
or controls equipment in the public right of way that is used or designed to be
used to transmit telecommunications in any form.
TELECOMMUNICATIONS RETAILER OR RETAILER OR CARRIER: Means and includes every
person engaged in the business of making sales of telecommunications at retail
as defined in this section. The village may, in its discretion, upon
application, authorize the collection of the fee hereby imposed by any retailer
not maintaining a place of business within this state, who, to the satisfaction
of the village, furnishes adequate security to ensure collection and payment of
the fee. When so authorized, it shall be the duty of such retailer to pay the
fee upon all of the gross charges for telecommunications in the same manner and
subject to the same requirements as a retailer maintaining a place of business
within the village.
WIRELESS TELECOMMUNICATIONS: Includes cellular mobile telephone services,
personal wireless services as defined in section 704(C) of the
telecommunications act of 1996 (public law no. 104-104), 42 USC section 332(c)
(7), as now or hereafter amended, including all commercial mobile radio
services, and paging services. (Ord. 97-12, 10-20-1997)
3-5-2: REGISTRATION OF TELECOMMUNICATIONS PROVIDERS:
   (A)   Every "telecommunications provider" as defined by section
3-5-1 of this chapter shall register with the village within thirty (30) days
after the effective date hereof or becoming a telecommunications provider,
whichever is later, on a form to be provided by the village, provided, however,
that any telecommunications retailer that has filed a return pursuant to
subsection
3-5-4(C) of this chapter shall be deemed to have registered in accordance with
this section.
   (B)   Every telecommunications provider who has registered with the village
pursuant to subsection (A) of this section has an affirmative duty to submit an
amended registration form or current return as required by subsection
3-5-4(C) of this chapter, as the case may be, to the village within thirty (30)
days from the date of the occurrence of any changes in the information provided
by the telecommunications provider in the registration form or most recent
return on file with the village. (Ord. 97-12, 10-20-1997)
3-5-3: MUNICIPAL TELECOMMUNICATIONS INFRASTRUCTURE MAINTENANCE FEE:
   (A)   A village telecommunications infrastructure maintenance fee is hereby
imposed upon all telecommunications retailers in the amount of one percent (1%)
of all gross charges charged by the telecommunications retailer to service
addresses within the village for telecommunications originating or received in
the village.
   (B)   Upon the effective date of the infrastructure maintenance fee
authorized in this chapter, the village infrastructure maintenance fee
authorized hereunder shall be the only fee or compensation for the use of all
public rights of way within the village by telecommunications retailers.
Imposition of the infrastructure maintenance fee provided under this chapter
does not, however, serve as a limitation on the levying of any taxes or
imposition of any fees otherwise authorized by law.
   (C)   The village telecommunications infrastructure maintenance fee
authorized by this section shall be collected, enforced, and administered as
set forth in section
3-5-4 of this chapter. (Ord. 97-12, 10-20-1997)
3-5-4: COLLECTION, ENFORCEMENT, AND ADMINISTRATION:
   (A)   A telecommunications retailer shall charge to and collect from each
customer an additional charge in an amount equal to the village infrastructure
maintenance fee attributable to that customer's service address.
   (B)   Unless otherwise approved by the village board of trustees, the
infrastructure maintenance fee shall be remitted by the telecommunications
retailer to the village not later than the last day of the month subsequent to
the month in which a bill is issued to the customer; provided, however, that
the telecommunications retailer may retain an amount not to exceed two percent
(2%) of the village infrastructure maintenance fee collected by it to reimburse
itself for expenses incurred in accounting for and remitting the fee.
   (C)   Remittance of the municipal infrastructure fee to the village shall be
accompanied by a return, in a form to be prescribed by the village treasurer,
which shall contain such information as the village treasurer may reasonably
require.
   (D)   Any infrastructure maintenance fee required to be collected pursuant
to this chapter and any such infrastructure maintenance fee collected by such
telecommunications retailer shall constitute a debt owed by the
telecommunications retailer to the village. The charge imposed under subsection
(A) of this section by the telecommunications retailer pursuant to this chapter
shall constitute a debt of the purchaser to the telecommunications retailer who
provides such services until paid and, if unpaid, is recoverable at law in the
same manner as the original charge for such services.
   (E)   If it shall appear that an amount of infrastructure maintenance fee
has been paid that was not due under the provisions of this chapter, whether as
a result of a mistake of fact or an error of law, then such amount shall be
credited against any infrastructure maintenance fee due, or to become due,
under this chapter, from the telecommunications retailer who made the erroneous
payment; provided, however, the village treasurer may request, and
telecommunications retailer shall provide, written substantiation for such
credit. However, no claim for such credit may be made more than three (3) years
after the date of the erroneous payment unless: 1) the credit is used only to
offset a claim of underpayment made by the village within the applicable
statutory period of limitations; and 2) the credit derives from an overpayment
made by the same telecommunications retailer during the applicable statutory
period of limitations.
   (F)   Amounts paid under this chapter by telecommunications retailers shall
not be included in the tax base under any of the following acts as described
immediately below:
      1.   "Gross charges" for purposes of the telecommunications excise tax
act;
      2.   "Gross receipts" for purposes of the municipal utility tax as
prescribed in section 8-11-2 of the Illinois municipal code;
      3.   "Gross charges" for purposes of the municipal telecommunications tax
as prescribed in section 8-11-17 of the Illinois municipal code;
      4.   "Gross revenue" for purposes of the tax on annual gross revenue of
public utilities prescribed in section 2-202 of the public utilities act.
   (G)   The village shall have the right, in its discretion, to audit the
books and records of all telecommunications retailers subject to this chapter
to determine whether the telecommunications retailer has properly accounted to
the village for the village infrastructure maintenance fee. Any underpayment of
the amount of the village infrastructure maintenance fee due to the village by
the telecommunications retailer shall be paid to the village plus five percent
(5%) of the total amount of the underpayment determined in an audit, plus any
costs incurred by the village in conducting the audit, in an amount not to
exceed five percent (5%) of the total amount of the underpayment determined in
an audit. Said sum shall be paid to the village within twenty one (21) days
after the date of issuance of an invoice for same.
   (H)   The village treasurer, or his or her designee, may promulgate such
further or additional regulations concerning the administration and enforcement
of this chapter, consistent with its provisions, as may be required from time
to time and shall notify all telecommunications retailers that are registered
pursuant to section
3-5-2 of this chapter of such regulations. (Ord. 97-12, 10-20-1997)
3-5-5: COMPLIANCE WITH OTHER LAWS:
Nothing in this chapter shall excuse any person or entity from obligations
imposed under any law, including, but not limited to:
   (A)   Generally applicable taxes; and
   (B)   Standards for construction on, over, under, or within, use of or
repair of the public rights of way, including standards relating to
freestanding towers and other structures upon the public rights of way, as
provided; and
   (C)   Any liability imposed for the failure to comply with such generally
applicable taxes or standards governing construction on, over, under, or
within, use of or repair of the public rights of way; and
   (D)   Compliance with any ordinance or provision of this code concerning
uses or structures not located on, over, or within the right of way. (Ord. 97-
12, 10-20-1997)
3-5-6: EXISTING FRANCHISES AND LICENSES:
Any franchise, license, or similar agreements between telecommunications
retailers and the village entered into before the effective date hereof
regarding the use of public rights of way shall remain valid according to and
for their stated terms except for any fees, charges or other compensation to
the extent waived. (Ord. 97-12, 10-20-1997)
3-5-7: PENALTIES:
Any telecommunications provider who violates, disobeys, omits, neglects or
refuses to comply with any of the provisions of this chapter shall be subject
to fine in accordance with the general penalty provisions of this code. (Ord.
97-12, 10-20-1997)
3-5-8: ENFORCEMENT:
Nothing in this chapter shall be construed as limiting any additional or
further remedies that the village may have for enforcement of this chapter.
(Ord. 97-12, 10-20-1997)
3-5-9: SEVERABILITY:
If any section, subsection, sentence, clause, phrase or portion of this chapter
is for any reason held invalid or unconstitutional by any court of competent
jurisdiction, such portion shall be deemed a separate, distinct, and
independent provision and such holding shall not affect the validity of the
remaining portions hereof. (Ord. 97-12, 10-20-1997)
3-5-10: CONFLICT:
This chapter supersedes all chapters or parts of chapters adopted prior hereto
which are in conflict herewith, to the extent of such conflict. (Ord. 97-12,
10-20-1997)
3-5-11: WAIVER AND FEE IMPLEMENTATION:
   (A)   The village hereby waives all fees, charges, and other compensation
that may accrue, after the effective date of the waiver, to the village by a
telecommunications retailer pursuant to any existing village franchise,
license, or similar agreement with a telecommunications retailer during the
time the village imposes the telecommunications infrastructure maintenance fee.
This waiver shall only be effective during the time the infrastructure
maintenance fee provided for in this chapter is subject to being lawfully
imposed on the telecommunications retailer and collected by the
telecommunications retailer from the customer.
   (B)   The village clerk shall send a notice of the waiver by certified mail/
return receipt requested to each telecommunications retailer with whom the
village has a franchise.
   (C)   The village infrastructure maintenance fee provided for in this
chapter shall become effective and imposed on the first day of the month not
less than ninety (90) days after the village provides written notice by
certified mail to each telecommunications retailer with whom the village has an
existing franchise, license, or similar agreement that the village waives all
compensation under such existing franchise, license, or similar agreement
during such time as the fee is subject to being lawfully imposed and collected
by the retailer and remitted to the village. The infrastructure maintenance fee
shall apply to gross charges billed on or after the effective date as
established in the preceding sentence. (Ord. 97-12, 10-20-1997)
CHAPTER 6
FOREIGN FIRE INSURANCE COMPANIES
(Rep. by Ord. 01-12, 8-20-2001)
CHAPTER 7
TRANSIENT MERCHANTS, ITINERANT MERCHANTS, AND MOBILE FOOD TRUCK VENDORS
SECTION:
3-7-1: Definitions
3-7-2: License Required
3-7-3: License Application
3-7-4: Application Review And Issuance
3-7-5: License Fees
3-7-6: License Denial
3-7-7: Itinerant And Transient Merchant Operations
3-7-8: Mobile Food Truck Vendor Operations
3-7-9: Exceptions
3-7-10: Penalty
3-7-11: License Suspension Or Revocation
3-7-12: Basis For Suspension Or Revocation
3-7-13: Appeals
3-7-1: DEFINITIONS:
The following words, terms, and phrases, and their derivations, when used in
this Chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this Section, except
where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:
CORPORATE AUTHORITIES: The President and Board of Trustees of the Village of
Manteno.
ITINERANT MERCHANT: Any person who transports tangible personal property for
retail sale within the Village other than from a fixed location and who does
not maintain in the Village an established store, office, distribution house,
sale house, warehouse service center, or home occupation residence from which
such business is conducted. This definition includes without limitation persons
who hawk personal property by public outcry, and persons who solicit orders for
personal property by going from place to place in the Village. However, this
Chapter does not apply to any solicitor, as that term is defined in §
3-12-1, going door-to-door at private residences, or any person who delivers
personal property in fulfilling an order which was solicited by mail or by
electronic means.
MOBILE FOOD TRUCK: A self-contained food service operation wholly located
within a single readily movable, motorized, wheeled or towed vehicle, occupied
by all operational personnel, and in and from which payment is accepted and all
food and beverage sold are stored, cooked/prepared, and served, and intended
for individual portion service and for consumption. A mobile food truck shall
include an ice cream truck.
MOBILE FOOD TRUCK VENDOR: Any person that operates a mobile food truck, as
defined herein.
PERSON: Any person, firm, corporation, association, club, society or other
organization.
TRANSIENT MERCHANT: Any person engaged temporarily in the retail sale of goods,
wares, merchandise, products, food, trees, flowers, and/or plants within the
Village and who, for the purpose of conducting such business, has the right to
occupy a specific building, room, booth, stand, structure, or vacant lot for a
period no greater than three (3) months.
VACANT LOT: Any a parcel of land having no principal building or structure or a
lot with its principal building or structure being vacant. A principal building
or structure will not be deemed vacant if occupied, in whole or part, for
licensee's business.
VILLAGE: The Village of Manteno.
VILLAGE CLERK: The Village Clerk of the Village of Manteno or his/her assigns.
VILLAGE PRESIDENT: The Village President of the Village of Manteno or his/her
assigns. (1956 Code, Sec. 33-1; amd. Ord. 22-21, 4-17-2023; Ord. 23-19, 2-5-
2024; Ord. 25-22, 10-6-2025)
3-7-2: LICENSE REQUIRED:
It shall be unlawful for any person, either as principal or agent, to engage in
or conduct in this Village a business as an itinerant merchant, transient
merchant, or mobile food truck vendor without first obtaining a license. Any
licensed issued under this Chapter shall be specific to the type of merchant/
vendor and shall only authorize the licensee to engage in those activities.
(1956 Code, Sec. 33-2; amd. Ord. 22-21, 4-17-2023; Ord. 23-19, 2-5-2024; Ord.
25-22, 10-6-2025)
3-7-3: LICENSE APPLICATION:
   (A)   Any person who desires to engage in or conduct business as an
itinerant merchant, transient merchant, or mobile food truck vendor shall:
      1.   For itinerant merchants and transient merchants, file with the
Village Clerk an application in writing, on a form to be furnished by the
Village Clerk, which shall consist of the following information:
         a.   The applicant's name, date of birth, phone number, and last four
(4) digits of his/her social security number;
         b.   Business name and permanent business address (which must include
a street address);
         c.   Residence address of the principal (and, if the applicant is
anything other than an individual person, the name and residence address of
each of its officers, stockholders, owners, members, managers, and partners);
         d.   The dates and locations on/at which the applicant intends to
conduct business;
         e.   Whether the applicant seeks an itinerant merchant or transient
merchant license;
         f.   The nature of the business the applicant intends to conduct and a
complete inventory of goods, wares, merchandise, products, food, and/or
beverage the applicant intends to offer for sale;
         g.   Proof the applicant is authorized to do business in the State of
Illinois and is in good standing;
         h.   A copy of the applicant's certificate of registration under the
Retailers' Occupation Tax Act;
         i.   The name and residential address of each person employed by the
applicant that is to or may engage in business on its behalf;
         j.   Proof of possession of any permit or license which, under
federal, state or local law, the applicant is required to have in order to
conduct the business, including a food license, as applicable; and
         k.   If authorized by this Chapter to conduct business from private
property and that is the intention of the applicant, proof of the applicant's
right to occupy the same from the owner of said property during operations.
      2.   For mobile food truck vendors, file with the Village Clerk an
application in writing, on a form to be furnished by the Village Clerk, which
shall consist of the following information:
         a.   All information and documentation required by subsections A.1.a.
- k.;
         b.   A description, license plate number, proof registration, and
proof of insurance of the mobile food truck and any other vehicles used to
transport the mobile food truck if not self-propelled;
         c.   Unobstructed photographs of the front, side, and rear of the
mobile food truck; and
         d.   The permanent address of the commercial kitchen, commissary, or
shared kitchen where any food or foodstuff is cooked/prepared when not cooked/
prepared in the mobile food truck.
   (B)   Any person who desires to engage in or conduct business as an
itinerant merchant, transient merchant, or mobile food truck vendor shall have
a criminal history check performed by the Manteno Police Department at a cost
of fifty dollars ($50.00).
(1956 Code, Sec. 33-3; amd. Ord. 22-21, 4-17-2023; Ord. 23-19, 2-5-2024; Ord.
25-22, 10-6-2025)
3-7-4: APPLICATION REVIEW AND ISSUANCE:
   (A)   Upon receipt of an application, the Village Clerk shall review the
application to determine if all of the information required by this §
3-7-3 is present/provided and complete, and there is no basis to reject the
same. If the application has listed all of the information necessary, and there
exists no reason to deny the license from the face of the application for the
reasons set forth in §
3-7-6, the Village Clerk shall order the applicant to be fingerprinted for a
criminal history check.
   (B)   The Village Clerk shall deny the license before a criminal history
check, and return the fifty dollars ($50.00) fee, if there exists a reason to
deny the same from the face of the application for the reasons set forth in §
3-7-6.
   (C)   Upon receipt of the criminal history report, and there otherwise being
no basis to deny the license for the reasons set forth in §
3-7-6, the Village Clerk shall issue the license upon receipt of the license
fee from the applicant.
   (D)   Any license issued pursuant to this Chapter shall contain the name and
address of the licensee, the name of any employer or principal, the type of
license issued, the date of issuance and the date of expiration. The license
shall also contain a license number (which shall be a number matching a number
listed on the application).
   (E)   The Village Clerk shall make a good-faith effort to complete an
application review and advise an applicant of his/her decision within fifteen
(15) days. If, upon the expiration of the fifteen (15) day review period, the
Village Clerk has not advised an applicant of his/her decision to grant or deny
a license, an applicant may request, and the Village Clerk shall be obligated
to issue, a temporary license upon receipt of the applicable license fee from
the applicant.
   (F)   If a temporary license is issued, and further review identifies a
basis for which a license should be denied, an applicant shall be immediately
notified by telephone that the temporary license is revoked and his/her
application has been denied. In such instance, the license fee shall be
returned to the applicant on a pro rata basis. In no event shall an application
review take longer than thirty (30) days. At the expiration of thirty (30)
days, and provided no oral decision has been made concerning the issuance of
the license, the applicant may request, and the Village Clerk shall be
obligated to issue a license to the applicant. Once issued, the license shall
only be subject to suspension or revocation as provided by §§
3-7-11 and
3-7-12 of this Chapter.
   (G)   The Village Clerk shall notify the applicant of his/her decision to
grant or deny a license by the telephone number listed on the application. The
Village Clerk shall advise the applicant of the basis for the denial.
   (H)   If an application is incomplete, the Village Clerk shall allow the
applicant an opportunity to provide the information necessary for his/her
review and the time limitations specified above shall only begin once the
application is complete.
   (I)   In the case of a denial, the Village Clerk shall issue a written
decision advising the applicant why the license was denied. The written
decision shall be mailed to the applicant via U.S. Mail at the address
contained on the application. The written decision shall be postmarked no later
than three (3) business days subsequent to the expiration of the fifteen (15)
day review period or the oral advisement of a denial of a license, whichever is
later.
   (J)   A denial of a license may be appealed in the manner provided in §
3-7-13 of this Chapter.
   (K)   A record of all licenses issued and denied pursuant to this Chapter
shall be maintained by the Village Clerk for a period of two (2) years.
   (L)   The Village Clerk shall reject any application that was denied within
the immediate past year when the basis for the previous denial was substantive,
affirmed by the corporate authorities on appeal. A rejection shall not be
considered a denial, and the applicant shall have no appeal rights therefrom.
(Ord. 23-19, 2-5-2024; amd. Ord. 25-22, 10-6-2025)
3-7-5: LICENSE FEES:
The fee for an itinerant merchant, transient merchant, or mobile food truck
vendor license shall be one hundred dollars ($100.00) per week (i.e., seven
continuous days), which fee shall be non-refundable. The fee for an itinerant
merchant, transient merchant, or mobile food truck vendor license shall be zero
dollars ($0.00) when an authorized participant in a special event held or
sponsored, in whole or part, by the Village or Manteno Chamber of Commerce.
(1956 Code, Sec. 33-4; amd. Ord. 20-14, 9-21-2020; Ord. 21-01, 5-3-2021; Ord.
22-21, 4-17-2023; Ord. 23-19, 2-5-2024; Ord. 25-22, 10-6-2025)
3-7-6: LICENSE DENIAL:
   (A)   The Village Clerk may refuse to issue a license for any of the
following reasons:
      1.   The applicant failed to supply all the required information or
documentation in or as a part of its application;
      2.   The applicant falsified information on the application;
      3.   The applicant, or any of its officers, stockholders, owners,
members, managers, partners, or employees, has been convicted or pleaded guilty
to a felony or misdemeanor involving a sex offense, trafficking in controlled
substances, crimes of dishonesty (e.g. theft, fraud, deceit, misrepresentation,
etc.), or any violent acts against persons or property, within the five (5)
years preceding the date of application;
      4.   The applicant's denial of a license issued under this Chapter within
the immediate past year, unless the applicant can and does show that the basis
for the previous denial no longer exists;
      5.   The business operations of the applicant would or does violate any
provision of this Code, including this Chapter, based upon the information or
documents contained in the application; or
      6.   The applicant, or any officer, stockholder, owner, member, manager,
partner, or employee, indebted to the Village.
   (B)   The Village Clerk's denial and the reasons for such disapproval shall
be noted on the application. (Ord. 23-19, 2-5-2024; amd. Ord. 25-22, 10-6-2025)
3-7-7: ITINERANT AND TRANSIENT MERCHANT OPERATIONS:
No person who has been granted a license as an itinerant merchant or transient
merchant shall:
   (A)   Sell or deliver, or attempt to sell or deliver, any goods, wares,
merchandise, product, or food by any fraudulent or deceptive means or
practices;
   (B)   Sell or deliver, or attempt to sell or deliver, any goods, wares,
merchandise, product, or food which are not identified in the inventory
provided to the Village, that are not owned by the licensee or by the
licensee's principal or employer, or which have been stolen from another
person;
   (C)   Remain on private property after being asked to leave by a person with
apparent authority thereover;
   (D)   Insist upon showing, selling, or delivering any goods, wares,
merchandise, product, or food to any person after being informed that such
person does not want them or wish to purchase them;
   (E)   Leave any trash or debris from business operations or customers within
one (100') feet of such operations;
   (F)   Excepting transient merchants, sell or deliver, or attempt to sell or
deliver, any food or beverage;
   (G)   Operate on any vacant lot except that a licensed transient merchant
may operate on a vacant lot to display and sell whole and raw fruits,
vegetables, beans, nuts, seeds, and/or plants, flowers, trees, and other forms
of vegetation;
   (H)   Sell or deliver, or attempt to sell or deliver, any food or beverage
excepting whole and raw fruits, vegetables, beans, nuts, and/or seeds;
   (I)   Tap into or use any utility or source of power without the written
permission of the owner of thereof;
   (J)   Use or maintain any sound amplifying equipment or noise making
apparatus that exceeds seventy-five (75) decibels measured from ten feet (10')
away;
   (K)   Operate following the lapse or invalidity of any authority or
documentation required to be provided and maintained as a part of the licensing
process;
   (L)   Fail to report and pay when due any tax owing to the Village or the
state;
   (M)   Operate within a residentially zoned area except in a public park or
public square;
   (N)   Operate on or upon any public street;
   (O)   Operate in or from any movable, motorized, wheeled or towed vehicle;
   (P)   Operate in such a manner so as to create a public nuisance, constitute
a breach of the peace, or endanger the health, safety or welfare of others; or
   (Q)   Violate any other federal, state, county or local law, statute,
ordinance, rule, regulation, order and decree of any court or an administrative
body or tribunal, order or determination of any governmental authority, while
engaging in business. (Ord. 25-22, 10-6-2025)
3-7-8: MOBILE FOOD TRUCK VENDOR OPERATIONS:
No person who has been granted a license as a mobile food truck vendor shall:
   (A)   Operate within two (200') feet of a restaurant or other food service
establishment.
   (B)   Operate within two hundred (200') feet of another mobile food truck;
   (C)   Operate at or within five (500') feet of such special event unless
written consent or permission to do so is obtained from the event operator, and
a copy provided to the Village Clerk;
   (D)   Operate between the hours of nine o’clock (9:00) p.m. and six o’clock
(6:00) a.m.;
   (E)   Tap into or use any utility or source of power external to the mobile
food truck;
   (F)   Use or maintain any sound amplifying equipment or noise making
apparatus while moving;
   (G)   Use or maintain any sound amplifying equipment or noise making
apparatus that exceeds seventy-five (75) decibels measured from ten (10') feet
away when stationary;
   (H)   Place or use signage that is not permanently affixed to the mobile
food truck;
   (I)   Fail to provide at least one (1) trash collection receptacle at its
operating location or fail to properly dispose of the trash in that receptacle
as appropriate and at the end of daily operations. The licensee shall also be
responsible for collecting and disposing of all trash and debris within one
hundred (100') feet of the mobile food truck operating location prior to
leaving such location;
   (J)   Sell or serve food from a mobile food truck that has been cooked/
prepared in a residential home. All operators must work in conjunction with a
commercial kitchen, commissary, or shared kitchen to cook/prepare food that is
not cooked/prepared in the mobile food truck;
   (K)   Take orders, accept payment, sell, store, prepare/cook or serve food
from any area outside of the mobile food truck. Operations from tables, booths,
stands, or other areas outside of the mobile food truck shall be prohibited;
   (L)   Operate within a residentially zoned area or a public street adjacent
to a residentially zoned area unless on or from an improved off-street parking
lot of a public park or public square;
   (M)   Operate from a fixed location on a public street for less than thirty
(30) minutes or more than four (4) hours. A licensee shall move not less than
five hundred feet (500') from any fixed location that it has operated for more
than thirty (30) minutes. No operator shall return to any prohibited zone for a
period of two (2) hours after it has moved;
   (N)   Operate on a public street with the service window or door being any
further than two feet (2') from a curb opposite all lanes of traffic;
   (O)   Take orders, accept payment, sell, or serve food or beverage on a
public street from a service window or door that does not directly face a curb;
   (P)   Operate or park on any public street so as to block, obstruct, or
otherwise interfere with vehicular, bicycle, or pedestrian traffic flow;
   (Q)   Operate on a public street in an area where parking is unlawful or not
permitted;
   (R)   Leave unattended any mobile food truck on any public street;
   (S)   Operate on any private property without the permission of the property
owner;
   (T)   Operate on any private property if the licensee, or any of its
officers, stockholders, owners, members, managers, partners, or employees owns
the property, or is related to an officer, stockholder, owner, member, manager,
partner, or employee of, any person that has any legal, equitable, or
proprietary interest in the property;
   (U)   Operate on any private property that is a vacant lot;
   (V)   Operate on any private property except from an improved surface
meeting the requirements for off-street parking;
   (W)   Operate on the same private property more than two (2) days per week;
   (X)   Leave unattended or parked overnight any mobile food truck on private
property that the licensee does not own;
   (Y)   Operate from a mobile food truck not identified as a part of the
application process;
   (Z)   Operate following the lapse or invalidity of any authority or
documentation required to be provided and maintained as a part of the licensing
process;
   (AA)   Fail to report and pay when due any tax owing to the Village or the
state;
   (BB)   Conduct business operations in such a manner so as to create a public
nuisance, constitute a breach of the peace, or endanger the health, safety or
welfare of others; or
   (CC)   Violate any other federal, state, county or local law, statute,
ordinance, rule, regulation, order and decree of any court or an administrative
body or tribunal, order or determination of any governmental authority, while
engaging in business. (Ord. 25-22, 10-6-2025)
3-7-9: EXCEPTIONS:
Itinerant merchants and mobile food trucks may operate under the following
conditions, as applicable, notwithstanding any operational restrictions in this
Chapter to contrary, provided they obtain a separate and distinct license for
such operations:
   (A)   Licensed transient merchants and mobile food trucks vendors shall be
authorized to operate and sell, store, prepare/cook or serve food when and in
the manner and at such designated locations authorized for/at a special event
held or sponsored by the Village or the Manteno Chamber of Commerce. Whenever
food or beverage is to be sold, prepared, cooked, and/or delivered by a
transient merchant under this exception, the merchant's application shall be in
conformance with requirements of an application for mobile food trucks, as may
be relevant, even if no mobile food truck will be used. Licensees shall abide
by all rules, regulations, and standards established for the special event;
   (B)   Licensed mobile food truck vendors shall be permitted to operate at
and during a private special event at a single-family residence in a
residentially zoned area for a period of not to exceed one ( 1) day provided
they have the written consent of the property owner, operate from an improved
driveway on the property, restrict delivery of food and beverage to guests of
the special event, and any renumeration for food and beverage is settled as a
single tab prior to or after the special event. Payment shall not be demanded
or accepted by a mobile food truck vendor from guests on a contemporaneous
individual portion service basis; and
   (C)   Licensed mobile food truck vendors shall be permitted to operate at
and during a block party authorized by the Village on a public street in or
adjacent to a residentially zoned area for a period of not exceeding one (1)
day provided they have the written consent of the organizer and operate within
the area closed to through vehicular traffic. Not more than two (2) mobile food
trucks shall be permitted to operate at said block party. (Ord. 25-22, 10-6-
2025)
3-7-10: PENALTY:
   (A)   Any person found in violation of any of the provisions of this Chapter
shall be fined no less than one hundred dollars ($100.00) and no more than
seven hundred and fifty dollars ($750.00) for each offense. Each day that a
violation occurs or is permitted to continue shall constitute a separate and
distinct offense.
   (B)   Any licensee found in violation of the provisions of this Chapter
shall, in addition to any fine that may be imposed, be subject to license
suspension and/or revocation proceedings.
   (C)   Violations of this Chapter may be administered as a part of license
proceedings or separately in accordance with the provisions of Title 1,
Administrative, Chapter 17, Administrative Adjudication, of the Code. (Ord. 22-
21, 4-17-2023; amd. Ord. 23-19, 2-5-2024; Ord. 25-22, 10-6-2025)
3-7-11: LICENSE SUSPENSION OR REVOCATION:
   (A)   Any license issued under this Chapter may be suspended or revoked by
the Village President after notice and a hearing for any basis identified in §
3-7-12 of this Chapter. Notice and a hearing prior to a suspension or
revocation shall not be given if Village President determines that an immediate
suspension or revocation is necessary. In such cases, a post-deprivation
hearing will be provided.
   (B)   The Village Clerk shall provide notice to the licensee via U.S. Mail
setting forth the time and place of the hearing. The notice shall consist of
the charges for which the license's suspension or revocation is being
considered. The notice shall contain the date(s) on which any charge is alleged
to have occurred along with the name(s) of any witness(es) that will testify at
the hearing. Any written or tangible evidence of the occurrence shall be
identified in the notice.
   (C)   A hearing pursuant to this Section shall occur no earlier than seven
(7) days nor later than fourteen (14) days from the date the notice of hearing
is postmarked.
   (D)   The licensee shall be responsible for obtaining a court reporter in
order to preserve the record for appeal.
   (E)   After the hearing, the Village President shall orally advise the
licensee of his/her decision to impose any fine and/or suspend or revoke a
license under this Chapter. After the decision has been orally related to the
licensee, the President shall issue a written decision setting forth his/her
decision and the basis for the ruling. The written decision shall be mailed to
the licensee via U.S. Mail at the address contained in the application. The
written decision shall be postmarked no later than five (5) business days
subsequent to the hearing. (Ord. 23-19, 2-5-2024; amd. Ord. 25-22, 10-6-2025)
3-7-12: BASIS FOR SUSPENSION OR REVOCATION:
Any license may be suspended or revoked for or because:
   (A)   Any reason the license could have been originally denied under §
3-7-6;
   (B)   The licensee, or any of its officers, stockholders, owners, members,
managers, partners, or employees, has been convicted or pleaded guilty to a
felony or misdemeanor involving a sex offense, trafficking in controlled
substances, crimes of dishonesty (e.g. theft, fraud, deceit, misrepresentation,
etc.), or any violent acts against persons or property;
   (C)   A violation of any provision of this Code, including this Chapter; or
   (D)   The licensee, or any officer, stockholder, owner, member, manager,
partner, or employee, becomes indebted to the Village on account of its
business operations. (Ord. 23-19, 2-5-2024; amd. Ord. 25-22, 10-6-2025)
3-7-13: APPEALS:
   (A)   Any person aggrieved by the action or decision of the Village Clerk or
Village President to deny, suspend or revoke a license shall have the right to
appeal such action to the Corporate Authorities within fourteen (14) days from
the date on which the decision has been mailed to the applicant/licensee. This
date shall be determined by the date on which the written decision was
postmarked. In the event the Village Clerk or Village President fails to issue
a written decision, the appellant shall have seventeen days (17) from the date
on which he/she was orally informed of the decision to deny, suspend or revoke
a license to appeal that decision.
   (B)   An appeal shall be perfected by filing a written statement with the
Village Clerk or Village President setting forth the grounds for the appeal. If
a written decision was provided to the appellant from the Village Clerk or
Village President, a copy of that decision shall be attached to the appellant's
written statement. After the receipt of said appeal, the Village Clerk or
Village President shall, unless otherwise agreed to by appellant and Village,
schedule the hearing on appeal for a special meeting to precede a regularly
scheduled meeting of the Corporate Authorities occurring no sooner than six (6)
and no more than twenty-two (22) days following receipt of the appeal. Under no
circumstances shall the hearing be set later than thirty (30) days from the
date on which an appeal is received.
   (C)   Notice of the time and place of the appeal hearing shall be given to
the appellant via U.S. Mail at the address provided on the person's
application.
   (D)   An appellant shall be given notice of the hearing at least seventy-two
(72) hours before the hearing.
   (E)   A decision to affirm or reverse the decision of the Village President
concerning the suspension or revocation of a license shall be limited to the
record generated at the hearing in front of the Village President.
   (F)   A decision to affirm or reverse a decision of the Village Clerk or
Village President shall be made by a majority vote of the Corporate Authorities
present at the meeting.
   (G)   The decision of the Corporate Authorities of the Village shall be
final and binding on all parties concerned. (Ord. 23-19, 2-5-2024; amd. Ord.
25-22, 10-6-2025)
CHAPTER 8
JUNK DEALERS
SECTION:
3-8-1: Definitions
3-8-2: License Required
3-8-3: Enforcement
3-8-4: Application
3-8-5: Investigation; Approval And Issuance Of License
3-8-6: Itinerant Junk Dealers
3-8-7: Period Of License; Renewal Procedure
3-8-8: License Fees
3-8-9: License Nontransferable
3-8-10: General Operating Requirements
3-8-11: Inspections
3-8-12: Revocation And Suspension
3-8-13: Hearing
3-8-14: Compliance
3-8-1: DEFINITIONS:
Except where otherwise indicated by the context, the following definitions
shall apply in the interpretation and enforcement of this chapter:
BUSINESS PREMISES OR PREMISES: The area of a junkyard as described in a junk
dealer's license or application for license, as provided for in this chapter.
ITINERANT JUNK DEALER: An individual (natural person) who buys, sells,
collects, or delivers junk within the village as a business or employment with
the village, but who is not an operator of a junkyard within the village or an
employee of such an operator.
JUNK: Old iron, steel, brass, copper, tin, lead, or other base metals; old
cordage, ropes, rags, fibers, or fabrics; old rubber; old bottles or other
glass; bones; wastepaper and other waste or discarded material which might be
prepared to be used again in some form; motor vehicles, no longer used as such,
to be used for scrap metal or stripping of parts; but "junk" shall not include
materials or objects accumulated by a person as byproducts, waste, or scraps
from the operation of his own business or materials or objects held and used by
a manufacturer as an integral part of his own manufacturing processes.
JUNK DEALER: A person who operates a "junkyard", as defined in this section,
within the village.
JUNKYARD: A yard, lot or place, covered or uncovered, outdoors or in an
enclosed building, containing "junk" as defined in this section, upon which
occurs one or more acts of buying, keeping, dismantling, processing, selling or
offering for sale any such junk, in whole units or by parts, for a business or
commercial purpose, whether or not the proceeds from such act or acts are to be
used for charity. (1974 Code)
3-8-2: LICENSE REQUIRED:
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to act as a junk dealer in the
village whether personally, by agents or employees, singly, or along with some
other business or enterprise, without first having obtained a license therefor
from the board of trustees in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. A
junk dealer who operates more than one junkyard within the village shall be
required to have in effect a separate license for each yard.
   (B)   It shall be unlawful for any individual to act as an itinerant junk
dealer in the village without first having obtained a license therefor from the
board of trustees in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. (1974
Code)
3-8-3: ENFORCEMENT:
   (A)   A board of investigators consisting of the village president and board
of trustees, is hereby created. Except where otherwise provided, a majority of
the members of the board shall constitute a quorum. Said board shall appoint a
secretary for itself from among the employees of the village, adopt its own
procedural rules, and keep a record of its proceedings and transactions.
   (B)   It is hereby made the duty of said board to enforce, or aid in the
enforcement of all provisions of this chapter, and for this purpose any of the
above members of the board, or their duly authorized representatives, shall
have the right and are hereby empowered to enter upon premises on which any
business subject to the provisions of this chapter is located, or about to be
located, and inspect the same at any reasonable time. The board is further
empowered to issue orders granting, renewing, and revoking any license provided
for in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. (1974 Code)
3-8-4: APPLICATION:
An applicant for license under this chapter shall file with the president and
board of trustees a written application signed by himself, if an individual, by
all partners, if a partnership, and by the president or chief officer of a
corporation or other organization, upon forms provided by the board of
trustees, together with copies of such application and a fee as hereinafter
prescribed. The application shall be sworn to by each of its signers before a
notary public or other officer authorized by law to administer oaths and shall
include the following information or material:
   (A)   Junk Dealer Applications:
      1.   Name, residence address, and telephone number of each individual
owner, partner, or, if a corporation or other organization, each officer and
director.
      2.   Trade names used during the previous five (5) years by the applicant
and each person signing the application, along with the locations of prior
establishments.
      3.   Names and addresses of employers of each person signing the
application during the previous five (5) years.
      4.   The trade name and address of the business on behalf of which
application is made and its telephone number, if assigned.
      5.   The name, residence address, and telephone number of each person
employed or intended to be employed in the business as of the time the
application is filed.
      6.   Exact address or location of the place where the business is or is
proposed to be carried on, plus a sketch of the actual premises to be used in
connection with the business, giving distances in feet and showing adjoining
roads, property lines, buildings and uses.
      7.   A description of the materials with which any buildings to be used
in connection with the licensed business are, or are to be made; a sketch
giving distances, showing the location of such buildings on the business
premises; and a diagram or plan giving distances and heights, showing floors,
exits, entrances, windows, ventilators and walls.
      8.   Such other information as the board of trustees shall find
reasonably necessary to effectuate the purposes of this chapter and to arrive
at a fair determination of whether the terms of this chapter have been complied
with.
   (B)   Itinerant Junk Dealer Applications:
      1.   Name, residence address and telephone number.
      2.   Trade names and exact locations and descriptions of any business
operated by applicant presently and during the past five (5) years.
      3.   Names and addresses of employers of applicant presently and during
the past five (5) years.
      4.   Names and addresses of two (2) persons, other than employers or
relatives, (preferably local residents) who know applicant personally.
      5.   A statement as to whether or not the applicant has been convicted of
any crime, misdemeanor or violation of any provisions of this code; the nature
of the offense; the date of its commission; and the punishment or penalty
assessed therefor.
      6.   A photograph of the applicant, taken within sixty (60) days
immediately prior to the date of the filing of the application, which shall be
two inches by two inches (2" x 2") showing the head and shoulders of the
applicant in a clear and distinguishing manner.
      7.   Trade name, business address and telephone number (if assigned) of
applicant or any employer of applicant in connection with its activities as an
itinerant junk dealer; and a description of such activities.
      8.   Such other information as the board of trustees shall find
reasonably necessary to effectuate the purposes of this chapter and to arrive
at a fair determination of whether the terms of this chapter have been complied
with. (1974 Code)
3-8-5: INVESTIGATION; APPROVAL AND ISSUANCE OF LICENSE:
   (A)   Upon receipt of an application for a junk dealer's license as provided
for herein, the clerk shall furnish copies of same to the board of trustees.
The secretary shall cause an investigation to be made of the applicant's
business responsibility and moral character. The proposed or existing premises
and equipment with which the junkyard is being or is to be operated shall be
examined by the other members of the board of investigators or their duly
appointed representatives. No junk dealer's license shall be issued unless the
application is approved by all members of the board of investigators.
   (B)   The investigating committee shall approve the application only if it
finds that the applicant's business responsibility and moral character are
satisfactory and that all agents or officers of applicant, if any, who will
take part in the operation of such business are of good character and
reputation and capable of operating the business in a manner consistent with
public health, safety and good morals.
   (C)   The investigating committee shall approve the application only if it
finds that any proposed or existing buildings or equipment with which the
junkyard is being or is to be operated conform to the requirements of the
building code and the requirements of this chapter.
   (D)   The investigating committee shall approve the application only if it
finds that the proposed or existing premises and equipment conform to the
requirements of this chapter and all applicable health laws.
   (E)   The investigating committee shall approve the application only if it
finds that the proposed or existing premises and equipment conform to the
requirements of this chapter and all applicable fire prevention laws.
   (F)   If any of the findings provided for in subsections (B), (C), (D) and
(E) of this section are unfavorable to the applicant, the president shall,
within thirty (30) days after the filing of the application, notify the
applicant that his application is disapproved and that no license will be
issued. Upon request, he shall furnish the applicant with a brief written
statement of the grounds upon which the application was disapproved. If the
findings in subsections (B), (C), (D) and (E) of this section are favorable to
the applicant, the president shall, within thirty (30) days after the filing of
the application, issue a junk dealer's license to the applicant if he finds:
      1.   That the applicant has obtained from the official charged with
administration under the zoning regulations a certificate to the effect that
the junkyard will not be a violation of existing village zoning regulations;
and
      2.   That the applicant has paid the fee prescribed by this chapter.
   (G)   The license as issued shall bear the following language on its face:
         IMPORTANT – This license applies only to the premises indicated herein
and authorizes the licensee to operate a junkyard in a lawful place and manner
only; it is not a substitute for any certificate of occupancy, building permit
or other certificate or permit that might be required by law of the licensee,
and it does not relieve the licensee of the responsibility to have all such
required permits or certificates at all times and comply with all laws
affecting the above described business.
   (H)   The clerk shall keep a permanent record of all applications filed and
all licenses issued in accordance with this section. (1974 Code)
3-8-6: ITINERANT JUNK DEALERS:
   (A)   Upon receipt of an application for an itinerant junk dealer's license
as provided for herein, the chairman of the board of investigators shall
furnish copies of same to the other members of said board, and the chief of
police shall cause an investigation to be made of the applicant's business
responsibility and moral character. If the board finds that the applicant's
business responsibility and moral character are satisfactory, and if the fee
prescribed by this code has been paid, the president shall, within thirty (30)
days after the filing of the application, issue an itinerant junk dealer's
license to the applicant. If the board finds that the applicant's business
responsibility or moral character is unsatisfactory, the president shall,
within thirty (30) days after the filing of the application, notify the
applicant that his application is disapproved and that no license will be
issued. Upon request, he shall furnish the applicant with a brief written
statement of the grounds upon which his application was disapproved.
   (B)   The clerk shall keep a permanent record of all applications filed and
all licenses issued in accordance with this section. (1974 Code)
3-8-7: PERIOD OF LICENSE; RENEWAL PROCEDURE:
   (A)   Unless otherwise provided by the board of trustees, any license or
renewal license issued hereunder shall be effective as of the date of its
issuance and shall expire one year thereafter.
   (B)   An applicant for a renewal license shall file with the president a
written application upon forms provided by the village board, signed and sworn
to in the same manner required in the case of an original application, together
with copies of the application and a fee as prescribed in this code. The
application shall contain such information about the applicant's demeanor and
the conduct and operation of the licensed business during the preceding license
period as is reasonably necessary to enable the board of investigators to
determine the applicant's eligibility for a renewal license. (1974 Code)
3-8-8: LICENSE FEES:
The annual fee to be paid for any license or renewal license hereunder shall be
two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00). Said license fee of two hundred fifty
dollars ($250.00) will be payable May 1 of each year. (Ord. 77-8-2, 8-15-1977)
3-8-9: LICENSE NONTRANSFERABLE:
No license issued under this chapter shall be transferred or assigned or used
by any person other than the one to whom it was issued, and no junk dealer's
license shall be used at any location other than the one described in the
application upon which it was issued. (1974 Code)
3-8-10: GENERAL OPERATING REQUIREMENTS:
   (A)   The following general operating requirements shall apply to all junk
dealers licensed in accordance with the provisions of this chapter:
      1.   The license issued pursuant to this chapter shall be plainly
displayed on the business premises.
      2.   The junkyard, together with things kept therein, shall at all times
be maintained in a sanitary condition.
      3.   No space not covered by the license shall be used in the licensed
business.
      4.   No water shall be allowed to stand in any place on the premises in
such manner as to afford a breeding place for mosquitoes.
      5.   Weeds and vegetation on the premises, other than trees, shall be
kept at a height of not more than four inches (4").
      6.   No garbage or other waste liable to give off a foul odor or attract
vermin shall be kept on the premises; nor shall any refuse of any kind be kept
on the premises, unless such refuse is "junk" as defined herein and is in use
in the licensed business.
      7.   No junk shall be allowed to rest upon or protrude over any public
street, walkway or curb or become scattered or blown off the business premises.
      8.   Junk shall be stored in piles not exceeding ten feet (10') in height
and shall be arranged so as to permit easy access to all such junk for
firefighting purposes.
      9.   No combustible material of any kind not necessary or beneficial to
the licensed business shall be kept on the premises; nor shall the premises be
allowed to become a fire hazard.
      10.   Gasoline and oil shall be removed from any scrapped engines or
vehicles on the premises.
      11.   No junk or other material shall be burned on the premises in any
incinerator not meeting the requirements of the building code; and no junk or
other material shall be burned on the premises in the open except in accordance
with the fire prevention code.
      12.   No noisy processing of junk or other noisy activity shall be
carried on in connection with the licensed business on Sunday, Christmas,
Thanksgiving, or at any time between the hours of six o'clock (6:00) P.M. and
seven o'clock (7:00) A.M.
      13.   The area on the premises where junk is kept (other than indoors)
shall be enclosed, except for entrances and exits, with a solid, vertical wall
or fence. Entrances and exits shall not be wider or more numerous than
reasonably necessary for the conduct of the licensed business.
      14.   The licensee shall permit inspection of the business premises by
any member or representative of a member of the board of investigators at any
reasonable time.
      15.   No junk dealer licensed hereunder or his agent or employee shall
purchase or receive any junk for use in the licensed business from any minor
without the written consent of a parent or guardian of such person. Such
writing shall be held available for inspection by any member, or representative
of a member of the board of investigators.
      16.   Each acquisition of junk shall be recorded in English in a
permanent type register kept on the business premises, giving the name and
residence address of the person from whom the acquisition was made, a
description of the junk acquired, and the date of the transaction. Such data
shall be held available for inspection by any member, or representative of a
member of the board of investigators.
      17.   No junkyard shall be allowed to become a nuisance; nor shall any
junkyard be operated in such manner as to become injurious to the health,
safety or welfare of the community or of any residents close by.
   (B)   The following general operating requirements shall apply to all
itinerant junk dealers licensed in accordance with this chapter:
      1.   The licensee shall have the license issued to him under this chapter
in his immediate possession at all times when he is acting as an itinerant junk
dealer in the village and shall exhibit it to any person upon request.
      2.   He shall not purchase or receive any junk from any minor without the
written consent of a parent or guardian of such person. He shall retain such
writing and shall produce it within a reasonable time upon the request of any
member, or representative of a member of the board of investigators.
      3.   He shall record in English in a permanent type register each
acquisition of junk within the village, giving the name and residence address
of the person from whom the acquisition was made, a description of the junk
acquired, and the date of the transaction. He shall retain such data and shall
produce them within a reasonable time upon the request of any member, or
representative of a member of the board of investigators. (1974 Code)
3-8-11: INSPECTIONS:
The board of investigators or its duly authorized representatives, shall
inspect the junkyards of all junk dealers licensed under this chapter at least
once a year to determine whether such yards are being operated in accordance
with the provisions of this chapter and other applicable provisions of law.
(1974 Code)
3-8-12: REVOCATION AND SUSPENSION:
When the board of trustees determines that the public interest so requires, it
shall revoke or suspend the license of any junk dealer or itinerant junk dealer
when it finds, after due investigation, that:
   (A)   The junk dealer or any agent or officer of such dealer who takes part
in the operation of the licensed business, or the itinerant junk dealer is not
of good character or reputation or is not capable of operating the licensed
business or carrying on the licensed activity in a manner consistent with the
public health, safety and good morals; or
   (B)   The junk dealer has failed to comply with the provisions of this
chapter or any provision of law applicable to the premises, equipment or
operation of the licensed business or the itinerant junk dealer has failed to
comply with this chapter or any provision of law applicable to his equipment or
licensed operations; or
   (C)   The licensee has obtained his license through any fraud or
misstatement; or
   (D)   The licensed business or activity is being conducted in a manner
detrimental to the health, safety or general welfare of the public, or is a
nuisance, or is being operated or carried on in any unlawful manner; or
   (E)   The licensed business or activity is no longer being operated or
carried on. (1974 Code)
3-8-13: HEARING:
   (A)   Any person aggrieved by an order of the board of trustees granting,
denying, renewing or revoking a license for a proposed or existing business or
activity subject to the provisions of this chapter, may file a written request
for a hearing before the board within ten (10) days after issuance of such
order. The board of trustees shall give notice to a public hearing upon this
request to be held in not less than five (5) days after service of the notice
on the person requesting the hearing. The board shall also give notice of the
hearing to other persons directly interested in the order in question. At such
hearing, the board shall determine whether the granting, denial, renewal or
revocation of the license was in accordance with the provisions of this chapter
and shall issue a written findings of fact, conclusions of law, and an order to
carry out its findings and conclusions. These findings of fact, conclusions of
law, and order shall be filed with the clerk and served by the board of
trustees upon all parties appearing or represented at said hearing.
   (B)   The village attorney shall furnish such assistance and advice to the
board of trustees as the board shall request. (1974 Code)
3-8-14: COMPLIANCE:
Any person acting as a junk dealer or itinerant junk dealer within the village
on the effective date of this chapter shall have a period of ninety (90) days
after such effective date to comply with the provisions hereof. (1974 Code)
CHAPTER 9
LIQUOR
SECTION:
3-9-1: Definitions
3-9-2: License Required
3-9-3: Applications
3-9-4: Fee
3-9-5: Issuance
3-9-6: Bond
3-9-7: Location
3-9-8: Minors
3-9-9: Females (Rep. by Ord. 01-13, 8-20-2001)
3-9-10: Food
3-9-11: Sanitation
3-9-12: Location Change
3-9-13: Hours
3-9-14: Limitation
3-9-15: Transfer
3-9-16: Expiration
3-9-17: Consumption Prohibited On Certain Premises
3-9-18: Drive-Up Service
3-9-19: Dramshop Insurance
3-9-20: Appeals
3-9-21: Conditions On Class D License
3-9-22: Conditions On Class E License
3-9-23: Penalty
3-9-24: Denial, Non-Renewal, Suspension, Revocation
3-9-1: DEFINITIONS:
All words and phrases used in this chapter which are defined in an act entitled
"an act relating to alcoholic liquors", approved January 31, 1934, as amended,
shall have the meanings accorded to such words and phrases in said act 1 .
(1956 Code § 35-1)
 
Notes
1 1. 235 ILCS 5/1-2 et seq.
3-9-2: LICENSE REQUIRED:  
It shall be unlawful for any person to sell or offer for sale at retail, or
outside of one's personal residence to permit the consumption of, any alcoholic
liquor in the Village:
   A.   Without a liquor license issued by the State of Illinois;
   B.   Without a liquor license issued by the Village of Manteno;
   C.   At a location, place, or premises other than as described in the liquor
license; or
   D.   In violation of the terms of such liquor license. (1956 Code § 35-2;
amd. Ord. 25-16, 9-15-2025)
3-9-3: APPLICATIONS:
   (A)   An application for a liquor license shall be made in conformity with
the general requirements of this code relating to applications for licenses.
   (B)   Such applications shall be delivered to the village clerk on forms
provided by the village, who shall forward and deliver to the president of the
board of trustees, as local liquor control commissioner, to perform an
investigation and background check of the applicant, and a decision on the
approval or denial of said license.
   (C)   Applications for liquor licenses shall be signed by the applicant, if
an individual, or by a duly authorized agent thereof, if an entity, verified
under oath, and shall include:
      1.   Such information as will allow the local liquor control commissioner
to investigate and determine that no grounds exist for the denial thereof
pursuant to Sections 6-2, 6-11, 6-12, or 6-25 of the Liquor Control Act of 1934
(the "Act"), as amended from time to time, including fingerprint samples;
      2.   Proof of dram shop liability insurance having the limits prescribed
by Section 6-21 of the Act;
      3.   Payment of the applicable license fee; and
   (D)   Such other information or documentation as may be required by the
licensee to qualify for such license.
   (E)   Except for applications for new licenses during the course of the
license year, every application for renewal of a liquor license shall be
completed and in the hands of the local liquor control commissioner at least
fifteen (15) days prior to the beginning of the license year.
   (F)   An application for a Class SE-NP or SE-FP license shall be completed
and in the hands of the local liquor control commissioner at least thirty (30)
days prior to the special event it relates.
   (G)   No license shall be issued hereunder until such application has been
fully completed, signed, investigated, and then only when the local liquor
control commissioner shall approve the same in writing. (Ord. 01-09, 7-2-2001;
amd. Ord. 20-12, 9-12-2020; Ord. 25-16, 9-15-2025)
3-9-4: FEE:
Retail licenses for the sale of alcoholic liquor shall be divided into the
following classes for which the following fees shall be paid:
   (A)   Class A license shall authorize the retail sale on the premises
specified of alcoholic liquor for consumption on the premises as well as other
retail sales of such liquor. The annual fee for such license shall be one
thousand one hundred twenty five dollars ($1,125.00).
   (B)   Class B license shall authorize the retail sale of alcoholic liquor,
but not for consumption on the premises where sold. The annual fee for such
license shall be one thousand five hundred dollars ($1,500.00).
   (C)   Class C license shall authorize the retail sale of alcoholic liquor
only in conjunction with the sale of food and shall be served at tables and
allowing for no sale across the bar to any patrons, except for banquets at
which liquor may be served across the bar to those patrons attending the
organized function. The annual fee for such license shall be seven hundred
fifty dollars ($750.00).
   (D)   Class O license shall authorize a holder of a class A or class C
liquor license to sell alcoholic liquor for consumption outside of the
permanent enclosed structure containing the licensed premises in a location
designated by the liquor commission. A holder of a class B license shall not be
eligible for a class O license. The annual fee for such license shall be five
hundred fifty dollars ($550.00).
   (E)   Class D license shall authorize the retail sale on the premises
specified of the alcoholic liquor for consumption on premises where food is
sold. Alcoholic liquor shall only be served at tables or other designated
areas, but shall not be sold across a bar to any patrons sitting or standing
thereat for any period exceeding what is necessary for the patron to order and
obtain the product sold. The annual fee for such license shall be one thousand
one hundred twenty-five dollars ($1,125.00).
   (F)   Class E license shall authorize the retail sale or complimentary
distribution of the beer, wine and champagne, by single glass only, for
consumption on the licensed premises only, when the principal business on the
licensed premises is a spa, beauty salon or barbershop, or at an art gallery,
art studio, or other place of business while instructing an artistic/culinary
experience event involving customer/patron participation. The sale, service and
consumption of alcoholic beverages shall be limited to those supplied by the
licensee to customers/patrons of the principal business use while receiving
such services or while participating in an artistic or culinary experience
event. The annual fee for such license shall be five hundred dollars ($500.00).
   (G)   Class F license shall authorize the retail sale or complimentary
distribution of beer, wine, champagne, or alcoholic liquor in its original can
or bottle, for consumption off the licensed premises only, together with the
packaged sale of sweets, fruits, or other edible arrangements, as a part of a
home occupation. The annual fee for such license shall be three hundred dollars
($300.00).
   (H)   Class SE-NP (Non-Profit Special Event) license shall authorize the
retail sale of alcoholic liquor for consumption on-premises at special events
organized and held by governmental and/or not-for-profit organizations or
entities. A Class SE-NP license shall also be available to for-profit entities
provided they are a sponsor of the special event organized or held by
governmental and/or not-for-profit organizations or entities. A Class SE-NP
license shall designate the location, date, and hours of validity. The local
liquor control commissioner may authorize the holder of a Class SE-NP license
to sell and deliver alcoholic liquor on Sunday prior to nine o'clock (9:00)
A.M., but no earlier than eight o'clock (8:00) A.M. The fee for such license
shall be zero dollars ($0.00) per day.
   (I)   Class SE-FP (For-Profit Special Event Supplemental) license shall
supplement a Class A license and shall authorize the retail sale of beer and
wine, only, for consumption on-premises at a special event organized and held
by the Class A license holder. A Class SE-FP license shall designate a location
other than the underlying licensed premises and the dates of validity. The fee
for such license shall be one-hundred dollars ($100.00) per day.
In the event that any application for an annual license hereunder shall be made
for a period of less than six (6) months by an applicant who or which shall not
have been previously engaged in the sale of alcoholic liquor within the
village, such application shall be accompanied by a fee of fifty percent (50%)
of the annual fee. (Ord. 12-15, 9-17-2012; amd. Ord. 15-46, 4-18-2016; Ord. 16-
36, 3-20-2017; Ord. 20-09, 7-20-2020; Ord. 22-10, 9-19-2022; Ord. 25-16, 9-15-
2025)
3-9-5: ISSUANCE:
A village retailer's license for the sale of alcoholic liquor shall be issued
by the village clerk upon the approval of the application therefor by the
president of the board of trustees, as the local liquor control commissioner,
subject to the provisions of an act of the general assembly of the state of
Illinois, entitled "an act relating to alcoholic liquor", approved January 31,
1934, as amended, and subject to all the provisions of this code relating to
alcoholic liquor, and all other laws and provisions of the state of Illinois or
of the United States Of America relating thereto. (1956 Code § 35-5)
The licensee must be actively engaged in business within ninety (90) days from
the issuance of the liquor license from the village and must remain actively
engaged in business within the licensed term.
The license holder shall be deemed actively engaged in business when the
licensed premises is open for the sale of alcoholic liquor for forty (40) hours
or more per week. (Ord. 80-5, 6-2-1980)
3-9-6: BOND:
(Rep. by Ord. 20-12, 9-12-2020)
3-9-7: LOCATION:
   (A)   In General: No liquor shall be sold, offered for sale, kept for sale,
displayed, or advertised for sale at retail, or delivered to any person
purchasing the same at retail, except at a location, place or premises
particularly described in a retail dealer's license.
   (B)   Outdoor Patios: A class O license shall authorize a holder of a liquor
license to sell alcoholic liquor for consumption outside of the permanent
structure constituting the licensed premises in a location designated by the
liquor commission ("class O premises"). Such licenses may only be issued in the
C-1 and C-2 zoning districts. In addition to any other requirement, class O
licenses may be denied if the applicant fails to clearly establish to the
satisfaction of the liquor commission all of the following:
      1.   That outdoor operations will not disturb the lawful use and quiet
enjoyment of nearby properties;
      2.   That the class O premises will be operated in strict accordance with
applicable health, building, fire and life safety codes;
      3.   That adequate safeguards are in place for security, crowd control,
lighting control, and protection of minors;
      4.   That the licensee has previously maintained adequate control and
supervision of the licensed premises and has consistently operated the licensed
premises in substantial compliance with the village liquor code;
      5.   That the class O premises can be made to comply with the
requirements of this section.
   (C)   Conditions: A class O license shall be subject to the following
conditions:
      1.   The class O license premises shall be enclosed by fencing
satisfactory to the liquor commission, in both height and design, taking into
account such factors as the location of the premises, the primary nature of the
business, the proximity and nature of surrounding business, the zoning of
adjacent properties, the safety of the patrons and public, the degree of
permanency of class O premises, the number of employees permanently stationed
in the area or otherwise charged with supervision over the area, and if
recorded or live music or entertainment is to be provided in the class O
premises. The liquor commission may exempt a licensee from the fencing
requirements of this subsection when the balancing of the factors listed herein
so dictates.
      2.   Access to the class O premises shall be through the permanent
structure constituting the licensed premises, except for emergency exits
required by village ordinance and the fire department, unless the licensee
stations an employee at the access point to the class O premises to ensure that
no minors enter the area in violation of section
3-9-8 of this chapter and that no patrons leave the area with liquor.
      3.   Live or recorded entertainment, music, or any other natural or
amplified sound shall be permitted in a class O premises; provided, however,
the sound level of any entertainment, music or any other sound shall not exceed
sixty (60) decibels at any time, as measured at any property line.
      4.   Class O premises shall be closed no later than ten o'clock (10:00)
P.M. Sunday through Thursday and no later than twelve o'clock (12:00) midnight
on Friday and Saturday.
      5.   No sales of alcoholic liquor shall be made to any person on
adjoining properties, streets, sidewalks, or alleys.
      6.   No liquor served in an open container shall be removed from the
class O premises, except to the licensed premises.
      7.   A site plan, blueprint, or scale drawing showing the location for
outside service of alcoholic liquor in relation to the permanent structure on
the premises, fences, emergency exits, and any other fixed objects within that
location, and a detailed description of materials to be used as fencing and
emergency exits, shall be submitted with the application for a class O permit.
      8.   All fences, enclosures, or other structures required by this section
shall be located, constructed and maintained in conformance with the zoning,
building and other ordinances of the city.
      9.   Any licensee who received authority to sell alcoholic liquor outside
the permanent structure constituting the licensed premises prior to October 21,
2002 (the effective date of ordinance 02-20), whether by the village or the
county, shall be: a) closed at twelve o'clock (12:00) midnight; and b) exempt
from any further fencing requirements for areas which were not fenced at that
time. The exemptions provided herein shall not apply to a licensed premises
which expands a grandfathered Class O premises. (Ord. 12-06, 5-21-2012)
   (D)   Location Restrictions And Exceptions: Unless granted an exemption by
the Local Liquor Control Commissioner which shall be evidenced by the issuance
of a liquor license, no liquor license shall be issued for the sale at retail
of any alcoholic liquor within one hundred feet (100') of any church, school
other than an institution of higher learning, hospital, home for the aged or
indigent persons or for veterans, their spouses or children. Notwithstanding
the above, there shall be no locational restriction for hotels offering
restaurant service, regularly organized clubs, or to restaurants, food shops or
other places where the sale of alcoholic liquors is not the principal business
carried on. (Ord. 18-13, 8-20-2018)
3-9-8: MINORS:
It shall be unlawful for any licensee or any officer, associate, member,
representative, agent, or employee of such licensee to sell, give, or deliver
alcoholic liquor to any minor. It shall be unlawful for any such person to
engage in, employ or permit any minor to work or to entertain, or to act as
host or hostess in or upon the licensed premises where the principal business
is the sale of alcoholic liquor while such premises are open for the sale at
retail of alcoholic liquor. For purposes of this section, a "minor" shall be
defined as a person not yet having reached his twenty first birthday. It is
further unlawful to employ or permit any minor to sell, give, deliver, or
supervise the sale of any alcoholic liquor on the premises of a Class B liquor
establishment.
   (A)   Presence Of Certain Persons On Premises Prohibited: No person under
the age of twenty-one (21) years unaccompanied by his parent or legal guardian
shall be permitted in or to loiter about the premises licensed under this
chapter. This subsection shall not apply to hotels, restaurants where regular
meals are served, stores, clubs, bowling alleys, pool/billiard halls, spas,
beauty salons, barbershops, art galleries or art studios. (Ord. 16-36, 3-20-
2017; amd. Ord. 20-23, 2-1-2021)
3-9-9: FEMALES:
(Rep. by Ord. 01-13, 8-20-2001)
3-9-10: FOOD:
It shall be unlawful for any licensee to serve, give away or permit to be
served or given away in the licensed premises, any food, free of charge, or to
serve, give away or permit to be served or given away in such licensed
premises, any alcoholic liquor in consideration in part or in whole for any
food purchased therein. (1956 Code § 35-9)
3-9-11: SANITATION:
Every licensee hereunder, who shall sell alcoholic liquor for consumption on
the premises of such licensee, shall keep and maintain the licensed premises
with running hot and cold water and adequate sanitary washing facilities for
the cleansing of glasses and service utensils, shall provide adequate toilet
facilities for both males and females and shall otherwise comply with all the
health and sanitary requirements of the laws of the State and of this Code
applicable to the licensed business. All employees shall be clean in person and
clothing and no person afflicted with any contagious or infectious disease in
communicable form shall be employed in or about the serving of liquor or in the
washing of glasses or other utensils. (1956 Code § 35-10)
3-9-12: LOCATION CHANGE:
When a request for removal to premises other than those licensed is received by
the President and Board of Trustees, said President and Board of Trustees shall
consider said request and if the same be approved by the President and Board of
Trustees, said change in location may be made and the license then in force,
provided all other provisions of this Code shall have been complied with in
connection with the new location, shall then continue in full force and effect
for the period so provided in such license. (1956 Code § 35-11)
3-9-13: HOURS:
   (A)   Unless otherwise provided, no licensee hereunder shall permit to be
sold or given away any alcoholic liquor between the hours of two o’clock (2:00)
A.M. and six o’clock (6:00) A.M. on Monday, Tuesday, Wednesday, Thursday,
Friday and Saturday of each week, and between the hours of two o’clock (2:00)
A.M. and nine o’clock (9:00) A.M. on Sunday of each week.
   (B)   Unless otherwise provided, all license holders shall clear the
premises of all patrons at or prior to two thirty o’clock (2:30) A.M. unless
such patrons are engaged in legal commercial activity which does not involve
the sale or consumption of alcoholic liquor. (Ord. 12-14, 9-17-2012; amd. Ord.
25-12, 8-4-2025)
3-9-14: LIMITATION:
   (A)   There shall not hereafter be issued within the corporate limits of the
village more than nine (9) class A licenses; eight (8) class B licenses; two
(2) class C licenses; two (2) class D licenses; ten (10) class E licenses;
three (3) Class F licenses; zero (0) Class SE-NP licenses; and zero (0) class
SE-FP licenses. The number of Class 0 licenses shall be limited by the
underlying class of licenses they supplement.
   (B)   The number of licenses authorized by this section for all classes
shall remain at the number set forth above; provided, however, that any license
forfeited, revoked, voided, or expired without timely renewal shall
automatically reduce the number of licenses of the particular class authorized
and available by the total number so forfeited, revoked, voided, or expired.
(Ord. 17-34, 4-16-2018; amd. Ord. 20-09, 7-20-2020; Ord. 25-16, 9-15-2025)
3-9-15: TRANSFER:
   (A)   The local liquor control commissioner, with the consent of the Board
of Trustees, may permit the transfer of interest in or to a license issued for
the sale of alcoholic liquors at retail at any location to which said license
has been issued upon: (1) the filing of a new application (along with the
manager's application and valid lease, if applicable) a minimum of four (4)
weeks prior to operations under the transferred license is anticipated to
commence; and (2) the payment of a transfer fee corresponding to the applicable
license fee at the time the application is filed with the Village Clerk. No
such transfer shall be permitted if the existing license is suspended or
revoked, or if any fees remain outstanding for the original license or
licensee. Upon approval, a new liquor license will be issued effective no
sooner than the later of the return of the original village-issued license
certificate and the date the original license is deemed surrendered as
identified in a letter of recission signed by the original licensee. For the
purpose of this section, a transfer of any interest in a company, partnership,
association, or of five (5%) percent or more of ownership in shares of the
stock of a corporation, shall be transfer of interest and require the payment
of the transfer fee provided for by this subsection. In the event the transfer
is requested within six (6) months of a license renewal date (i.e., November 1
- April 30 of a license year) then the fee shall be fifty (50%) percent of the
applicable transfer fee.
   (B)   Except as authorized in subsection (a) above, it shall be unlawful for
any licensee to transfer or to attempt to transfer, either directly or
indirectly, any license for the sale of alcoholic liquor. issued pursuant to
the provisions of this chapter are not subject to sale, assignment, transfer or
to a change of location. (1956 Code § 35-15; amd. Ord. 2020-12, 9-12-2020)
3-9-16: EXPIRATION:
   (A)   All annual liquor licenses issued in conformity with this chapter
shall, without exception, expire at twelve o'clock (12:00) midnight on April 30
following the date of issuance.
   (B)   All Class SE-NP and SE-FP licenses shall expire in accordance with the
terms of the particular license. (1956 Code § 35-16; Ord. 25-16, 9-15-2025)
3-9-17: CONSUMPTION PROHIBITED ON CERTAIN PREMISES:
   (A)   No person shall bring any alcoholic liquor into any dining room of any
hotel, restaurant, clubroom or place where lunches are served, or where soft
drinks are sold, or a soda fountain is operated, or into any public place for
consumption, or for use for mixing with or "spiking" any alcoholic liquor or
any other beverage whatsoever.
   (B)   No owner or proprietor, or agent or employee thereof, of any
restaurant, store or other commercial establishment or private park inviting or
permitting public patronage shall permit the consumption of alcoholic liquor on
the premises except those specifically licensed for consumption on the
premises.
   (C)   No person shall consume any alcoholic liquor on any street, alley,
sidewalk or other public property, or in any restaurant, store or other
commercial or private establishment, inviting or permitting public patronage
except those specifically licensed for consumption on the premises or in any
automobile or vehicle traveling upon or parked on any street, alley or public
property.
   (D)   No person shall possess alcoholic liquor in a motor vehicle with the
original seal thereof broken.
   (E)   Any person violating any of the provisions of this section shall be
fined not more than two hundred dollars ($200.00) for each offense, and every
day that such violation shall continue shall constitute a separate and distinct
offense. (Ord. 74-13, 8-19-1974)
3-9-18: DRIVE-UP SERVICE:
It shall be unlawful for any licensee to provide a drive-up window or drive-
through service to customers for the purchase of alcoholic liquor. It shall be
further unlawful for a licensee to provide for curb service and walk-up service
for the sale of alcoholic liquor. All liquor sold by said licensee shall be
conducted within the licensed premises. (Ord. 83-12, 10-17-1983)
3-9-19: DRAMSHOP INSURANCE:
Any person applying for a Village retailer's license for the sale of alcoholic
liquor, and any person owning, renting, leasing as lessor or as lessee, or
permitting the occupation of any building or premises with knowledge that
alcoholic liquors are to be sold therein, or who leases the building or
premises for other purposes and who knowingly permits therein the sale of any
alcoholic liquors, shall be required to carry dramshop insurance for such
facility in maximum insurance coverage limits as set forth in 235 Illinois
Compiled Statutes 5/6-21, as amended from time to time. Evidence that every
such person carries such insurance, and that such insurance is current and in
force, must be maintained on the licensed premises at all times and must be
submitted at the time of application for issuance or renewal of a Village
retailer's license for the sale of alcoholic liquor. Failure to submit such
evidence shall be grounds for denial of a retailer's license for the sale of
alcoholic liquor, and failure to maintain such evidence on the premises shall
be grounds for revocation of a previously issued license. (Ord. 03-16, 9-2-
2003)
3-9-20: APPEALS:
Any appeal of an order or decision of the Local Liquor Control Commissioner to
suspend or revoke a liquor license shall be limited to a review of the official
record. (Ord. 06-36, 9-5-2006)
3-9-21: CONDITIONS ON CLASS D LICENSE:
A Class D license is subject to the following conditions and limitations:
   (A)   Hours: No Class D licensee shall permit to be sold or given away any
alcoholic liquor between the hours of two o'clock (2:00) A.M. and six o'clock
(6:00) A.M. on Monday, Tuesday, Wednesday, Thursday, Friday and Saturday of
each week, and between the hours of two o'clock (2:00) A.M. and nine o'clock
(9:00) A.M. on Sunday of each week.
   (B)   Closing: A Class D license holder shall clear the premises of all
patrons at or prior to two thirty o'clock (2:30) A.M. unless such patrons are
engaged in legal commercial activity which does not involve the sale or
consumption of alcoholic liquor. (Ord. 15-46, 4-18-2016; amd. Ord. 25-16, 9-15-
2025)
3-9-22: CONDITIONS ON CLASS E LICENSE:
A Class E license is subject to the following conditions and limitations:
   (A)   Hours: A Class E licensee shall permit the sale, delivery or
consumption of beer, wine and champagne during the principal business' hours,
but in no event earlier than nine o'clock (9:00) A.M. and no later than eleven
o'clock (11:00) P.M. on Monday through Sunday of each week.
   (B)   Closing: A Class E license holder shall clear the premises of all
customers/patrons at or prior to eleven thirty o'clock (11 :30) P.M. unless
such patrons are engaged in legal commercial activity that does not involve the
sale, delivery or consumption of alcoholic liquor.
   (C)   Video Gaming: No video gaming or video gaming terminal shall be
permitted or allowed in or on a Class E licensed premises.
   (D)   Food Service: No food shall be prepared in or on a Class E licensed
premises except in conjunction with a culinary experience event through which
customers/patrons participate by preparing food for their own consumption.
   (E)   Signs: No advertisement, sign or any other external indicia of the
Class E licensee, the Class E licensed premises, or the primary business use,
shall contain an express or implicit reference to alcoholic beverages being
sold, delivered, or available for consumption.
   (F)   Prohibited Licensees: No person or premises holding or having a liquor
license of any other class shall be permitted to simultaneously hold or have
applicable to it a Class E license. (Ord. 16-36, 3-20-2017; amd. Ord. 25-16, 9-
15-2025)
3-9-23: PENALTY:
   (A)   Any person found in violation of any provision of this chapter shall
be fined not less than one hundred dollars ($100.00) not more than seven
hundred and fifty dollars ($750.00) for each offense. Each violation and each
day a violation occurs or is allowed to continue shall constitute a separate
and distinct offense.
   (B)   In addition to or in lieu of a fine, a licensee found in violation of
any provision of this chapter may have his/her/its liquor license non-renewed,
suspended, or revoked.
   (C)   The fines, penalties, and remedies provided for above are in addition
to and not exclusive of any other remedy available to the Village as provided
by applicable law. (Ord. 25-16, 9-15-2025)
3-9-24: DENIAL, NON-RENEW AL, SUSPENSION, REVOCATION:
In addition to or in lieu of imposing a fine for a violation of this chapter,
the local liquor control commissioner is authorized to deny, not renew,
suspend, or revoke a liquor license of any applicant/licensee for any of the
following reasons:
   (A)   The applicant/licensee is not authorized to hold a liquor license
under the Act;
   (B)   The applicant/licensee failed to supply or update information,
documentation, or fees required for the issuance or renewal of said liquor
license;
   (C)   Any fraud, misrepresentation or false statement by the applicant/
licensee contained in or supplementing any application for a liquor license;
   (D)   The licensee, or his agents or employees, violates any United States,
State of Illinois, County of Kankakee, Village of Manteno, or local liquor
control commissioner statute, ordinance, regulation, rule or order related to
the sale of alcoholic liquor, its business operations, or the licensed
premises, including the provisions of this chapter;
   (E)   Failure by licensee to timely pay any fee, fine, tax, or penalty owed
to the Village arising from or relating to its operations on the licensed
premises.
   (F)   The business operations of the licensee on the licensed premises
constitute a nuisance or a hazard or danger to the public health, safety, or
welfare. (Ord. 25-16, 9-15-2025)
CHAPTER 10
MOTION PICTURES
SECTION:
3-10-1: License Required
3-10-2: Applications
3-10-3: Fees
3-10-4: Prohibited Matter
3-10-5: Crowding
3-10-6: Safety Requirements
3-10-1: LICENSE REQUIRED:
It shall be unlawful to give, present or conduct any motion picture, or
theatricals, for admission to which a fee is charged, excepting performances
given solely for the benefit of and under the supervision of a religious,
educational or charitable organization, without having first secured a license
therefor as is herein provided. (1956 Code, Sec. 36-1)
3-10-2: APPLICATIONS:
Applications for such license shall conform to all general requirements of this
code and shall state in addition the place of the intended performance and the
seating capacity. (1956 Code, Sec. 36-2)
3-10-3: FEES:
Any person securing an annual license for motion pictures, or theatricals,
naming a specific place or building where the same are to be presented, may
present therein any number of performances or theatricals, during the year for
which the license was issued without any additional fee.
The fee for such annual license shall be one hundred dollars ($100.00) per
year.
The fee in cases other than performances under an annual license shall be five
dollars ($5.00) per day. (1956 Code, Sec. 36-3)
3-10-4: PROHIBITED MATTER:
It shall be unlawful to present any motion picture or theatrical which has a
tendency to cause a riot or to disturb the peace; or which is in any way
immoral, indecent or tends to in any manner offend public dignity. (1956 Code,
Sec. 36-4)
3-10-5: CROWDING:
It shall be unlawful to permit anyone to stand during any performance
authorized under a license hereunder, except ushers or other proper officials.
It shall be unlawful to admit more people to any performance within the village
than can be accommodated by the seating arrangements of the premises. (1956
Code, Sec. 36-5)
3-10-6: SAFETY REQUIREMENTS:
Those responsible for the giving of any performance, either theatrical, motion
picture or otherwise, shall observe and comply with all code provisions and
statutes pertaining thereto and failure to do so is a violation of this
chapter. (1956 Code, Sec. 36-6)
CHAPTER 11
OCCUPATION TAXES
SECTION:
3-11-1: Retailer's Occupation Tax
3-11-2: Service Occupation Tax
3-11-3: Municipal Use Tax
3-11-4: Cannabis Retailers’ Occupation Tax
3-11-5:    Hotel Tax
3-11-6: Municipal Grocery Occupation Tax
3-11-1: RETAILER'S OCCUPATION TAX:
A tax is hereby imposed upon all persons engaged in the business of selling
tangible personal property at retail in the village at the rate of one percent
(1%) of the gross receipts from such sales made in the course of such business
while this chapter is in effect, in accordance with the provisions of 65
Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/8-11-1.
Every such person engaged in such business in the village shall file on or
before the last day of each calendar month, the report to the state department
of revenue required by section three of "an act in relation to a tax upon
persons engaged in the business of selling tangible personal property to
purchasers for use or consumption" approved June 28, 1933, as amended.
At the time such report is filed, there shall be paid to the state department
of revenue the amount of tax hereby imposed on account of the receipts from
sales of tangible personal property during the preceding month. (7-17-67; amd.
1974 Code)
3-11-2: SERVICE OCCUPATION TAX:
A tax is hereby imposed upon all persons engaged in the municipality in the
business of making sales of service at the rate of one percent (1%) of the
gross receipts received from such business, in accordance with the provisions
of 65 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/8-11-5.
Every serviceman required to account for municipal service occupation tax for
the benefit of this municipality shall file on or before the last day of each
calendar month, the report to the state department of revenue required by
section nine of the service occupation tax act 1 .
At the time such report is filed, there shall be paid to the state department
of revenue the amount of tax hereby imposed. (11-6-67; amd. 1974 Code)
 
Notes
1 1. 35 ILCS 115/1 et seq.
3-11-3: MUNICIPAL USE TAX:
   (A)   A tax is hereby imposed in accordance with the provisions of 65
Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/8-11-6 of the Illinois municipal code, approved
May 29, 1961, as amended, upon the privilege of using in the municipality any
item of tangible personal property which is purchased outside Illinois at
retail from a retailer, and which is titled or registered with any agency of
Illinois government. The tax shall be at the rate of one percent (1%) of the
selling price of such tangible personal property with selling price to have the
meaning as defined in the use tax act, approved July 1955, as amended, and the
tax shall be collected from persons whose Illinois address for titling or
registration purposes is given as being within the municipality of the village
of Manteno.
   (B)   Such tax shall be collected by the Illinois department of revenue for
the village of Manteno and the tax must be paid, or an exemption determination
obtained from the department of revenue, before the title or certificate of
registration for the personal property may be issued. The department of revenue
shall have full power to administer and enforce the provisions of such act and
this section. (Ord. 87-7, 7-20-1987)
3-11-4: CANNABIS RETAILERS' OCCUPATION TAX:
   (A)   A tax is hereby imposed upon all persons engaged in the business of
selling cannabis, other than cannabis purchased under the Compassionate Use of
Medical Cannabis Pilot Program Act, at retail in the Village at the rate of
three (3%) percent of the gross receipts from these sales made in the course of
that business. Each retailer shall collect and remit to the Illinois Department
of Revenue the tax imposed under this section. A retailer may reimburse itself
for its tax liability hereunder by separately stating the tax as an additional
charge, which charge may be stated in combination, in a single amount, with any
Illinois tax the retailer is required to collect.
   (B)   The Illinois Department of Revenue shall have full power and authority
to administer and enforce the provisions of this section. The tax imposed, and
all civil penalties that may be assessed as an incident thereto, shall be
collected and enforced by the Illinois Department of Revenue. Any tax required
to be collected, and any tax collected by such retailer and required to be
remitted to the Illinois Department of Revenue, shall constitute a debt owed by
the retailer to the State of Illinois. (Ord. 19-17, 9-16-2019)
3-11-5: HOTEL TAX:
   (A)   Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, as used in this
section, shall have the following meanings ascribed to them unless the context
clearly indicates a different meaning:
HOTEL: Any building or buildings in which the public may, for a consideration,
obtain living quarters, sleeping or housekeeping accommodations. The term
includes, but is not limited to, inns, motels, tourist homes or courts, lodging
houses, rooming houses and apartment houses, retreat centers, conference
centers, and hunting lodges.
OPERATOR: Any person operating a hotel.
OCCUPANCY: The use or possession, or the right to the use or possession, of any
room or rooms in a hotel for any purpose, or the right to the use or possession
of the furnishings or to the services and accommodations accompanying the use
and possession of the room or rooms.
ROOM OR ROOMS: Any living quarters, sleeping or housekeeping accommodations.
PERMANENT RESIDENT: Any person who occupied or has the right to occupy any room
or rooms, regardless of whether or not it is the same room or rooms, in a hotel
for at least thirty (30) consecutive days.
RENT OR RENTAL: The consideration received for occupancy, valued in money,
whether received in money or otherwise, including all receipts, cash, credits
and property or services of any kind or nature.
PERSON: Any natural individual, firm, partnership, association, joint stock
company, joint adventure, public or private corporation, limited liability
company, or a receiver, executor, trustee, guardian or other representative
appointed by order of any court.
VILLAGE: The Village of Manteno, Kankakee County, Illinois.
VILLAGE CLERK: The Village Clerk of the Village.
   (B)   Tax Levied. A tax is levied and imposed upon all persons engaged in
the renting, leasing, or letting of hotel rooms within the Village at a rate of
five percent (5.00%) of the gross rental receipts therefor for each twenty-four
(24) hour period or fraction thereof. The tax levied shall be paid by the
operator and shall be in addition to any and all other taxes and charges that
may be imposed by law. Operators may reimburse themselves for the tax liability
by separately stating such tax as an additional charge on the invoice to the
user, which charge may be stated in combination and in a single amount with tax
imposed under 35 ILCS 145/1, et seq. The tax imposed herein shall not apply to
permanent residents of the hotel.
   (C)   Record Retention and Inspection. Each operator shall prepare and
maintain records of every occupancy and of all rent paid, charged, or due
thereon and of the tax payable pursuant to this section. The records shall be
maintained and preserved for at least three (3) years. Such records shall be
available for inspection and examination for any proper purpose at any
reasonable time upon demand by the Village Clerk or a duly authorized agent or
employee of the Village.
   (D)   Returns and Payment. Each operator shall file with the Village Clerk a
sworn tax return by the twentieth of each month showing the total gross rental
receipts from the rental of rooms in the hotel and all taxes payable from such
hotel in the preceding month. The operator shall remit to the Village full
payment of all taxes due for the period to which the tax return applies at the
time of filing of such return. If for any reason a tax is not paid when due, a
penalty shall be imposed at the rate of two percent (2%) of the unpaid tax
liability per thirty-day period, or portion thereof.
   (E)   Penalty. Any person found to be in violation of any provision of this
section shall be subject to a fine of not less than two hundred fifty dollars
($250.00) nor more than seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00). Each violation,
or day said violation is permitted to continue, shall constitute a separate
offense. Nothing in this section shall be interpreted to limit the remedies or
penalties available to the Village.
   (F)   Disposition of Funds. All taxes and penalties received by the Village
pursuant to this section shall be expended to promote tourism and conventions
within the Village or otherwise to attract nonresident overnight visitors to
the Village. (Ord. 23-26, 4-15-2024)
3-11-6: MUNICIPAL GROCERY OCCUPATION TAX:
   (A)   Municipal Grocery Retailers' Occupation Tax Imposed. A tax is hereby
imposed upon all persons engaged in the business of selling groceries at retail
in the Village of Manteno at the rate of one percent (1%) of the gross receipts
from such sales made in the course of such business. The imposition of this tax
is in accordance with and subject to the provisions of Section 8-11-24 of the
Illinois Municipal Code (65 ILCS 5/8-11-24).
   (B)   Municipal Grocery Service Occupation Tax Imposed. A tax is hereby
imposed upon all persons engaged in the business of making sales of service in
the Village of Manteno, who, as an incident to making those sales of service,
transfer groceries as an incident to a sale of service. The rate of this tax
shall be the same rate identified in subsection (A) above. The imposition of
this tax is in accordance with and subject to the provisions of Section 8-11-24
of the Illinois Municipal Code (65 ILCS 5/8-11-24).
   (C)   Illinois Department of Revenue to Administer Taxes. The taxes hereby
imposed, and all civil penalties that may be assessed as an incident thereto,
shall be collected and enforced by the Illinois Department of Revenue. The
Illinois Department of Revenue shall have full power to administer and enforce
the provisions of this section. (Ord. 25-14, 9-2-2025)
CHAPTER 12
PEDDLERS, SOLICITORS AND CANVASSERS
SECTION:
3-12-1: Definitions
3-12-2: Permit Required
3-12-3: Permit Application
3-12-4: Criminal History Check And Permit Fees
3-12-5: Application Review And Issuance Of Permit
3-12-6: Permit Denial
3-12-7: Permit Expiration
3-12-8: Carrying And Displaying Of Badges
3-12-9: Transfer Of Permits Or Badges
3-12-10: Canvassers
3-12-11: Entry And Staying Upon Private Premises Unlawful
3-12-12: Hours
3-12-13: Handbills And Flyers
3-12-14: Street Solicitation
3-12-15: Permit Suspension And Revocation
3-12-16: Basis For Suspension Or Revocation
3-12-17: Appeals
3-12-18: Claims Of Exemption
3-12-1: DEFINITIONS:
The following words, terms, and phrases, and their derivations, when used in
this Chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except
where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:
CANVASSER: Any person who attempts to make personal contact with another
(except on premises where that person is employed or resides), for the primary
purpose of:
   A.   Attempting to enlist support for or against a particular religion,
philosophy, ideology, political party, issue, or candidate, even if incidental
to such purpose the canvasser accepts contributions for or against such cause;
and/or
   B.   Distributes a handbill, flyer, pamphlet, or any other type of
literature, advertising a non-commercial event, service or ideal. Canvasser
shall also include any person who seeks charitable contributions for a
patriotic, philanthropic, religious, social, health, welfare, benevolent,
educational, civic, cultural or fraternal cause or ideology.
CANVASSING ACTIVITIES: The actions of a canvasser.
CHIEF OF POLICE: The Chief of Police of the Manteno Police Department or his/
her designee.
CONTRIBUTIONS: Mean and include alms, money, subscriptions, property, or any
other types of donations.
CORPORATE AUTHORITIES: The President and Board of Trustees of the Village of
Manteno.
PEDDLER: Any person who, not having been invited by another, carries or
transports goods, wares, merchandise or personal property of any nature and
offers the same for sale (except on premises where that person is employed or
resides). A Peddler shall also include any person who solicits orders and, as a
separate transaction, makes a subsequent delivery to a purchaser.
PEDDLING ACTIVITIES: The actions of a peddler.
PERSON: Any person, firm, corporation, association, club, society or other
organization.
SOLICITOR: Any person who, not having been invited by another (except on
premises where that person is employed or resides), takes or attempts to take
orders for the sale of goods, merchandise, wares, or other personal property of
any nature for future delivery, or for services performed in the future. A
solicitor shall also include any person who distributes handbills and flyers
advertising a commercial event or service.
SOLICITING ACTIVITIES: The actions of a solicitor.
STREET: Any public street, highway or other thoroughfare primarily intended for
use by motor vehicles. Street shall mean the entire area between a curb-cut,
including but not limited to any and all medians and crosswalks.
STREET SOLICITATION: The act of soliciting, peddling or canvassing in and on a
Village streets or highways.
VILLAGE: The Village of Manteno.
VILLAGE CLERK: The Village Clerk of the Village of Manteno or his/her assigns.
(Ord. 08-07, 7-7-2008; amd. Ord. 22-17, 1-3-2023)
3-12-2: PERMIT REQUIRED:
It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in peddling or solicitation
activities within the Village without first obtaining a permit issued by the
Manteno Police Department. (Ord. 08-07, 7-7-2008; amd. Ord. 22-17, 1-3-2023)
3-12-3: PERMIT APPLICATION:
Any person who desires to engage in peddling or solicitation activities shall
file with the Manteno Police Department an application in writing, on a form to
be furnished by the Manteno Police Department, which shall consist of the
following information:
   (A)   Name, address, age and telephone number of the applicant, which shall
be confirmed through the applicant's driver's license or state identification
card, articles of incorporation, or other legally recognized form of
identification;
   (B)   A brief description of the business or activity;
   (C)   If acting as an employee of an employer, the name, address and
telephone number of the employer; or if acting as an agent, the name, address
and telephone number of the principal who is being represented, with
credentials in written form establishing the relationship and the authority of
the employee or agent to act for the employer or principal, as the case may be;
   (D)   A statement as to whether or not the applicant has been convicted or
pleaded guilty to a felony or misdemeanor, the nature of the offense, and the
date of the conviction or plea;
   (E)   A statement as to whether the applicant has had a permit denied,
suspended or revoked for noncompliance with this Chapter in the past; and,
   (F)   Proof of possession of any license or permit which, under Federal,
state or local law, the applicant is required to have in order to conduct the
proposed business, or which, under any such law, would exempt the applicant
from the licensing requirements of this Chapter. (Ord. 08-07, 7-7-2008; amd.
Ord. 22-17, 1-3-2023)
3-12-4: CRIMINAL HISTORY CHECK AND PERMIT FEES:
No fee shall be due at the time an application is filed with the Manteno Police
Department. The applicant shall pay fifty dollars ($50.00) to the Manteno
Police Department to be fingerprinted for a criminal history check. The
applicant shall pay a fifty dollars ($50.00) permit fee to the Manteno Police
Department to obtain a permit following a criminal history check that reveals
no basis to deny the same unless the applicant has already submitted the permit
fee to obtain a temporary permit. (Ord. 17-29, 2-20-2018; amd. Ord. 22-17, 1-3-
2023)
3-12-5: APPLICATION REVIEW AND ISSUANCE OF PERMIT:
   (A)   Upon receipt of an application, the Chief of Police shall review the
application to determine if all of the information required by this Chapter is
present. If the application has listed all of the information necessary, and
there exists no reason to deny the permit from the face of the application for
the reasons set forth in §
3-12-6 , the Chief of Police shall order the applicant to be fingerprinted for
a criminal history check. The Chief of Police shall deny the permit before a
criminal history check if there exists a reason to deny the same from the face
of the application for the reasons set forth in §
3-12-6 .
   (B)   Upon receipt of the criminal history report, and there otherwise being
no basis to deny the permit for the reasons set forth in §
3-12-6 , the Chief of Police shall issue the permit upon receipt of a fifty
dollars ($50.00) permit fee from the applicant.
   (C)   Any permit issued pursuant to this Chapter shall contain the name,
address and photograph of the permittee, the name of any employer or principal,
the class of permit issued, the date of issuance and the date of expiration.
The permit shall also contain a permit number (which shall be a number matching
a number listed on the application).
   (D)   The Chief of Police shall make a good-faith effort to complete an
application review and advise an applicant of his/her decision within seventy-
two (72) hours of receipt of the application, excepting weekends and holidays.
If, upon the expiration of the seventy-two (72) hour review period, the Chief
of Police has not advised an applicant of his/her decision to grant or deny a
permit, an applicant may request, and the Chief of Police shall be obligated to
issue, a temporary permit upon receipt of a fifty dollars ($50.00) permit fee
from the applicant.
   (E)   If a temporary permit is issued, and further review identifies a basis
for which a permit should be denied, an applicant shall be immediately notified
by telephone that the temporary permit is revoked and his/her application has
been denied. In such instance, thirty dollars ($30.00) of the fifty dollars
($50.00) permit fee shall be returned to the applicant. In no event shall an
application review take longer than seven (7) business days. At the expiration
of seven (7) business days, and provided no oral decision has been made
concerning the issuance of the permit, the applicant may request, and the Chief
of Police shall be obligated to issue a permit to the applicant. Once issued,
the permit shall only be subject to suspension or revocation as provided by §§
3-12-15  and
3-12-16  of this Chapter.
   (F)   The Chief of Police shall notify the applicant of his/her decision to
grant or deny a permit by the telephone number listed on the application. The
Chief of Police shall advise the applicant of the basis for the denial.
   (G)   If an application is incomplete, the Chief of Police shall allow the
applicant an opportunity to provide the information necessary for his/her
review.
   (H)   In the case of a denial, the Chief of Police shall issue a written
decision advising the applicant why the permit was denied. The written decision
shall be mailed to the applicant via U.S. Mail at the address contained on the
application. The written decision shall be postmarked no later than three (3)
business days subsequent to the expiration of the seventy-two (72) hour review
period or the oral advisement of a denial of a permit, whichever is later.
   (I)   A denial of a permit may be appealed in the manner provided in §
3-12-17  of this Chapter.
   (J)   A record of all permits issued and denied pursuant to this Chapter
shall be maintained by the Chief of Police for a period of two (2) years. (Ord.
08-07, 7-7-2008; amd. Ord. 22-17, 1-3-2023)
3-12-6: PERMIT DENIAL:
The Chief of Police may refuse to issue a permit for any of the following
reasons:
   (A)   The location and time of solicitation or peddling, referenced on the
application, is otherwise prohibited by this Chapter;
   (B)   An investigation reveals that the applicant falsified information on
the application;
   (C)   The applicant has been convicted or pleaded guilty to a felony or
misdemeanor involving a sex offense, trafficking in controlled substances,
crimes of dishonesty (e.g. theft, fraud, deceit, misrepresentation, etc.), or
any violent acts against persons or property, within the five (5) years
preceding the date of application;
   (D)   The applicant's failure to provide proof of authority to act on behalf
of an employer or principal; or
   (E)   The applicant's denial of a permit issued under this Chapter within
the immediate past year, unless the applicant can and does show that the basis
for the previous denial no longer exists;
The Chief of Police's denial and the reasons for such disapproval shall be
noted on the application. (Ord. 08-07, 7-7-2008; amd. Ord. 22-17, 1-3-2023)
3-12-7: PERMIT EXPIRATION:
All permits shall list the number of days and dates upon which a solicitor or
peddler is authorized to conduct his/her activities. The permit shall expire on
the date requested by the solicitor or peddler. Provided, however, no permit
shall be valid for more than one year after the date of issuance. No person
shall engage in soliciting/peddling activities without a valid permit. (Ord.
08-07, 7-7-2008)
3-12-8: CARRYING AND DISPLAYING OF BADGES:
Every person required to obtain a permit under this chapter shall carry a badge
on him/herself at all times. The badge shall be affixed to the person in such a
way as to be visible to the public. No solicitor/peddler shall conduct his/her
activities with a badge that is expired. (Ord. 08-07, 7-7-2008)
3-12-9: TRANSFER OF PERMITS OR BADGES:
No permit or badge issued to any one person shall be transferable to another
regardless of affiliation. It shall be unlawful for any person other than the
permittee to use a permit/badge issued under this chapter. (Ord. 08-07, 7-7-
2008)
3-12-10: CANVASSERS:
Canvassers shall be exempt from the permit requirements of this chapter.
Canvassers shall be subject to all other time, place and manner restrictions
provided for in this chapter. (Ord. 08-07, 7-7-2008)
3-12-11: ENTRY AND STAYING UPON PRIVATE PREMISES UNLAWFUL:
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any solicitor, peddler or canvasser to enter
upon any private premises in the village which has posted, at the entry to the
premises, or at the entry to the principal building on the premises, a sign
bearing the words "No Peddlers" or "No Solicitors", or words of similar import.
   (B)   It shall be unlawful for any solicitor, peddler or canvasser to remain
on any private premises once requested to leave by an occupant. Once requested
to leave, a solicitor, peddler or canvasser must do so immediately and
peacefully. (Ord. 08-07, 7-7-2008)
3-12-12: HOURS:
   (A)   Permitted hours for canvassing activities, peddling activities, and
soliciting activities are Monday through Saturday between the hours of nine
o'clock (9:00) A.M. and nine o'clock (9:00) P.M. and Sunday between the hours
of twelve o'clock (12:00) noon and nine o'clock (9:00) P.M.
   (B)   No person shall engage in canvassing activities, peddling activities,
and soliciting activities other than during permitted hours. (Ord. 08-07, 7-7-
2008)
3-12-13: HANDBILLS AND FLYERS:
It shall be unlawful to leave a handbill or flyer upon any premises which is
not securely attached thereto or placed in such a manner to prevent litter.
Provided, however, it shall be unlawful to damage any property in an attempt to
securely attach any handbill or flyer to a premises. (Ord. 08-07, 7-7-2008)
3-12-14: STREET SOLICITATION:
Street solicitation is not permitted in or on any street or highway in the
village. (Ord. 08-07, 7-7-2008)
3-12-15: PERMIT SUSPENSION AND REVOCATION:
   (A)   Any permit issued under this Chapter may be suspended or revoked by
the Chief of Police after notice and a hearing for any basis identified in §
3-12-16  of this Chapter. Notice and a hearing prior to a suspension or
revocation shall not be given if Chief of Police determines that an immediate
suspension or revocation is necessary. In such cases, a post-deprivation
hearing will be provided.
   (B)   The Chief of Police shall provide notice to the permittee via U.S.
Mail setting forth the time and place of the hearing. The notice shall consist
of the charges for which the permit's suspension or revocation is being
considered. The notice shall contain the date(s) on which any charge is alleged
to have occurred along with the name(s) of any witness(es) that will testify at
the hearing. Any written or tangible evidence of the occurrence shall be
identified in the notice.
   (C)   A hearing pursuant to this section shall occur no earlier than seven
(7) days nor later than fourteen (14) days from the date the notice of hearing
is postmarked.
   (D)   The permittee shall be responsible for obtaining a court reporter in
order to preserve the record for appeal.
   (E)   After the hearing, the Chief of Police shall orally advise the
permittee of his/her decision to suspend or revoke a permit under this Chapter.
After the decision has been orally related to the permittee, the Chief of
Police shall issue a written decision setting forth his/her decision and the
basis for the ruling. The written decision shall be mailed to the permittee via
U.S. Mail at the address contained in the application. The written decision
shall be postmarked no later than three (3) business days subsequent to the
hearing. (Ord. 08-07, 7-7-2008; amd. Ord. 22-17, 1-3-2023)
3-12-16: BASIS FOR SUSPENSION OR REVOCATION:
Any permit may be suspended or revoked for the following reasons:
   (A)   Fraud, misrepresentation or false statement contained in an
application;
   (B)   Fraud, misrepresentation or false statement made by the permittee in
the course of conducting solicitation or peddling activities;
   (C)   Conducting peddling or solicitation activities contrary to the
provisions contained in the permit or this Chapter;
   (D)   A conviction of any crime which would otherwise be a basis for denying
a permit application; or
   (E)   Conducting peddling or solicitation activities in such a manner so as
to create a public nuisance, constitute a breach of the peace, or endanger the
health, safety or welfare of the public. (Ord. 08-07, 7-7-2008; amd. Ord. 22-
17, 1-3-2023)
3-12-17: APPEALS:
   (A)   Any person aggrieved by the action or decision of the Chief of Police
to deny, suspend or revoke a permit shall have the right to appeal such action
to the Corporate Authorities within fourteen (14) days from the date on which
the Chief of Police's decision has been mailed to the applicant/permittee. This
date shall be determined by the date on which the written decision was
postmarked. In the event the Chief of Police fails to issue a written decision,
the appellant shall have seventeen days (17) from the date on which he/she was
orally informed of the Chief of Police's decision to deny, suspend or revoke a
permit to appeal that decision.
   (B)   An appeal shall be perfected by filing a written statement with the
Chief of Police setting forth the grounds for the appeal. If a written decision
was provided to the appellant from the Chief of Police, a copy of that decision
shall be attached to the appellant's written statement. After the receipt of
said appeal, the Chief of Police shall schedule the appeal for the next
regularly scheduled meeting of the Corporate Authorities. Provided, however, if
said appeal is received within ninety-six (96) hours of a regularly scheduled
meeting, said appeal shall be heard at the following regularly scheduled
meeting.
   (C)   A hearing shall be set no later than thirty (30) days from the date on
which an appeal is received.
   (D)   Notice of the time and place of the appeal hearing shall be given to
the appellant via U.S. Mail at the address provided on the person's
application.
   (E)   An appellant shall be given notice of the hearing at least seventy-two
(72) hours before the hearing.
   (F)   A decision to affirm or reverse the decision of the Chief of Police
concerning the suspension or revocation of a permit shall be limited to the
record generated at the hearing in front of the Chief of Police.
   (G)   The decision of the corporate authorities of the Village shall be
final and binding on all parties concerned.
   (H)   A decision to affirm or reverse a decision of the Chief of Police
shall be made by a majority vote of the Corporate Authorities present at the
meeting. (Ord. 08-07, 7-7-2008; amd. Ord. 22-17, 1-3-2023)
3-12-18: CLAIMS OF EXEMPTION:
Any person claiming to be legally exempt from the application of this Chapter
shall cite to the Chief of Police the legal authority under which the exemption
is claimed and shall present to the Chief of Police proof of qualification for
such exemption. (Ord. 08-07, 7-7-2008; amd. Ord. 22-17, 1-3-2023)
CHAPTER 13
TAXICABS
SECTION:
3-13-1: Definitions
3-13-2: Taxicab And Taxicab Drivers License Commission
3-13-3: Organization
3-13-4: Meetings
3-13-5: Taxicab Owner's License
3-13-6: Taxicab Driver's License
3-13-7: License Fees
3-13-8: Issuance
3-13-9: Records
3-13-10: Revocation Of License
3-13-11: Service
3-13-12: Exhibiting License
3-13-1: DEFINITIONS:
CLASS A TAXICAB: As used in this chapter shall be construed to mean any taxicab
so constructed as to be intended for the normal carriage of not more than six
(6) persons inclusive of the driver or operator.
CLASS B TAXICAB: As used in this chapter shall mean any taxicab so constructed
as to be intended for the normal carriage of not more than seven (7) persons
inclusive of the driver or operator.
COMMISSION: As used in this chapter shall mean the taxicab and taxicab drivers
license commission as herein created and provided for.
DRIVER: As used in this chapter means every person in charge of or operating
any "taxicab" as herein defined, either as agent, employee or otherwise.
OWNER: As used in this chapter shall be construed to mean any person, firm or
corporation who has the bona fide legal title or control, direction, operation,
maintenance, leasing or the collection of revenues derived from taxicabs
operated for hire on the streets of the village.
TAXICAB: As used in this chapter means all motor vehicles propelled and
operated for passenger hire subject to call from a stand, station or garage or
otherwise operating for hire, except motorbuses running and operating on
established routes, sightseeing buses and funeral vehicles. (1956 Code, Sec.
15-1; amd. Ord. 77-1, 4-18-1977)
3-13-2: TAXICAB AND TAXICAB DRIVERS LICENSE COMMISSION:
There is hereby created a taxicab and taxicab drivers license commission for
the village. The commission shall consist of the president of the board of
trustees of the village and two (2) other members of the board of trustees who
shall be appointed annually on or before April 30 by the president of the board
of trustees and they shall hold office until their successors have been
appointed. (1956 Code, Sec. 15-2)
3-13-3: ORGANIZATION:
The president of the board of trustees shall by virtue of his office be the ex
officio chairman of the commission and shall have the right to vote upon all
matters pertaining to the duties of the commission. All meetings of the
commission shall be called by the chairman and he shall preside thereat. The
village clerk shall by virtue of his office be the ex officio clerk of the
commission and he shall keep and preserve the records thereof, including the
minutes of all meetings, but shall not be entitled to vote upon any of the
questions submitted to or pertaining to the business of the commission. (1956
Code, Sec. 15-3)
3-13-4: MEETINGS:
It shall be the duty of the chairman upon receipt of any application for a
taxicab license as herein provided, to call a meeting of the commission to be
held within fifteen (15) days from the date of the receipt by him of such
application; and he shall inform the clerk of the time and place of such
meetings at least ten (10) days prior to the date thereof. All meetings called
for the purpose of passing upon an application for license shall be public
meetings and notice thereof shall be given by the village clerk as ex officio
clerk of the commission by posting written notices in at least three (3) of the
most public places in the village which notice shall state the time and place
of such meetings and the application to be acted upon. Such notices shall be
posted not less than five (5) days prior to the date of the meeting. The clerk
shall receive the sum of one dollar ($1.00) for posting such notices which
shall be paid by the applicant at the time of filing application. (1956 Code,
Sec. 15-4)
3-13-5: TAXICAB OWNER'S LICENSE:
No person shall operate any taxicab upon the streets of the village without
first having obtained a taxicab license therefor. Any person desiring a license
for any taxicab shall:
   (A)   File an application with the chairman of the commission setting forth
the name, business and residence address of the applicant, a full description,
including make, model, motor, engine number and number of passengers that may
be accommodated in any such motor vehicle for which a license is desired, place
where such motor vehicle is to be kept when not in use, and any such other
information as the commission may from time to time request.
   (B)   File with the application a contract or policy of insurance issued to
the applicant for the full period to be covered by the license sought upon the
motor vehicle for which a license is applied for. Such contract or policy of
insurance shall insure applicant against any liability on account of injury or
death of any passenger using any such motor vehicle and shall insure such
applicant against liability on account of injury or damage to the property of
any person resulting from the operation of such motor vehicle. Said contract or
policy of insurance shall be issued for, and the amount payable thereunder
shall be not less than five thousand dollars ($5,000.00) to any person or ten
thousand dollars ($10,000.00) to more than one person for injury or death
resulting from one accident and shall cover full liability for injury or death
resulting from one accident and shall cover full liability for injury or damage
to property of others.
   (C)   Pay to the village clerk the license fee hereinafter provided for the
full annual period for which such license is issued and as evidence thereof
shall attach the receipt of the village clerk to the application for license
when filing the same. In the event that such license is not issued, such fee
shall be refunded to the applicant.
   (D)   The application for a taxicab license shall, in addition to all other
requirements, contain or have attached thereto a statement, under oath,
alleging that public convenience and necessity within the village require
taxicab service in addition to that then existing and alleging that the
taxicabs then in licensed operation within the village are insufficient or
incapable of adequately rendering such service as public and convenience
require, and stating the facts upon which such allegations are based.
If the commission shall find that such statements and allegations are true in
substance and fact and that all other conditions and provisions of this chapter
have been fully and completely complied with by the applicant, they shall so
find and shall record their findings in their records; and a license shall
thereupon be issued to such applicant for such additional taxicab or taxicabs.
Every license so granted shall entitle the owner of the taxicab for which the
same is issued to operate such taxicab for one current license year. (1956
Code, Sec. 15-5)
3-13-6: TAXICAB DRIVER'S LICENSE:
It shall be unlawful for any person to drive, operate, or be in charge of any
taxicab without first having obtained a license so to do. Applicants for such
license shall file with the president of the board of trustees an application
in writing, stating the experience of the applicant in driving motor vehicles,
the physical condition, including the eyesight and hearing of the applicant,
and whether such person has ever been convicted for violation of the motor
vehicle, or traffic or criminal ordinances, or laws, either village, county,
state or federal; and the number of times, if any, and the various offenses
charged. In case such application is for an original license and not the
renewal of a previously issued license, such application shall be accompanied
by the signed statement of a practicing physician that the applicant is
physically fit to operate a taxicab and has no uncorrected defects in eyesight
and no impairment in hearing. The president of the board of trustees shall
investigate the facts stated in such application and shall not grant a license
to any person who has been convicted of the violation of any criminal law, or
laws against reckless driving, or who is less than twenty one (21) years of
age, or who is not physically or morally a person who should be permitted to
operate a taxicab, or where the safety of the public might be endangered by the
granting of such license. Every license so granted shall entitle the holder
thereof to drive a licensed taxicab for one current year upon the payment of
the license fee. (1956 Code, Sec. 15-6)
3-13-7: LICENSE FEES:
The following license fees shall be paid by all persons licensed under the
provisions of this chapter:
   For each original driver's license or renewal   $ 1.00
   For each class A taxicab license or renewal   20.00
   For each class B taxicab license or renewal   30.00
(1956 Code, Sec. 15-7)
3-13-8: ISSUANCE:
All licenses provided for in this chapter shall be issued by the president of
the board of trustees. (1956 Code, Sec. 15-8)
3-13-9: RECORDS:
There shall be kept in the office of the village clerk a complete record of
each taxicab license and of each license issued to a driver, and of all
renewals, suspensions and revocations thereof, which records shall be kept on
file with the original applications for license. (1956 Code, Sec. 15-9)
3-13-10: REVOCATION OF LICENSE:
The commission shall have the right to at any time examine any taxicab licenses
as herein provided or for which a license is applied for and shall have the
power and duty to recommend the revocation of the license therefor, or to
recommend that the application therefor be refused if such commission shall
find that such taxicab is so unfit for service by reason of physical condition
as to endanger the lives or property of any person upon the streets of the
village or render its further use hazardous to the lives and property of
persons riding therein. Revocation of a license upon the recommendation of the
commission shall be made by notice in writing by the president of the board of
trustees, and transmitted to the owner by registered mail to his last known
address or to the address stated upon the application for the license so
revoked. (1956 Code, Sec. 15-10)
3-13-11: SERVICE:
Every taxicab shall be operated regularly to the extent reasonably necessary to
meet the public demand for taxicab service. In the event that the service of
any taxicab is discontinued excepting on account of strikes, acts of God or
causes beyond the control of the licensee, the commission may give written
notice to the licensee, to restore such taxicab to service and if same is not
so restored to service within five (5) days from the date of such notice the
commission, in its discretion may revoke the license for such taxicab. (1956
Code, Sec. 15-11)
3-13-12: EXHIBITING LICENSE:
Each taxicab license shall be exhibited in a conspicuous place within the
taxicab for which the same is issued. Each driver shall exhibit his license
upon the request of any village, county or state officer or upon the request of
any passenger. (1956 Code, Sec. 15-12)
CHAPTER 14
MOBILE HOME PARKS
(Rep. by Ord. 99-06, 6-21-1999)
CHAPTER 15
WEAPONS
SECTION:
3-15-1: License Required
3-15-2: Application
3-15-3: Fee
3-15-4: Register
3-15-5: Restrictions On Sales And Gifts
3-15-6: Permit
3-15-7: Sales Tax Number
3-15-1: LICENSE REQUIRED:
It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in the business of selling, or to
sell or give away, any pistol, revolver, dagger, stiletto, billy, derringer,
bowie knife, dirk, air rifle, BB gun or other deadly weapon which can be
concealed on the person without securing a license to do so. (1956 Code, Sec.
39-1)
3-15-2: APPLICATION:
All applications shall conform to the general requirements of this code and in
addition shall be approved by the police chief before a license shall issue.
(1956 Code, Sec. 39-2)
3-15-3: FEE:
The annual fee for such deadly weapon license shall be twenty five dollars
($25.00). (1956 Code, Sec. 39-3)
3-15-4: REGISTER:
Every person dealing in the aforementioned deadly weapons at retail, within the
village, shall keep a register of all such weapons sold, loaned, rented or
given away. Such register shall contain the date of the sale, loan or gift,
number of the permit, number of the weapon, name, age and address of the person
receiving same, price and purpose. Such register shall be open to inspection by
the office of the police chief at all reasonable times. (1956 Code, Sec. 39-4)
3-15-5: RESTRICTIONS ON SALES AND GIFTS:
It shall be unlawful for any person to sell, barter or give away to any person
within the village any deadly weapon mentioned in this chapter which can be
concealed on the person without first securing from the police chief a permit
to do so. The police chief may require such information from such applicant as
he deems reasonable and necessary. (1956 Code, Sec. 39-5)
3-15-6: PERMIT:
It shall be unlawful for any person to purchase any deadly weapon mentioned in
this chapter which can be concealed on the person without first securing from
the police chief a permit so to do. The police chief may require such
information from such applicant as he deems reasonable and necessary. No such
permit shall be issued to one convicted of any crime, or to a minor. The police
chief, if satisfied as to the good moral character of the applicant, shall
issue such permit. (Ord. 76-9, 8-16-1976)
3-15-7: SALES TAX NUMBER:
No license to sell under this chapter shall be issued unless the applicant or
such licensee shall first show proof that he has received from the Illinois
department of revenue a retailer's occupation sales tax number. (Ord. 76-9, 8-
16-1976)
CHAPTER 16
WHEEL TAX
SECTION:
3-16-1: Definition; Exceptions
3-16-2: License Required; Nonresidents
3-16-3: Application For License
3-16-4: Issuance Of License
3-16-5: Fees; Proration
3-16-6: Emblem; Display
3-16-7: Sale Of Vehicle
3-16-8: Emblem On Vehicle Licensed; Damage
3-16-9: Transfer
3-16-10: Use Of License Fees
3-16-11: Manufacturers; Dealers
3-16-12: Village Exempt
3-16-1: DEFINITION; EXCEPTIONS:
For the purpose of this chapter a "motor vehicle" is hereby defined as any
vehicle propelled otherwise than by the muscular power of man or animal, except
such as run on rails or tracks.
Nothing contained in this chapter shall be construed as in any manner repealing
or modifying any provisions elsewhere in this code relating to any particular
business now being licensed by the village where wagons or other vehicles are
being used upon the public ways of the village. (1956 Code, Sec. 16-1)
3-16-2: LICENSE REQUIRED; NONRESIDENTS:
It shall be unlawful for any person residing within the village to use, or to
cause, or permit any of his agents or employees to use, any motor vehicle upon
the public ways of the village, unless such vehicle be licensed as hereinafter
provided.
It shall be unlawful for any person not residing within the village to use, or
permit any of his agents or employees to use any motor truck, motor driven
commercial vehicle or motor vehicle which is used for public hire, upon the
public ways of the village unless such vehicle is licensed as hereinafter
provided, or unless such owner shall have obtained a certificate of
registration from the secretary of state of Illinois as by law provided.
It shall be unlawful for any person to use, or cause or permit any of his
agents or employees to use, any vehicle other than a motor vehicle upon the
public ways of the village unless such a vehicle be licensed as hereinafter
provided.
No person living within the village shall be exempt from the operation of this
chapter, or released from the payment of the license fee required, by reason of
the registering of an automobile or other vehicle in another state or
sovereignty beyond the jurisdiction of the state of Illinois, but if such
automobile or other vehicle is used or operated on the public ways of the
village, it shall be subject to the provisions of this chapter, even though it
has been registered in some other district in the United States. (1956 Code,
Sec. 16-2)
3-16-3: APPLICATION FOR LICENSE:
Any person desiring a license for any such motor vehicle or other vehicle shall
file an application with the village clerk upon a form provided therefor, which
shall set forth the name and address of the applicant, a description of the
vehicle for which the license is sought, the place where the same is to be kept
when not in use, the number and the kinds of other vehicles kept by said
applicant at such place and in the case of the application for a license for a
motor vehicle, for what purpose the same is to be used and such other
information as may be prescribed. Such application shall be transmitted to the
president of the board of trustees. (1956 Code, Sec. 16-3)
3-16-4: ISSUANCE OF LICENSE:
Upon the payment by the applicant of the license fee hereinafter provided, the
president of the board of trustees shall issue, or cause to be issued, a
license which shall be attested by the village clerk authorizing the use of
such vehicle within the village. (1956 Code, Sec. 16-4)
3-16-5: FEES; PRORATION:
Annual license fees shall be as follows:
   Motor vehicles, except trucks of 3/4 ton capacity or more   $3.00
   Trucks of 3/4 ton capacity or more   5.00
If such vehicle has been purchased or lawfully acquired by the applicant on or
after July 1 of any current year, the fee to be paid shall be a sum equal to
one-half (1/2) of the annual fee for the balance of any such year. Before any
applicant shall be entitled to a prorated license as provided for in this
subsection, the applicant shall furnish an affidavit satisfactory in form to
the village clerk stating that the vehicle for which the license is applied was
purchased or otherwise obtained by the applicant on or after July 1 of the
current year, and shall exhibit to the village clerk the bill of sale covering
the vehicle for which license is sought. (1956 Code, Sec. 16-5)
3-16-6: EMBLEM; DISPLAY:
The village clerk shall deliver to the holder of any license issued hereunder a
transparent sticker license emblem, which shall bear the words "Vehicle Tax,
Manteno, Illinois" and the numerals designating the year for which such license
is issued, a facsimile signature of the president of the board of trustees and
a number identical with the number of such license.
When such transparent sticker emblem is delivered to any such licensee, it
shall be the duty of such licensee to affix the same in the lower right hand
corner on the inside part of the windshield of such motor vehicle,
approximately one inch (1") from the right and lower sections of the frame of
such windshield.
The village clerk shall change annually the predominant background color of
such transparent sticker license emblem. Said transparent sticker emblem shall
be impervious to weather and incapable of being removed from said windshield
without being destroyed. (1956 Code, Sec. 16-6)
3-16-7: SALE OF VEHICLE:
Immediately upon the sale of any vehicle licensed under this chapter, when such
sale is made prior to the expiration of such license, the vendor shall remove
the transparent sticker license emblem from the vehicle so sold.
Except where a vehicle license has been regularly transferred as hereinafter
provided, it shall be the duty of the purchaser of any used automobile or other
vehicle to remove and deliver to the vendor or the vendor's agent immediately
any transparent sticker license emblem which may be attached to such vehicle at
the time of the purchase thereof, which the vendor of such vehicle may have
refused, failed or omitted to detach from such vehicle as hereinabove required.
It shall be unlawful for any such purchaser to use, sell or offer for sale such
used automobile or other vehicle without first having removed all such
transparent sticker license emblems. (1956 Code, Sec. 16-7)
3-16-8: EMBLEM ON VEHICLE LICENSED; DAMAGE:
It shall be unlawful for any person to affix or cause to be affixed any
transparent sticker license emblem to any automobile or other vehicle other
than the vehicle to which such transparent sticker license emblem was intended
to be affixed at the time of the issuance thereof by the village clerk. (1956
Code, Sec. 16-8)
Any person who shall take, destroy, remove or obliterate any license emblem
provided for in this chapter, without the consent of the owner of the vehicle,
shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor. (1956 Code, Sec. 16-13)
3-16-9: TRANSFER:
Whenever the owner of any vehicle licensed under this chapter, before the
expiration of such license, sells or otherwise disposes of such vehicle, and
thereafter acquires another vehicle and desires to transfer the vehicle license
originally issued for the vehicle disposed of, to such newly acquired vehicle,
such owner shall immediately make application to the village clerk for a
transfer of such vehicle license to the newly purchased vehicle. Said
application shall state the name and address of the licensee and the name and
address of the purchaser of said vehicle, together with a description of the
newly purchased vehicle. Upon surrender of the original license and transparent
sticker, or upon proof that the transparent sticker has been destroyed the
village clerk shall transfer said license to apply to the newly acquired
vehicle upon payment of the proper license fee.
The transfer fee shall be one dollar ($1.00). If the newly acquired vehicle is
of a class requiring the payment of a license fee higher than was paid for the
license originally obtained for the vehicle disposed of, the fee required to be
paid for such transfer shall be a sum equal to the difference between the fee
paid for the original license and the fee fixed for licenses for vehicles of
such class plus the transfer fee of one dollar ($1.00). (1956 Code, Sec. 16-9)
3-16-10: USE OF LICENSE FEES:
All revenues derived from license and transfer fees shall be kept as a separate
fund and used for paying the costs of street and alley improvement and repair.
Such revenue shall be used in the manner provided for in the annual
appropriation bill or in such other manner as the board of trustees may by
ordinance direct. (1956 Code, Sec. 16-10)
3-16-11: MANUFACTURERS; DEALERS:
If any manufacturer or dealer in any of the motor vehicles mentioned in this
chapter shall make application to the village clerk and shall state that he is
a manufacturer operating a plant for the construction of motor vehicles within
the village or is a dealer in such motor vehicles with a salesroom located
within the village, and that he desires a license emblem to be used by him in
testing such motor vehicles or demonstrating same upon the streets of the
village, and that he will use such license emblem only for such purpose, the
village clerk shall, upon the payment of such applicant of the fee hereinafter
set forth, issue to such manufacturer or dealer a transparent sticker license
emblem with a number thereon. Said emblem must be attached to or borne by any
such motor vehicle while being operated upon the streets of the village for the
purpose of testing or demonstrating such vehicle. When any such vehicle is in
use for such purpose and carries such transparent sticker license emblem, no
other license fee shall be collected under the provisions of this chapter.
The annual license fee to be paid under the provisions of this section shall be
ten dollars ($10.00), and said fee shall not be prorated.
Such transparent sticker license emblem shall be used only upon vehicles used
for demonstration purposes, while such vehicles are being so used. Every
manufacturer or dealer applying for such license must submit to the village
clerk satisfactory proof of his status as such manufacturer or dealer.
Provided, that no license emblems shall be issued hereunder unless the
applicant is in possession of a state manufacturer's or dealer's license for
the current year. The total number of demonstrating license emblems that may be
obtained hereunder shall not exceed the number of sets of dealer's license
plates issued by the state.
No demonstrating license emblem shall be used except upon a vehicle operated
under a dealer's license issued by the state, and upon which both of the state
license plates are attached. (1956 Code, Sec. 16-11)
3-16-12: VILLAGE EXEMPT:
All vehicles owned and operated by the village shall be exempt from the
provisions of this chapter. (1956 Code, Sec. 16-12)
CHAPTER 17
COMMUNITY ANTENNA TELEVISION SYSTEM
SECTION:
3-17-1: Definitions
3-17-2: Franchise To Install And Operate
3-17-3: Cable Television Service
3-17-4: Conditions Of Street Occupancy
3-17-5: Safety Requirements
3-17-6: System Construction And Extension
3-17-7: Franchise Payments
3-17-8: Franchise Term; Duration, Termination And Extension
3-17-9: Bonds; Indemnifications; Insurance
3-17-10: Acceptance Of The Franchise
3-17-11: Limitations Of Franchise
3-17-12: Permits And Construction
3-17-13: Miscellaneous Provisions
3-17-14: Repair After Construction Of System
3-17-15: Violations
3-17-16: Severability
3-17-1: DEFINITIONS:
For the purpose of this chapter, the following terms, phrases, words,
abbreviations and their derivations shall have the meanings given herein. When
not inconsistent with the context, words used in the present tense include the
future tense, words in the plural number include the singular number and words
in the singular number include the plural number:
BOARD: The present governing body of the village or any future board
constituting the legislative body of the village.
CABLE TELEVISION SYSTEM, CATV AND CTV: For the purposes of this chapter,
describe a system employing antennas, microwave, wires, wave guide, coaxial
cables, or other conductors, equipment or facilities designed, constructed or
used for the purpose of:
   (A)   Collecting and amplifying local and distant broadcast television radio
signals and distributing and transmitting them.
   (B)   Transmitting original cablecast programming not received through
television broadcast signals.
   (C)   Transmitting television pictures, film and videotape programs not
received through broadcast television signals, whether or not encoded or
processed to permit reception by only selected receivers.
   (D)   Transmitting and receiving all other signals, digital, voice and
audiovisual; provided, however, that any of the services permitted hereunder to
be performed, as described above, shall be those performed by the grantee for
subscribers, as herein defined, in the operation of a cable television or CATV
system franchised by the village and not otherwise.
FRANCHISE: Any authorization granted hereunder in terms of a franchise,
privilege, permit, license or otherwise to construct, operate and maintain a
cable television system within all of the village or such portions thereof as
may be proposed and authorized for cabling. Any such authorization, in whatever
form granted, shall not mean and include any license or permit required for the
privilege of transacting and carrying on a business within the village as
required by other ordinances and laws of this village.
GRANTEE: The person, firm or corporation granted a franchise by the board under
this chapter, and the lawful successor, transferee or assignee of said person,
firm or corporation.
GROSS RECEIPTS: As used in this chapter shall mean any and all compensation, in
whatever form, grant, subsidy, exchange, or otherwise, directly or indirectly
received by a grantee, not including any taxes on services furnished by the
grantee imposed directly on any subscriber or user by a city, county, state or
other governmental unit, and collected by the grantee for such entity.
MAYOR: The village manager, village administrator, or other designation of the
village chief executive officer, or any designee thereof.
PERSON: Any natural person and all domestic and foreign corporations,
associations, syndicates, joint stock corporations, partnerships of every kind,
clubs, business or common law trusts and societies.
PROPERTY OF GRANTEE: All property owned, installed or used within the village
by a grantee in the conduct of a cable television system business under the
authority of a franchise granted pursuant to this chapter.
STREET: The surface, the air space above the surface and the area below the
surface of any public right of way or public place, including public utility
easements.
SUBSCRIBER OR USER: Any person or entity receiving for any purpose any service
of grantee's cable television system.
VILLAGE: The village of Manteno, in its present incorporated form or in any
later reorganized, consolidated, enlarged or reincorporated form. (Ord. 82-1,
2-1-1982)
3-17-2: FRANCHISE TO INSTALL AND OPERATE:
A nonexclusive franchise within the village may be granted by the board to any
person to engage in the business of operating and providing a CATV system in
the village, and for that purpose to erect, install, construct, repair,
replace, reconstruct, maintain and retain in, on, over, under, upon, across and
along any street or streets laid out or dedicated and all extensions thereof
and additions thereto in the village, such poles, wires, cable, conductors,
ducts, conduit, vaults, manholes, pedestals, amplifiers, appliances,
attachments, and other property as may be necessary and appurtenant to the CATV
system; and in addition, so to use, operate and provide similar facilities or
properties rented or leased from other persons, including, but not limited to,
any public utility or other grantee franchised or permitted to do business in
the village. No provision of this chapter may be deemed or construed as to
require the granting of a franchise when in the opinion of the board it is in
the public interest to restrict the number of grantees to one or more. (Ord.
82-1, 2-1-1982)
3-17-3: CABLE TELEVISION SERVICE:
   (A)   Render efficient service, making repairs promptly and interrupting
service only for good cause. Planned interruptions, insofar as possible, shall
be preceded by notice given to subscribers.
   (B)   Operate and maintain its cable television system in full compliance
with the standards set forth by the federal communications commission.
   (C)   Have no obligation to construct or extend the system, nor to provide,
repair, replace, maintain or operate CATV service for any cause beyond
grantee's control, including, without limitation, acts of God, fire, flood,
earthquakes, hurricane, unavoidable casualty, extraordinary delays in
transportation, strikes, lockouts, picketing, boycotts, embargoes, government
orders and other requirements, acts of civil or military authorities,
governmental action, civil commotion, energy shortages, acts or omissions of
carriers or activities or other emergency conditions including weather
conditions incompatible with good quality workmanship. (Ord. 82-1, 2-1-1982)
3-17-4: CONDITIONS OF STREET OCCUPANCY:
   (A)   All transmission and distribution structures, poles, lines and
equipment installed or erected by the grantee within the village shall be so
located as to cause minimum interference with the proper use of streets and
with the rights and reasonable convenience of property owners who adjoin any of
said streets. The CATV system shall be constructed and operated in compliance
with applicable governmental construction and electrical codes.
   (B)   In case of disturbance of any street or paved area, the grantee shall,
at its expense and in a manner approved by the village, replace and restore
such street or paved area in as good condition as theretofore.
   (C)   The grantee shall, at its expense, protect, support, temporarily
disconnect, relocate in the same street or other public place, or remove from
the street or other public place, any property of the grantee when lawfully
required by the village by reason of traffic conditions, public safety, street
vacation, freeway and street construction, change or establishment of street
grade, installation of sewers, drains, gas or water pipes, or any other type of
structures or improvements by the village; but, the grantee shall in all cases
have the right of abandonment of its property, subject to village ordinances,
and if public funds are available to any utility company for the purpose of
defraying the cost of any of the foregoing, such funds shall also be made
available to the grantee.
   (D)   The grantee shall, on the request of any person holding a building
moving permit issued by the village, temporarily raise or lower its wires to
permit the moving of buildings, provided: 1) the expense of such temporary
raising or lowering of wires is paid by said person, including, if required by
the grantee, making such payment in advance; and 2) the grantee is given not
less than three (3) business days' advance notice to arrange for such temporary
wire changes.
   (E)   The grantee shall have the authority to trim trees overhanging any
streets in the franchise area so as to prevent branches from coming in contact
with the grantee's wires and cables, except that at the option of the village,
such trimming may be done by it or under its supervision and direction at the
grantee's expense.
   (F)   Subject to any applicable state or federal regulations or tariffs, the
village shall have the right to make additional use, for any public purpose, or
any poles or conduits controlled or maintained exclusively by or for the
grantee in any street, provided: 1) such use by the village does not interfere
with the use by the grantee, and 2) the village holds the grantee harmless
against and from all claims, demands, causes of actions, suits, actions,
proceedings, damages, costs or liabilities of every kind and nature whatsoever
arising out of such use of said poles or conduits. (Ord. 82-1, 2-1-1982)
3-17-5: SAFETY REQUIREMENTS:
   (A)   The grantee shall at all times employ ordinary care and shall install
and maintain in use commonly accepted methods and devices for preventing
failures and accidents which are likely to cause damage, injuries or nuisances
to the public.
   (B)   All structures and all lines, equipment and connections in, over,
under and upon all streets of the franchise area shall be kept and maintained
in a safe and suitable condition and in good order and repair. (Ord. 82-1, 2-1-
1982)
3-17-6: SYSTEM CONSTRUCTION AND EXTENSION:
   (A)   In those areas of the village where the transmission or distribution
facilities of the respective public utilities providing telephone,
communication and electric services are underground or hereafter are placed
underground, the grantee likewise shall construct, operate and maintain all of
his transmission and distribution facilities underground. The term
"underground" shall include a partial underground system; provided, that upon
obtaining the written approval of the chief administrative officer, amplifiers
in the grantee's transmission and distribution lines may be placed in
appropriate housings upon the surface of the ground.
   (B)   The grantee is hereby authorized to extend the system within the
franchise area to the extent that such extension is or may become technically
and economically feasible.
   (C)   Whenever the grantee shall have received written requests for service
from at least fifteen (15) subscribers within four hundred (400) cable meters
(1,300 cable feet) of its aerial trunk cable, or from at least twenty five (25)
subscribers within four hundred (400) cable meters (1,300 cable feet) of its
underground trunk cable, it shall extend its system to such subscribers solely
for the usual connection and service fees for all subscribers, provided that
such extension is technically and economically feasible. The four hundred
meters (400 m) shall be measured in extension length of grantee's cable
required for service located within the public way or easement and shall not
include length of necessary drop to the subscriber's home or premises.
   (D)   No person in the grantee's service area shall be arbitrarily refused
service; but in recognition of the capital costs involved in unusual
circumstances, including, without limitation, instances where the distance from
distribution cable to connection of service to subscribers is more than forty
five meters (45 m) (150 cable feet) or when a subscriber density exists less
than the density specified hereinabove, service may be made available on the
basis of costs of materials, labor and easements in orders to prevent
inequitable burdens on cable subscribers in more densely populated areas.
   (E)   For all residential structures hereinafter erected which are to be
served by underground utilities, the developer of the subdivision or
development may acquire CATV service for this development under the following
conditions; but otherwise the grantee shall not be obligated to construct a
CATV system in such new development: Developer shall perform all trenching and
backfilling necessary for the provision of cable television service, including
furnishing of any imported backfill material required, and will furnish and
install for the grantee any necessary distribution conduit and substructures,
including pedestals, required in accordance with the grantee's plans and
specifications. Developer may enter into a written agreement with the grantee
whereby such costs may be reimbursed to the developer by grantee at the rate of
fifty percent (50%) of basic subscriber receipts generated from CATV service
supplied within the development over a period not to exceed three (3) years.
In addition to providing plans and specifications to the developer, the grantee
shall inspect the facilities required hereunder and certify to the village
prior to final approval of the subdivision or development that the facilities
required herein are properly installed. The village shall have the right to
review and require its approval of the maps and specifications provided by the
grantee. The cost of that portion of an extension to a subdivision or
development from the grantee's existing facilities in excess of sixty meters
(60 m) (200 feet) outside the boundaries of the subdivision or development
shall be borne by the developer. Facilities installed hereunder shall be owned,
operated and maintained by grantee. (Ord. 82-1, 2-1-1982)
3-17-7: FRANCHISE PAYMENTS:
   (A)   In consideration of the granting and exercise of a franchise to use
the streets, as herein defined, for the operation of a cable television system,
any grantee shall pay to the village, during the life of the franchise, a
percentage of three percent (3%) of its gross receipts. Sales taxes, use or
other taxes levied on a per subscriber basis and collected by the grantee shall
be deducted from the gross receipts in computing any sums due to the village.
   (B)   The percentage payments shall be made annually within thirty (30) days
after the expiration of any calendar year or portion thereof during which such
franchise is in force.
   (C)   At the time of payment, grantee shall provide the village an annual
summary report in respect of gross receipts received during the preceding year.
(Ord. 82-1, 2-1-1982)
3-17-8: FRANCHISE TERM; DURATION, TERMINATION AND EXTENSION:
   (A)   The franchise granted by the board under this chapter shall be for a
term of twenty (20) years from the date of its acceptance by the grantee.
   (B)   The village may terminate any franchise granted pursuant to the
provisions of this chapter in the event of the wilful failure, refusal or
neglect by grantee to do or comply with any material requirement or limitation
contained in this chapter.
   (C)   The president may make written demand that the grantee do or comply
with any such requirement, limitation, term, condition, rule or regulation. If
the failure, refusal or neglect of the grantee continues for a period of thirty
(30) days following such written demand, the president may place his request
for termination of the franchise upon the next regular board meeting agenda.
The president shall cause to be served upon such grantee, at least ten (10)
days prior to the date of such board meeting, a written notice of his intent to
request such termination, and the time and place of the meeting, notice of
which shall be published by the village clerk at least once ten (10) days
before such meeting in a newspaper of general circulation within the village.
   (D)   The board shall consider the request of the president and shall hear
any persons interested therein, including the grantee, and shall determine, in
its discretion, whether or not any failure, refusal or neglect by the grantee
was with just cause.
   (E)   If such failure, refusal or neglect by the grantee was with just
cause, the board shall direct the grantee to comply within such time and manner
and upon such terms and conditions as are reasonable.
   (F)   If the board shall determine such failure, refusal or neglect by the
grantee was without just cause, then the board may, by resolution, declare that
the franchise of such grantee shall be terminated and forfeited unless there be
compliance by the grantee within such period as the board may fix.
   (G)   The termination and forfeiture of any franchise shall in no way affect
any of the rights of the village under the franchise or any provision of law.
   (H)   Prior to expiration, any franchise granted hereunder may be extended
for a term or terms of not less than five (5) years duration which, in the
opinion of the board, would serve the public interest. The procedure to
consider such an extension shall be as follows:
      1.   During the sixteenth year of the term of this franchise, or sixty
(60) months prior to the expiration of any extended term thereof, the board
shall review the performance of the grantee and shall determine whether the
grantee has satisfactorily performed its obligations under the franchise. To
determine satisfactory performance, the board shall look at technical
developments and performance of system, programming, other services offered,
cost of service, and any other particular requirement set forth in the
resolution. If the board finds the grantee's performance satisfactory, the
franchise may be extended pursuant to an amendment to the chapter.
      2.   In the event the current grantee is determined by the board to have
performed unsatisfactorily, or, in the event that the board fails to make a
determination prior to the last day of the sixteenth year of this franchise, or
at least forty eight (48) months prior to the expiration of any extended term
hereof, as the case may be, which failure shall be deemed a refusal to extend
the term of this franchise, then the grantee may sell all of its equipment,
hardware and property owned, installed or used by it in the conduct of its
rights under the franchise for the unexpired term of said franchise to a third
party and the approval of the board to such sale and transfer shall not be
unreasonably withheld. In the event that the grantee shall give notice to the
village of the proposed sale and request approval of the village thereto, then
the village shall have the sole option to approve such sale or to purchase all
of grantee's equipment and property owned, installed or used by grantee in the
conduct of its CATV business in the village at a price equal to the greater of:
a) The price to be paid by the prospective third party purchaser pursuant to
the provisions of the preceding sentence; or b) the fair market value as
determined by three (3) independent appraisers, one of which shall be selected
by the board, one of which shall be selected by the grantee, and the third to
be selected by the first two (2) appraisers; provided, however, if the village
has failed at any time to grant upon the request of grantee a rate increase
comparable to rates of other similar systems and in any event a rate which will
provide a reasonable rate of return on assets in service to the franchise, then
such appraisal shall be based upon the assumption that grantee is, at the time
of appraisal, receiving the rate increase so requested. (Ord. 82-1, 2-1-1982)
3-17-9: BONDS; INDEMNIFICATIONS; INSURANCE:
   (A)   Performance Bond To The Village: Upon being granted a franchise, and
upon the filing of acceptance required under this chapter, the grantee shall
file with the village clerk and shall thereafter, annually, during the entire
term of such franchise, maintain in full force and effect a corporate surety
bond, cash or other adequate surety agreement in the amount of thirty five
thousand dollars ($35,000.00). The bond or agreement shall be so conditioned
that in the event that grantee shall fail to comply with any one or more of the
provisions of this chapter, or of such franchise, then there shall be
recoverable jointly and severally from the principal and surety any damages or
loss, or costs suffered or incurred by the village as a result thereof,
including attorney fees and costs of any action or proceeding, and including
the full amount of any compensation, indemnification, cost of removal or
abandonment of any property or other costs which may be in default, up to the
full principal amount of such bond. Said condition shall be a continuing
obligation during the entire term of such franchise and thereafter until
grantee shall have satisfied in full any and all obligations to the village
which arise out of or pertain to said franchise. Neither the provisions of this
chapter, nor any bond accepted by the village pursuant hereto, nor any damages
recovered by the village thereunder, shall be construed to excuse faithful
performance by the grantee or limit the liability of the grantee under any
franchise issued pursuant to this chapter or for damages either to the full
amount of the bond, or otherwise.
   (B)   Hold Harmless: Grantee shall indemnify and hold harmless the village,
its officers, boards, commissions, agents and employees against and from any
and all claims, demands, causes of actions, actions, suits, proceedings,
damages (including, but not limited to, damages to village property and damages
arising out of copyright infringements, and damages arising out of any failure
by grantee to secure consents from the owners, authorized distributors or
licensees of programs to be delivered by grantee's cable television system),
costs or liabilities (including costs or liabilities of the village with
respect to its employees), of every kind and nature whatsoever, including, but
not limited to, damages for injury or death or damage to person or property,
and against all liability to others, and against any loss, cost and expense
resulting or arising out of any of the same, including any attorney fees,
accountant fees, expert witness or consultant fees, court costs, per diem
expense, traveling and transportation expense, or other costs of expense which
may accrue to or be suffered or claimed by any person or persons arising out of
or pertaining to the negligence of the grantee in the ownership, construction,
repair, replacement, maintenance and operation of said cable television system,
provided that the village gives the grantee prompt notice of any such claims,
actions and suits, in writing, without limitation. Any and all claims, demands,
causes of actions, actions, suits, proceedings, damages, cost or liabilities
resulting from use of the cable television system by the village, its agents
and employees, shall be the sole liability and responsibility of the village.
   (C)   Insurance Required: Upon being granted a franchise, and upon the
filing of the acceptance required under this chapter hereof, the grantee shall
file with the village clerk and shall thereafter during the entire term of such
franchise maintain in full force and effect at its own cost and expense each of
the following policies of insurance:
      1.   General comprehensive liability insurance in the amount of one
million dollars ($1,000,000.00), together with bodily injury liability
insurance in the amount of not less than one million dollars ($1,000,000.00)
for injuries including accidental death, to any one person and subject to the
same limit for each person in an amount not less than one million dollars
($1,000,000.00) on account of any one occurrence, and property damage liability
insurance in any amount not less than fifty thousand dollars ($50,000.00)
resulting from any occurrence; provided, however, as follows:
         (a)   The village shall be named as an additional insured in any of
said insurance policies; and
         (b)   Where such insurance is provided by a policy which also covers
grantee or any other entity or person, it shall contain the standard cross
liability endorsement. (Ord. 82-1, 2-1-1982)
3-17-10: ACCEPTANCE OF THE FRANCHISE:
   (A)   No franchise granted under this chapter shall become effective for any
purpose unless and until written acceptance thereof shall have been filed with
the village clerk. Written acceptance, which shall be in the form and substance
approved by the village attorney, shall also be and operate as an acceptance of
each and every term and condition and limitation contained in this chapter, or
in such franchise, or otherwise specified as herein provided.
   (B)   The written acceptance shall be filed by the grantee not later than
one minute after twelve o'clock (12:01) P.M. of the thirtieth day next
following the effective date of the ordinance granting such franchise.
   (C)   In default of the filing of such written acceptance, as herein
required, the grantee shall be deemed to have rejected and repudiated the
franchise. Thereafter, the acceptance of the grantee shall not be received nor
filed by the village clerk. The grantee shall have no rights, remedies or
redress in the premises, unless and until the board, by resolution, shall
determine that such acceptance be received or filed, and then upon such terms
and conditions as the board may impose. (Ord. 82-1, 2-1-1982)
3-17-11: LIMITATIONS OF FRANCHISE:
   (A)   Every franchise granted under this chapter shall be nonexclusive.
   (B)   Any such franchise shall be a privilege to be held in personal trust
by the original grantee. It cannot in any event be sold, transferred, leased,
assigned or disposed of, in whole or in part, either by forced or involuntary
sale, or by voluntary sale, merger, consolidation or otherwise, other than to a
person or entity controlling, controlled by or under common control with the
grantee, without prior consent of the board expressed by resolution and then
only under such conditions as may therein be prescribed. The said consent of
the board may not be unreasonably refused; provided, however, the proposed
assignee must agree in writing to comply with all provisions of the ordinance;
and provided, further, that no such consent shall be required for a transfer in
trust, mortgage or other hypothecation, in whole or in part to secure on
indebtedness.
   In the event that grantee is a corporation, prior approval of the village
board, expressed by ordinance, shall be required where there is an actual
change in control where ownership of more than fifty percent (50%) of the
voting stock of grantee is acquired by a person or group of persons acting in
concert, none of whom already own fifty percent (50%) or more of the voting
stock, singly or collectively. Any such acquisition occurring without prior
approval of the village board shall constitute a failure to comply with a
provision of the chapter within the meaning of section
3-17-8 of this chapter.
   (C)   Any right or power in, or duty impressed upon, any officer, employee,
department or board of the village shall be subject to transfer by the village
to any other officer, employee, department or board of the village.
   (D)   The grantee shall at all times during the life of this franchise be
subject to all lawful exercise of the police power by the village. The village
reserves the right to adopt from time to time, in addition to the provisions
herein contained, such ordinances as may be necessary to the exercise of police
power. Such regulation shall be reasonable and not in derogation of the rights
herein granted, nor in conflict with the laws of the state or other local or
federal laws or regulations.
   (E)   Any such franchise granted shall not relieve the grantee of any
obligations involved in obtaining pole or conduit space from any department of
the village, utility company, or from other maintaining utilities in streets.
(Ord. 82-1, 2-1-1982)
   (F)   Rates:
      1.   Prior to granting any franchise hereunder the board, by resolution,
shall approve all rates and charges for service, herein defined, allowable to
grantee, such as:
         (a)   Charges for installation (single dwelling only) – twenty dollars
($20.00).
         (b)   Subscriber rates – ten dollars fifty cents ($10.50).
         (c)   Service charges for separate classifications of service (e.g.,
additional connections) – two dollars fifty cents ($2.50).
         (d)   Connector deposit – twenty five dollars ($25.00).
The above amendments are made by the village board with the understanding and
upon the condition that franchisee shall provide an additional four (4)
channels to the subscriber of said service and same shall be available for use
on or before June 1, 1986. (Ord. 85-16, 4-21-1986)
      2.   Absent actions resulting in reassignment of jurisdiction to approve
increases in rates for basic subscriber services to some other authority, such
rates shall be subject to modification upon approval by the council by
resolution in accordance with the following procedures:
         (a)   Not more than once in any calendar year, grantee may petition
the village board for increases in all or any part of its rates. Such petition
shall include a revised rate schedule and justification therefor. Such petition
shall be accompanied by a current balance sheet and statement of earnings for
grantee's CATV operation within the village with supporting schedules of income
and expenses.
         (b)   Within sixty (60) calendar days following the receipt of a
request for a change in rates, the board may conduct a public hearing thereon,
or approve the rate change as presented. If a public hearing is held then
within thirty (30) calendar days following the public hearing the board, by
resolution, shall approve, deny or modify the requested change in rates which
resolution shall include appropriate findings of fact in connection therewith
if the petition is denied or modified. If the village fails to reach a decision
within ninety (90) calendar days following receipt of a request for change in
rates, the proposed revised rate schedule shall be deemed approved.
         (c)   Grantee shall be entitled to fair and reasonable rates and
charges or basic CATV service no higher than necessary to costs of service,
assuming efficient and economical management including a fair return on the
fair value of the properties devoted to such service, such rates and charges
not to be unreasonably discriminatory. The rates and charges for which village
approval is required shall be limited to basic subscriber service.
         (d)   Not less than thirty (30) calendar days in advance of the
offering of any services or equipment, other than basic subscriber service
including expanded service, there shall be filed with the village a schedule of
the rates and charges and the rules relating to such services or equipment.
Within thirty (30) calendar days prior to the effective date thereof, there
shall be filed with the village changes to such schedule of rates and charges.
(Ord. 82-1, 2-1-1982)
3-17-12: PERMITS AND CONSTRUCTION:
   (A)   Within thirty (30) days after acceptance of any franchise, the grantee
shall proceed with due diligence to apply for all necessary permits and
authorizations which are required in the conduct of its business, including,
but not limited to, any utility joint use attachment agreements, microwave
carrier licenses, and any other permits, licenses and authorizations to be
granted by duly constituted regulatory agencies having jurisdiction over the
operation of cable television systems, or associated microwave transmission
facilities.
   (B)   Within ninety (90) days after obtaining all necessary permits,
licenses and authorization, including right of access to poles and conduits,
grantee shall commence construction and installation of the cable television
system.
   (C)   Within two hundred ten (210) days after the commencement of
construction and installation of the system, grantee shall proceed to render
service to subscribers, and the completion of the installation and construction
shall be pursued with reasonable diligence thereafter, so that service to all
of the areas designated and scheduled on the map and plan of construction made
part of the franchise shall be provided as set forth therein; provided,
however, that grantee shall in all events meet and comply with any construction
requirements set down by the FCC or any other applicable regulatory authority.
   (D)   Failure on the part of the grantee to commence and diligently pursue
each of the foregoing requirements, and to complete each of the foregoing
requirements and to complete each of the matters set forth herein, shall be
grounds for termination of such franchise. By resolution, the board, in its
discretion, may extend the time for the commencement and completion of
installation and construction for additional periods in the event the grantee,
acting in good faith, experiences delays by reason of circumstances beyond his
control.
   (E)   Grantee shall utilize existing poles, conduits and other facilities
whenever feasible or practical; and shall not construct or install any new,
different or additional poles, conduits or other facilities whether on public
property or on privately owned property.
   (F)   In the event that:
      1.   The use of any part of the system of grantee is discontinued for any
reason for a continuous period of thirty (30) days without prior written notice
to and approval by the village; or
      2.   Any part of such system has been installed in any street or other
area without complying with the requirements hereof; or
      3.   Any franchise shall be terminated, canceled or shall expire, then
the grantee shall, at the option of the village and at the expense of the
grantee and at no expense to the village, and upon demand of the village,
promptly remove from any streets or other area all property of grantee except
the underground plant which may be abandoned in place, and grantee shall
promptly restore the street or other area from which such property has been
removed to such reasonable condition as the president shall approve.
The board may, upon written application therefor by grantee, approve the
abandonment of nonunderground property in place by grantee and under such terms
and conditions as the board may prescribe. Upon abandonment of any such
property in place, grantee shall cause to be executed, acknowledged and
delivered to the village such instruments as the village attorney shall
prescribe and approve, transferring and conveying the ownership of such
property to the village. (Ord. 82-1, 2-1-1982)
3-17-13: MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS:
   (A)   When not otherwise prescribed herein, all matters herein required to
be filed with the village shall be filed with the village clerk.
   (B)   The grantee shall provide, without charge, one outlet of basic CATV
service to each governmental office building, fire station, police station and
public school building that is passed by the cable. The distribution of the
cable facility inside such buildings and the extent thereof shall be at the
option, duty and expense of the building owner.
   (C)   In the case of any emergency or disaster, the grantee shall, upon
request of the village, make available its facilities to the village for
emergency use during the emergency or disaster period.
   (D)   Grantee shall be prohibited from directly or indirectly doing any of
the following:
      1.   Engaging in the business of selling at retail, leasing, renting,
repairing or servicing of television sets or radios.
      2.   Imposing a fee or charge for any service or repair to subscriber
owned receiving devices except for the connection of its service, for service
or repair to grantee furnished, subscriber owned converters or decoders, or for
the determination by the grantee of the quality of its signal to the recipients
thereof.
      3.   Soliciting, referring or causing or permitting the solicitation or
referral of any subscriber to persons engaged in any business herein prohibited
to be engaged in by grantee.
      4.   Providing information concerning the viewing patterns of
identifiable individual subscribers to any person, group or organization for
any purpose.
   (E)   If the federal communications commission or the public utilities
commission of the state of Illinois, or any other federal or state body or
agency, shall now or hereafter exercise any paramount jurisdiction over the
subject matter of any franchise granted under this chapter, then to the extent,
such jurisdiction shall preempt or preclude the exercise of like jurisdiction
by the village, the jurisdiction of the village shall cease and no longer
exist.
   (F)   No person, firm or corporation within the service area of the grantee,
and where trunk lines are in place, shall be refused service; provided,
however, that the grantee shall not be required to provide service to any
subscriber who does not pay the applicable connection fee or service charge.
   (G)   If at any time the grantee's cable and/or other equipment is
disturbed, damaged or severed, the cost of repair shall be paid by the party
responsible for said damage. The grantee may charge the responsible party for
the time and materials expended for repair of said damage. The village will
cooperate with the grantee to assist in enforcing any charge or penalty arising
from cable severing or other damage to grantee's property. (Ord. 82-1, 2-1-
1982)
3-17-14: REPAIR AFTER CONSTRUCTION OF SYSTEM:
Grantee shall complete all rehabilitation of streets and rights of way and
private property disturbed during the construction of the system on or before
October 1, 1984. (Ord. 82-1, 2-1-1982)
3-17-15: VIOLATIONS:
   (A)   From and after the effective date of this chapter, it shall be
unlawful for any person to construct, install or maintain within any public
street in the village, or within any other public property of the village, or
within any privately owned area within the village which has not yet become a
public street but is designated or delineated as a proposed public street on
any tentative subdivision map approved by the village, any equipment or
facilities for distributing any television signals or radio signals through a
cable television system, unless a franchise authorizing such use of such street
or property or area has first been obtained pursuant to the provisions of this
chapter, and unless such franchise is in full force and effect.
   (B)   It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to make or
use any unauthorized connection, whether physically, electrically,
acoustically, inductively or otherwise, with any part of a franchised cable
television system within this village for the purpose of enabling himself or
others to receive or use any television signal, radio signal, picture, program
or sound, without payment to the owner of said system.
   (C)   It shall be a misdemeanor for any person, without the consent of the
owner, to wilfully tamper with, remove or injure any cable, wires or equipment
used for distribution of television signals, radio signals, pictures, programs
or sound. (Ord. 82-1, 2-1-1982)
3-17-16: SEVERABILITY:
If any section, subsection, sentence, clause or phrase of this chapter is for
any reason held illegal, invalid or unconstitutional by the decision of any
court or regulatory tribunal of competent jurisdiction, such decision shall not
affect the validity of the remaining portions hereof. The board hereby declares
that it would have passed this chapter and each section, subsection, sentence,
clause and phrase hereof, irrespective of the fact that any one or more
sections, subsections, sentences, clauses or phrases be declared illegal,
invalid or unconstitutional. The invalidity of any portion of this chapter
shall not abate, reduce or otherwise affect any consideration or other
obligation required of the grantee of any franchise granted hereunder. (Ord.
82-1, 2-1-1982)
CHAPTER 18
AMUSEMENT DEVICES; VENDING MACHINES
SECTION:
3-18-1: Definitions Of Terms
3-18-2: Gambling Devices Prohibited (Rep. by Ord. 12-02, 5-7-2012)
3-18-3: License Required; Exception
3-18-4: Application For License
3-18-5: Inspection
3-18-6: License Fees
3-18-7: Display Of License
3-18-8: Revocation Of License
3-18-9: Seizure And Destruction Of Machine Or Device (Rep. by Ord. 12-02, 5-7-
2012)
3-18-10: Penalty
3-18-11: Injunctive Relief
3-18-1: DEFINITIONS OF TERMS:
As used in this chapter, unless the context otherwise indicates:
CIGARETTE VENDING MACHINE: Any automatic vending machine used for the sale of
cigarettes and automatic vending machines used for the sale of cigarettes and
matches, and controlled by the insertion of a coin or coins. It shall not
include machines or devices used solely for the vending of service, food and
confections.
JUKEBOX: Any music vending machine, contrivance or device which, upon the
insertion of a coin, slug, token, plate, disk, or key into any slot, crevice or
other opening, or by the payment of any price operates or may be operated, for
the emission of songs, music or similar amusement.
MECHANICAL OR ELECTRONIC AMUSEMENT MACHINE OR DEVICE: Any machine or device
which, upon the insertion of a coin, slug, token, plate or disk, or by the
payment of any price may be operated by the public generally by manipulating
special equipment thereby a score is established, the object of which is to
secure a special number or numbers or a high total score, whether a prize is
offered or not, when the element of skill in such manipulation predominates
over chance or luck. It shall include, but not be limited to, pinball machines,
video computer machines, skillball machines, mechanical grab machines,
mechanical or electronic baseball, basketball or football machines or devices.
PERSON, FIRM, CORPORATION OR ASSOCIATION: As used herein, shall include the
following: any person, firm, corporation or association which owns, leases,
maintains or displays any mechanical or electronic amusement machine or device;
the person, firm, corporation or association in whose place of business any
such machine or device is placed for use by the public; and the person, firm,
corporation or association having control over such machine or device;
provided, however, that the payment of such fee by any person, firm,
corporation or association enumerated herein shall be deemed a compliance with
this chapter. (Ord. 81-2, 4-6-1981)
3-18-2: GAMBLING DEVICES PROHIBITED:
(Rep. by Ord. 12-02, 5-7-2012)
3-18-3: LICENSE REQUIRED; EXCEPTION:
Any person, firm, corporation or association displaying for public patronage or
keeping for operation any "cigarette vending machine", "jukebox", mechanical or
electronic machine or device for profit as defined by section
3-18-1 of this chapter, shall be required to obtain a license from the village
upon payment of a license fee.
Application for such license shall be made to the village clerk. Each license
shall become effective as of May 1 of each year and expire as of the following
April 30. (Ord. 81-2, 4-6-1981)
Any person who owns or is leasing his own business located within the village
may own and display one machine as described above without the necessity of
obtaining a license. (Ord. 84-3, 6-4-1984)
3-18-4: APPLICATION FOR LICENSE:
The application for such license shall contain the following information:
   (A)   The name, address, age, date and place of birth, social security
number and business identification number of each person having a legal or
equitable interest in a proprietorship or partnership applying for a license.
   (B)   The name, address, age, date and place of birth, social security
number and business identification number of any person or corporation holding
five percent (5%) or more of the outstanding shares of a corporation making
application.
   (C)   A list of all criminal convictions of any of the persons, entities or
corporations listed in subsections (A) and (B) of this section, together with
the date and place of their convictions and the disposition thereof.
   (D)   The place where each machine or device is to be displayed or operated
and the business conducted at that place.
   (E)   A description of each machine or device to be covered by the license,
mechanical features, name of manufacturer and serial number.
No license shall be issued to any applicant unless he shall be over twenty one
(21) years of age and a citizen of the United States. (Ord. 81-2, 4-6-1981)
3-18-5: INSPECTION:
Application for a license shall be made out in triplicate, one copy being
referred to the chief of police and another copy to the village fire inspector.
   (A)   The chief of police shall investigate the location wherein it is
proposed to operate such machine(s) or device(s), and conduct a background
investigation of each person named in subsections
3-18-4(A) and (B) of this chapter of the application. The board of trustees
shall either approve or disapprove the application. Conviction of a crime or
the commission of an act of moral turpitude by any person named in the
application shall be grounds for disapproving the application.
The board of trustees may consider other grounds in approving or disapproving
the application other than the grounds stated aforesaid.
   (B)   The fire inspector shall inspect all wiring, the connections to the
machine(s) or device(s), determine if the same complies with the electrical
code of the village 1 . (Ord. 81-2, 4-6-1981)
 
Notes
1 1. See section
  8-1-13 of this code.
3-18-6: LICENSE FEES:
Every applicant, before being granted a license, shall pay the following annual
fees in order to operate or maintain the operation for each "cigarette vending
machine", "jukebox" or "mechanical or electronic amusement machine or device"
as defined in section
3-18-1 of this chapter:
Annual fee for original or renewed license:
    Cigarette vending machine                        $250.00
    Jukebox                                          500.00
    Mechanical or electronic amusement machine or dev500.00
In addition, the following fee shall be paid:
    Cigarette vending machine                        10.00 per machine
    Jukebox                                          20.00 per machine
    Mechanical or electronic amusement machine or dev20.00 per machine
 
(Ord. 09-34, 4-5-2010)
3-18-7: DISPLAY OF LICENSE:
   (A)   The license or licenses herein provided for shall be posted
permanently or conspicuously at the location of the machine(s) or device(s) in
the premises wherein the machine(s) or device(s) is to be operated or
maintained to be operated.
   (B)   Each machine or device shall have a village sticker as designated by
the village clerk, affixed thereto in a prominent or conspicuous location.
(Ord. 81-2, 4-6-1981)
3-18-8: REVOCATION OF LICENSE:
Every license issued under this chapter is subject to the right, which is
hereby expressly reserved, to revoke the same should the licensee directly or
indirectly, permit the operation of any cigarette vending machine, jukebox or
mechanical or electronic amusement machine or device, contrary to the
provisions of this chapter, the ordinances of the village, or the laws of the
state. Said license may be revoked by the board of trustees after written
notice to the licensee, which notice shall specify the ordinance or law
violations with which the licensee is charged, if after a hearing the licensee
is found to be guilty of such violations. Ten (10) days' notice of the hearing
shall be given the licensee. At such hearing the licensee and his attorney may
present and submit evidence and witnesses in his defense. (Ord. 81-2, 4-6-1981)
3-18-9: SEIZURE AND DESTRUCTION OF MACHINE OR DEVICE:
(Rep. by Ord. 12-02, 5-7-2012)
3-18-10: PENALTY:
Any person, firm, corporation or association violating any of the provisions of
this chapter, in addition to the revocation of his or its license, shall be
liable to a fine or penalty as set forth in section
1-4-1 of this code. Each day of noncompliance or violation shall constitute a
separate offense. (Ord. 81-2, 4-6-1981; amd. Ord. 99-09, 8-2-1999)
3-18-11: INJUNCTIVE RELIEF:
In the event any violation of this chapter is of a continuing nature, the chief
of police is hereby authorized to seek an injunction in the circuit court to
enjoin the operation of the offending amusement establishment as a nuisance and
the operation of the mechanical or electronic amusement device(s), cigarette
machine(s) or jukebox(es) located therein. Said chief of police shall bring
said action in the name of the village. (Ord. 81-2, 4-6-1981)
CHAPTER 19
AMUSEMENT ESTABLISHMENTS
SECTION:
3-19-1: Definitions
3-19-2: Unobstructed View Of Premises
3-19-3: Penalty
3-19-4: Injunctive Relief
3-19-1: DEFINITIONS:
AMUSEMENT ESTABLISHMENT: Any building, tent, structure or any part thereof, of
any kind, which houses or contains more than three (3) mechanical or electronic
amusement devices, maintained, displayed or operated for profit.
MECHANICAL OR ELECTRONIC AMUSEMENT DEVICE: Any machine or device which, upon
the insertion of a coin, slug, token, plate or disc, or by payment of any
price, may be operated by the public generally by manipulating special
equipment and thereby a score is established, the object of which is to secure
a special number or numbers or a high total score, whether a prize is offered
or not, when the element of skill in which such manipulation predominates over
chance or luck. It shall include, but not be limited to, pinball machines,
video computer machines, skillball machines, mechanical grab machines,
mechanical or electronic baseball, basketball or football machines and
mechanical or electronic card game machines. (Ord. 81-3, 4-6-1981)
3-19-2: UNOBSTRUCTED VIEW OF PREMISES:
In the premises upon which an amusement establishment is maintained and
operated, no screen, blind, curtain, partition, article or thing shall be
permitted in the windows, upon the doors of such licensed premises nor inside
such premises, which shall prevent a clear view into the interior of such
licensed premises from the street, road, parking area or sidewalk at all times,
and no booth, screen, partition, or other obstruction nor any arrangements of
lights or lighting shall be permitted in or about the interior of the licensed
premises which shall prevent a full view of the entire interior of such
premises from the street, road, parking area, or sidewalk, and the premises
must be so located that there shall be a full view of the entire interior of
such premises from the street, road, parking area or sidewalk. All rooms where
an amusement establishment is operated and maintained upon the premises shall
be continuously lighted during business hours by natural light or artificial
white light so that all parts of the interior of the premises are clearly
visible. (Ord. 81-3, 4-6-1981)
3-19-3: PENALTY:
Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter, in addition to the
revocation of his license, shall be liable to a fine or penalty as set forth in
section
1-4-1 of this code. Each day of noncompliance or violation shall constitute a
separate offense. (Ord. 81-3, 4-6-1981; amd. Ord. 99-09, 8-2-1999)
3-19-4: INJUNCTIVE RELIEF:
In the event any violation of this chapter is of a continuing nature, the chief
of police is hereby authorized to seek an injunction in the circuit court to
enjoin the operation of the offending amusement establishment as a nuisance and
the operation of the mechanical or electronic amusement device(s), cigarette
machine(s) or jukebox(es) located therein. Said chief of police shall bring
said action in the name of the village. (Ord. 81-3, 4-6-1981)
CHAPTER 20
RAFFLES
SECTION:
3-20-1: License Required
3-20-2: Definitions
3-20-3: Qualifications
3-20-4: Ineligibility
3-20-5: Application
3-20-6: Applicant Convictions
3-20-7: License Fee
3-20-8: License Issuance
3-20-9: License Terms
3-20-10: Exemption
3-20-11: Conduct Of Raffles
3-20-12: Manager; Bond
3-20-13: Records
3-20-14: Suspension And Revocation Of Licenses
3-20-15: Penalties
3-20-1: LICENSE REQUIRED:
It shall be unlawful to conduct any raffle, including the sale or issuance of
chances, in the Village without first having obtained a raffle license in
accordance with the provisions of this Chapter. (Ord. 17-14, 9-5-2017; amd.
Ord. 25-19, 10-6-2025)
3-20-2: DEFINITIONS:
The following words and phrases shall be given the meanings ascribed herein
unless the context clearly denotes a contrary intention:
ACT: The Raffles and Poker Runs Act, 230 ILCS 15/0.01, et seq.
BOARD OF TRUSTEES: The president and board of trustees of the Village of
Manteno.
BUSINESS: A voluntary organization composed of individuals and businesses who
have joined together to advance the commercial, financial, industrial, and
civic interests of a community.
CHARITABLE: An organization or institution organized and operated to benefit an
indefinite number of the public. The service rendered to those eligible for
benefits must also confer some benefit to the public.
EDUCATIONAL: An organization or institution organized and operated to provide
systematic instruction in useful branches of learning by methods common to
schools and institutions of learning which compare favorably in their scope and
intensity with the course of study presented in tax-supported schools.
FIRE PROTECTION AGENCY:
   A.   An agency of the State of Illinois, unit of local government, or
intergovernmental mutual aid entity that is vested by law or intergovernmental
agreement with the duty and authority to provide public fire suppression,
rescue, or emergency medical services; or
   B.   An organization that provides support or assistance to an agency of the
State of Illinois, unit of local government, or intergovernmental mutual aid
entity that is vested by law or intergovernmental agreement with the duty and
authority to provide public fire suppression, rescue, or emergency medical
services.
FRATERNAL: An organization of persons having a common interest, the primary
interest of which is to both promote the welfare of its members and to provide
assistance to the general public in such a way as to lessen the burdens of
government by caring for those that otherwise would be cared for by the
government.
KEY LOCATION: The location where the winning chances for a raffle are
determined.
LABOR: An organization composed of workers organized with the objective of
betterment of the conditions of those engaged in such pursuit and the
development of a higher degree of efficiency in their respective occupations.
LAW ENFORCEMENT AGENCY: Any agency of Illinois or unit of local government
which is vested by law or ordinance with the duty to maintain public order and
to enforce criminal laws or ordinances.
NET PROCEEDS: The gross receipts from the conduct of raffles, less reasonable
sums expended for prizes, local license fees and other reasonable operating
expenses incurred as a result of operating a raffle.
NON-PROFIT: An organization or institution organized and conducted on a not-
for-profit basis with no personal profit inuring to any one as a result of the
operation.
RAFFLE: A form of lottery, as defined in Section 28-2(b) of the Criminal Code
of 2012, conducted by an organization licensed under this Chapter, in which:
   A.   A person pays or agrees to pay something of value for a chance,
represented and differentiated by a number or by a combination of numbers or by
some other medium, one or more of which chances is to be designated the winning
chance; and
   B.   The winning chance is determined through drawing or by some other
method based on an element of chance by an act or set of acts on the part of
persons conducting or connected with the lottery, except that the winning
chance shall not be determined by the outcome of a publicly exhibited sporting
contest. Raffle does not include any game designed to simulate:
      1.   Gambling games as defined in the Illinois Gambling Act;
      2.   Any casino game approved for play by the Illinois Gaming Board;
      3.   Any games provided by a video gaming terminal, as defined in the
Video Gaming Act; or
      4.   A savings promotion raffle authorized under Section 5g of the
Illinois Banking Act, Section 7008 of the Savings Bank Act, Section 42.7 of the
Illinois Credit Union Act, Section 5136B of the National Bank Act (12 U.S.C.
25a), or Section 4 of the Home Owner's Loan Act.
RELIGIOUS: Any church, congregation, society, or organization founded for the
purpose of religious worship.
VETERANS: An organization or association comprised of members of which
substantially all are individuals who are veterans or spouses, widows, or
widowers of veterans, the primary purpose of which is to promote the welfare of
its members and to provide assistance to the general public in such a way as to
confer a public benefit. (Ord. 17-14, 9-5-2017; amd. Ord. 25-19, 10-6-2025)
3-20-3: QUALIFICATIONS:
Only bona fide religious, charitable, labor, business, fraternal, educational,
veterans', or other bona fine not-for-profit organizations that operate without
profit to their members and which have been in existence continuously for a
period of five (5) years immediately before making an application for a raffle
license and which have had during that entire five (5) year period a bona fide
membership engaged in carrying out their objects, non-profit fundraising
organizations that the board of trustees determines is organized for the sole
purpose of providing financial assistance to an identified individual or group
of individuals suffering extreme financial hardship as a result of illness,
disability, accident or disaster, law enforcement agencies and statewide
associations that represent law enforcement officials, or fire protection
agencies and associations that represent fire protection officials, shall be
qualified for the issuance of a raffle license. (Ord. 17-14, 9-5-2017; amd.
Ord. 25-19, 10-6-2025)
3-20-4: INELIGIBILITY:
The following persons/organizations shall be ineligible for a raffle license:
   (A)   Any person whose felony conviction will impair the person's ability to
engage in the licensed position;
   (B)   Any person who is or has been a professional gambler or gambling
promoter;
   (C)   Any person who is not of good moral character;
   (D)   Organization in which a person defined in subsection (A), (B), or (C)
has a proprietary, equitable or credit interest, or in which such a person is
active or employed;
   (E)   Any organization in which a person defined in subsection (A), (B), or
(C) is an officer, director, or employee, whether compensated or not;
   (F)   Any organization in which a person defined in subsection (A), (B), or
(C) is to participate in the management or operation of a raffle;
   (G)   Any organization that has a debt due and owing the Village, including
fines and penalties for violations of this Chapter; and
   (H)   Any organization that has had a raffle license revoked that has not
eliminated the basis for such revocation.
(Ord. 17-14, 9-5-2017; amd. Ord. 25-19, 10-6-2025)
3-20-5: APPLICATION:
Any organization desirous of conducting a raffle within the Village shall
complete and file with the Village Clerk an application that shall include the
following information:
   (A)   The name, address and telephone number of the organization, including
the manager;
   (B)   Proof of eligibility for a raffle license;
   (C)   The time period during which raffle chances are to be sold or issued;
   (D)   The time of determination of winning chances;
   (E)   The location or locations where winning chances are to be determined;
   (F)   A sworn statement on the letterhead of the organization executed by
the presiding officer and secretary of the organization attesting:
      1.   To the not-for-profit character of the applicant; and
      2.   That upon reasonable inquiry, there exists no basis for the denial
of such license under Section
3-20-4 of this Chapter; and
   (G)   The name of any other jurisdiction in the State of Illinois in which
the organization is licensed to conduct raffles.
(Ord. 17-14, 9-5-2017; amd. Ord. 25-19, 10-6-2025)
3-20-6: APPLICANT CONVICTIONS:
   (A)   No organization applying for a raffle license shall be obligated to
report the following information, nor shall such criminal history records be
considered in connection with the application for licensure:
      1.   Juvenile adjudications of delinquent minors as defined in Section 5-
105 of the Juvenile Court Act of 1987, subject to the restrictions set forth in
Section 5-130 of the Juvenile Court Act of 1987;
      2.   Law enforcement records, court records, and conviction records of an
individual who was seventeen (17) years old at the time of the offense and
before January 1, 2014, unless the nature of the offense required the
individual to be tried as an adult;
      3.   Records of arrest not followed by a conviction;
      4.   Convictions overturned by a higher court; and,
      5.   Convictions or arrests that have been sealed or expunged.
   (B)   The Village Clerk, upon a finding that an applicant for a license was
previously convicted of a felony, shall forward the application and all matters
in his/her possession related thereto to the Board of Trustees who shall
consider any evidence of rehabilitation and mitigating factors contained in the
applicant's record, including any of the following factors and evidence, to
determine if the conviction will impair the ability of the applicant to engage
in the position for which a license is sought:
      1.   The lack of direct relation of the offense for which the applicant
was previously convicted to the duties, functions, and responsibilities of the
position for which a license is sought;
      2.   Whether five (5) years since a felony conviction or three (3) years
since release from confinement for the conviction, whichever is later, have
passed without a subsequent conviction;
      3.   If the applicant was previously licensed or employed in Illinois or
other states or jurisdictions, then the lack of prior misconduct arising from
or related to the licensed position or position of employment;
      4.   The age of the person at the time of the criminal offense;
      5.   Successful completion of sentence and, for applicants serving a term
of parole or probation, a progress report provided by the applicant's probation
or parole officer that documents the applicant's compliance with conditions of
supervision;
      6.   Evidence of the applicant's present fitness and professional
character;
      7.   Evidence of rehabilitation or rehabilitative effort during or after
incarceration, or during or after a term of supervision, including, but not
limited to, a certificate of good conduct under Section 5-5.5-25 of the Unified
Code of Corrections or a certificate of relief from disabilities under Section
5-5.5-10 of the Unified Code of Corrections; and
      8.   Any other mitigating factors that contribute to the person's
potential and current ability to perform the duties and responsibilities of the
position for which a license or employment is sought.
   (C)   If the Board of Trustees directs the Village Clerk to deny the license
to the applicant, then the applicant shall be notified of the denial in writing
with the following included in the notice of denial:
      1.   A statement about the decision to refuse to issue a license;
      2.   A list of the convictions that the Village determined will impair
the applicant's ability to engage in the position for which a license is
sought;
      3.   A list of convictions that formed the sole or partial basis for the
refusal to issue a license; and
      4.   A summary of the appeal process or the earliest the applicant may
reapply for a license, whichever is applicable.
   (D)   No later than May 1 of each year, the Village shall prepare, publicly
announce, and publish a report of summary statistical information relating to
new and renewal license applications during the preceding calendar year. Each
report shall show, at a minimum:
      1.   The number of applicants for a new or renewal license under this
chapter within the previous calendar year;
      2.   The number of applicants for a new or renewal license under this
chapter within the previous calendar year who had any criminal conviction;
      3.   The number of applicants for a new or renewal license under this
chapter in the previous calendar year who were granted a license;
      4.   The number of applicants for a new or renewal license with a
criminal conviction who were granted a license under this chapter within the
previous calendar year;
      5.   The number of applicants for a new or renewal license under this
chapter within the previous calendar year who were denied a license; and
      6.   The number of applicants for a new or renewal license with a
criminal conviction who were denied a license under this chapter in the
previous calendar year in whole or in part because of a prior conviction. (Ord.
25-19, 10-6-2025)
3-20-7: LICENSE FEE:
Unless waived by the Village Board at the request of the applicant, the fee for
a raffle license shall be twenty-five dollars ($25.00) for each raffle to be
conducted. The license fee shall be tendered with the prospective licensee's
application. The license fee shall be non-refundable unless the applicant is
denied a license. A request for a license waiver may cause delays in the
review, processing, and approval of an application. (Ord. 17-14, 9-5-2017; amd.
Ord. 25-19, 10-6-2025)
3-20-8: LICENSE ISSUANCE:
A raffle license shall be issued to qualified organizations not otherwise
ineligible that have completed and filed an application therefor, have tendered
the applicable license fee, and have tendered a copy of the fidelity bond for
its manager in conformance with the provisions of this Chapter. Raffle licenses
shall be granted or denied by the Village within thirty (30) days after the
date of filing of the application. (Ord. 17-14, 9-5-2017; amd. Ord. 25-19, 10-
6-2025)
3-20-9: LICENSE TERMS:
Each raffle license shall be valid for one raffle or for a specified number of
raffles to be conducted within a specified period of a calendar year as
identified on the raffle license. Raffle licenses are not assignable or
transferable. (Ord. 17-14, 9-5-2017; amd. Ord. 25-19, 10-6-2025)
3-20-10: EXEMPTION:
No raffle license shall be required for a political committee conducting a
raffle within the Village that has a valid raffle license issued by the
Illinois State Board of Elections, nor shall a raffle license be required for
the sale or issuance of raffle chances by organizations that are otherwise
licensed by a another jurisdiction so long as the key location of the raffle is
located outside of the Village. (Ord. 17-14, 9-5-2017; amd. Ord. 25-19, 10-6-
2025)
3-20-11: CONDUCT OF RAFFLES:
Raffles conducted in Village shall be subject to the following restrictions:
   A.   The entire net proceeds of any raffle shall be exclusively devoted to
the lawful purposes of the organization permitted to conduct that raffle;
   B.   no person except a bona fide director, officer, employee, or member of
the sponsoring organization may manage or participate in the management or
operation of a raffle;
   C.   No person may receive any remuneration or profit for managing or
participating in the management or operation of a raffle;
   D.   The licensee may contract with third parties who, acting at the
direction and under the supervision of the licensee, provide bona fide services
to the licensee in connection with the operation of a raffle and may pay
reasonable compensation for said service. Such services include the following:
      1.   Advertising, marketing and promotion;
      2.   Legal;
      3.   Procurement of goods, prizes, wares and merchandise for the purpose
of operating the raffle;
      4.   Rent, if the premises upon which the raffle will be held is rented;
      5.   Accounting, auditing and bookkeeping;
      6.   Website hosting;
      7.   Mailing and delivery;
      8.   Banking and payment processing; and
      9.   Other services relating to the operation of the raffle;
   (E)   A licensee may rent a premises on which to determine the winning
chance or chances in a raffle provided that the rent is not determined as a
percentage of receipts orbprofits from the raffle;
   (F)   Raffle chances may be sold throughout the State of Illinois, but the
key location shall be located in the Village;
   (G)   A person under the age of eighteen (18) years shall not participate in
the conducting of a raffle without the written permission of a parent or
guardian;
   (H)   A person under the age of eighteen (18) years shall only be within the
area where winning chances are determined when accompanied by a parent or
guardian;
   (I)   If a lessor rents a premises where a winning chance or chances on a
raffle is determined, the lessor shall not be criminally liable if the person
who uses the premises for the determining of winning chances does not hold a
license issued by the Village;
   (J)   The aggregate retail value of all prizes and merchandise awarded by a
licensee in a single raffle shall not exceed one million dollars
($1,000,000.00);
   (K)   The maximum retail value of each prize awarded in a single raffle
shall not exceed one million dollars ($1,000,000.00);
   (L)   The maximum price that may be charged for a raffle chance shall not
exceed two hundred dollars ($200.00); and,
   (M)   The maximum period for which chances may be issued or sold shall not
exceed nine (9) months. (Ord. 17-14, 9-5-2017; amd. Ord. 25-19, 10-6-2025)
3-20-12: MANAGER; BOND:
The operation and conduct of each raffle shall be under the supervision of a
single manager designated by the organization, and bonded in accordance with
the provision of this section. The manager shall provide a fidelity bond in
favor of the licensee conditioned upon his honesty in the performance of his
duties in the amount of fifty percent (50%) of the anticipated aggregate value
of all raffle prizes and merchandise to be awarded by the licensee in the
license year. The term of the bond shall provide that notice shall be given in
writing to the Village not less than thirty (30) days prior to its cancellation
or amendment. The bond shall be waived, and a waiver provision shall be
included in the license, if the organization applying for the license provides
proof it has authorized a waiver for its manager for the specific raffle by an
affirmative vote of the requisite number of members of the licensed
organization or, if the licensed organization does not have members, of members
of the governing board of the organization, so as to constitute an affirmative
action of the licensed organization. Proof of such authorization shall be in
writing and documented in accordance with applicable laws and the
organization's operating requirements. (Ord. 17-14, 9-5-2017; amd. Ord. 25-19,
10-6-2025)
3-20-13: RECORDS:
   (A)   Each organization licensed to conduct raffles shall maintain the
records of its gross receipts, expenses, and net proceeds for each single
gathering or occasion at which winning chances are determined. All deductions
from gross receipts for each single gathering or occasion shall be documented
with receipts or other records indicating the amount, a description of the
purchased item or service or other reason for the deductions, and the
recipient. The distribution of net proceeds shall be itemized as to payee,
purpose, amount and date of payment.
   (B)   Gross receipts from the operation of raffle programs shall be
segregated from other revenues of the organization, including bingo gross
receipts, if bingo games are also conducted by the organization pursuant to
license therefor issued by the Department of Revenue of the State of Illinois,
and placed in a separate account. Each organization shall have separate records
of its raffles. The person who accounts for gross receipts, expenses, and net
proceeds from the operation of raffles shall not be the same person who
accounts for other revenues of the organization.
   (C)   Each organization licensed to conduct raffles shall report to the
Village and its membership within seven (7) days after the conclusion of each
raffle its gross receipts, expenses and net proceeds from raffles, and the
distribution of net proceeds itemized as required in this Chapter.
   (D)   Records shall be preserved for three (3) years, and organizations
shall make available their records relating to operation of raffles for public
inspection at reasonable times and places. (Ord. 17-14, 9-5-2017; amd. Ord. 25-
19, 10-6-2025)
3-20-14: SUSPENSION AND REVOCATION OF LICENSES:
A raffle license issued under this Chapter may be revoked or suspended by the
Village Clerk for a violation of this Chapter, or any other provision of this
Code, upon notice and an opportunity to be heard before the Board of Trustees.
(Ord. 17-14, 9-5-2017; amd. Ord. 25-19, 10-6-2025)
3-20-15: PENALTIES:
Any person, firm, corporation or organization violating any provision of this
Chapter shall be fined not less than fifty dollars ($250.00) nor more than
seven hundred and fifty dollars ($750.00) for each offense. A separate offense
shall be deemed committed on each day during or on which the violation occurs
or continues. (Ord. 17-14, 9-5-2017; amd. Ord. 25-19, 10-6-2025)
CHAPTER 21
CABLE AND VIDEO CUSTOMER PROTECTION LAW
SECTION:
3-21-1: Customer Service And Privacy Protection Law
3-21-2: Enforcement
3-21-3: Customer Credits
3-21-1: CUSTOMER SERVICE AND PRIVACY PROTECTION LAW:
   (A)   The regulations of 220 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/70-501 are hereby
adopted by reference and made applicable to the cable or video providers
offering services within the village boundaries.
   (B)   Any amendment to the cable and video customer protection law that
becomes effective after the effective date of this chapter shall be
incorporated into this chapter by reference and shall be applicable to cable or
video providers offering services within the village's boundaries. However, any
amendment that makes its provisions optional for adoption by municipalities
shall not be incorporated into this chapter by reference without formal action
by the corporate authorities of the village. (Ord. 07-36, 11-19-2007)
3-21-2: ENFORCEMENT:
The village does hereby pursuant to law declare its intent to enforce all of
the customer service and privacy protection standards of the cable and video
protection law with respect to complaints received from residents within the
village. (Ord. 07-36, 11-19-2007)
3-21-3: CUSTOMER CREDITS:
The village hereby adopts the schedule of customer credits for violations as
provided for in the provisions of 220 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/70-501(s)
and applied on the statement issued to the customer for the next billing cycle
following the violation or following the discovery of the violation. The cable
or video provider is responsible for providing the credits and the customer is
under no obligation to request the credit. (Ord. 07-36, 11-19-2007)
CHAPTER 22
CABLE/VIDEO SERVICE PROVIDER FEE AND PEG ACCESS SUPPORT FEE
SECTION:
3-22-1: Definitions
3-22-2: Cable/Video Service Provider Fee Imposed
3-22-3: PEG Access Support Fee Imposed
3-22-4: Applicable Principles
3-22-5: No Impact On Other Taxes Due From Holder
3-22-6: Audits Of Cable/Video Service Provider
3-22-7: Late Fees/Payments
3-22-1: DEFINITIONS:
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the following meanings:
ACT: The cable and video competition law of 2007 1  (the "act").
CABLE SERVICE: That term as defined in 47 USC section 522(6).
COMMISSION: The Illinois commerce commission.
GROSS REVENUES: That term as defined in section 21-801(c) of the act.
HOLDER: A person or entity that has received authorization to offer or provide
cable or video service from the commission pursuant to section 5/21-401 of the
act.
PEG: Public, education and governmental.
PEG ACCESS SUPPORT FEE: The amount paid under this chapter and section 5/21-801
(d) of the act by the holder to the village for the service areas within its
territorial jurisdiction.
SERVICE: The provision of "cable service" or "video service" to subscribers and
the interaction of subscribers with the person or entity that has received
authorization to offer or provide cable or video service from the commission
pursuant to section 5/21-401 of the act.
SERVICE PROVIDER FEE: The amount paid under this chapter and section 5/21-801
of the act by the holder to the village for the service areas within its
territorial jurisdiction.
VIDEO SERVICE: Video programming and subscriber interaction, if any, that is
required for the selection or use of such video programming services, and which
is provided through wireline facilities located at least in part in the public
right of way without regard to delivery technology, including internet protocol
technology. This definition does not include any video programming provided by
a commercial mobile service provider defined in 47 USC section 332(d) or any
video programming provided solely as part of, and via, service that enables
users to access content, information, electronic mail, or other services
offered over the public internet. (Ord. 07-37, 11-19-2007)
 
Notes
1 1. 220 ILCS 5/70-501 et seq.
3-22-2: CABLE/VIDEO SERVICE PROVIDER FEE IMPOSED:
   (A)   Fee Imposed: A fee of five percent (5%) of the holder's gross revenues
is hereby imposed on any holder providing cable service or video service in the
village.
   (B)   Notice To Village: A holder shall notify the village at least ten (10)
days prior to the date on which the holder begins to offer cable service or
video service in the village.
   (C)   Holder's Liability: The holder shall be liable for and pay the service
provider fee to the village. The holder's liability for the fee shall commence
on the first day of the calendar month following thirty (30) days after receipt
of the ordinance adopting this chapter by the holder. The ordinance adopting
this chapter shall be sent by mail, postage prepaid, to the address listed on
the holder's application notice sent pursuant to section 5/21-401(b)(6) of the
act to the village.
   (D)   Payment Date: The payment of the service provider fee shall be due on
a quarterly basis, forty five (45) days after the close of the calendar
quarter. If mailed, the fee is considered paid on the date it is postmarked.
Each payment shall include a statement explaining the basis for the calculation
of the fee.
   (E)   Exemption: The fee hereby imposed does not apply to existing cable
service or video service providers that have an existing franchise agreement
with the village in which a fee is paid.
   (F)   Credit For Other Payments: An incumbent cable operator that elects to
terminate an existing agreement pursuant to section 5/21-301(c) of the act with
credit for prepaid franchise fees under that agreement may deduct the amount of
such credit from the fees that operator owes under this section. (Ord. 07-37,
11-19-2007)
3-22-3: PEG ACCESS SUPPORT FEE IMPOSED:
   (A)   Fee Imposed: A PEG access support fee of one percent (1%) of the
holder's gross revenues or, if greater, the percentage of gross revenues that
incumbent cable operators pay to the village or its designee for PEG access
support in the village is hereby imposed on any holder providing cable service
or video service in the village in addition to the fee imposed pursuant to
section
3-22-2 of this chapter.
   (B)   Payment: The holder shall pay the PEG access support fee to the
village or to the entity designated by the village to manage PEG access. The
holder's liability for the PEG access support fee shall commence on the date
set forth in section
3-22-2 of this chapter.
   (C)   Payment Due: The payment of the PEG access support fee shall be due on
a quarterly basis, forty five (45) days after the close of the calendar
quarter. If mailed, the fee is considered paid on the date it is postmarked.
Each payment shall include a statement explaining the basis for the calculation
of the fee.
   (D)   Credit For Other Payments: An incumbent cable operator that elects to
terminate an existing agreement pursuant to section 5/21-301(c) of the act
shall pay, at the time they would have been due, all monetary payments for PEG
access that would have been due during the remaining term of the agreement had
it not been terminated pursuant to that section. All payments made by an
incumbent cable operator pursuant to the previous sentence may be credited
against the fees that that operator owes under this section. (Ord. 07-37, 11-
19-2007)
3-22-4: APPLICABLE PRINCIPLES:
All determinations and calculations under this chapter shall be made pursuant
to generally accepted accounting principles. (Ord. 07-37, 11-19-2007)
3-22-5: NO IMPACT ON OTHER TAXES DUE FROM HOLDER:
Nothing contained in this chapter shall be construed to exempt a holder from
any tax that is or may later be imposed by the village, including any tax that
is or may later be required to be paid by or through the holder with respect to
cable service or video service. A state issued authorization shall not affect
any requirement of the holder with respect to payment of the village's
simplified municipal telecommunications tax or any other tax as it applies to
any telephone service provided by the holder. A state issued authorization
shall not affect any requirement of the holder with respect to payment of the
local unit of government's 911 or E911 fees, taxes or charges. (Ord. 07-37, 11-
19-2007)
3-22-6: AUDITS OF CABLE/VIDEO SERVICE PROVIDER:
   (A)   Audit Requirement: The village will notify the holder of the
requirements it imposes on other cable service or video service providers to
submit to an audit of its books and records. The holder shall comply with the
same requirements the village imposes on other cable service or video service
providers in its jurisdiction to audit the holder's books and records and to
recompute any amounts determined to be payable under the requirements of the
village. If all local franchises between the village and cable operator
terminate, the audit requirements shall be those adopted by the village in
title 1, chapter 18 of this code. No acceptance of amounts remitted should be
construed as an accord that the amounts are correct.
   (B)   Additional Payments: Any additional amount due after an audit shall be
paid within thirty (30) days after the village's submission of an invoice for
the sum. (Ord. 07-37, 11-19-2007)
3-22-7: LATE FEES/PAYMENTS:
All fees due and payments which are past due shall be governed by the
provisions of title 1, chapter 18 of this code. (Ord. 07-37, 11-19-2007)
CHAPTER 23
HOTEL ESTABLISHMENTS
SECTION:
3-23-1: Definitions
3-23-2: License Required
3-23-3: License Term; Timing Of Application
3-23-4: Application For Issuance/Renewal
3-23-5: License Requirements
3-23-6: Transferability
3-23-7: Secured Premises
3-23-8: Housekeeping Services
3-23-9: Maximum Stay Length
3-23-10: Occupancy Limitations
3-23-11: Reporting And Record-Keeping
3-23-12: Unlawful Operation Declared A Nuisance
3-23-13: Suspension/Revocation Of License
3-23-14: Appeals Of Decisions To Suspend Or Revoke
3-23-15: Penalty; Administration
3-23-1: DEFINITIONS:
The following words, terms, phrases and their derivations, when used in this
section, shall have the meanings ascribed herein, except where the context
clearly indicates a different meaning:
BOARD OF TRUSTEES:       The Board of Trustees for the Village of Manteno.
CODE:                    The Municipal Code for the Village of Manteno.
DIRECTOR:                The Director of Building and Zoning.
                         A hotel which offers services and facilities designed
EXTENDED STAY HOTEL:     to appeal to longer-term guests, such as laundry and
                         kitchen facilities, and may quote rates on a weekly or
                         longer basis.
                         A person who exercises occupancy or is entitled to
                         occupancy in a hotel by reason of concession, permit,
GUEST:                   right of access, license or other agreement and shall
                         include the named guest and those occupying the room
                         under or with the named guest.
                         Any public or private space or structure, including
                         but not limited to, any inn, hostelry, hotel, tourist
                         home, motel, bed and breakfast, lodging house or motel
                         rooming house used or held out to the public as a
                         place where sleeping accommodations are furnished or
                         maintained. A hotel excludes any building or structure
                         that is physically unable to accommodate sleeping
HOTEL:                   accommodations for twenty (20) or more persons
                         overnight due to occupancy limitations. For purposes
                         hereof, it shall be assumed that each hotel room
                         existing in a hotel will accommodate two (2) persons
                         with sleeping accommodations. Hotel includes the
                         parking lot and other common areas of the hotel. Hotel
                         does not include living accommodations provided at any
                         governmental or nonprofit institution in connection
                         with the functions of that institution.
                         A document that contains the name, date of birth,
                         description and picture of a person, issued by the
                         federal government, the State of Illinois, another
                         state, a county or municipal government subdivision or
                         one of their agencies, including but not limited to: a
                         motor vehicle operator's license, an identification
IDENTIFICATION DOCUMENT: card, or an identification card issued to a member of
                         the Armed Forces. Identification document also
                         includes a passport issued by a foreign government or
                         a consular identification card, issued by a foreign
                         government to any of its citizens and nationals, which
                         has been approved by the village as valid
                         identification.
OCCUPANCY:               The use or possession, or the right to the use or
                         possession, of any room in any hotel.
                         The person that is the proprietor/owner of the hotel
OPERATOR:                and land on which the hotel is located and all
                         managers, employees, agents and contractors operating
                         the hotel under and through the proprietor/owner.
                         Any natural individual, firm, trust, estate,
                         partnership, association, joint stock company, joint
                         adventure, corporation, limited liability company,
PERSON:                  municipal corporation, the State or any of its
                         political subdivisions, any State university created
                         by statute, or a receiver, trustee, guardian or other
                         representative appointed by order of any court.
                         Written documentation of information about a guest. A
RECORD:                  record may be maintained electronically, in a book, or
                         on cards.
                         The consideration charged, whether or not received,
                         for the occupancy of a room in a hotel valued in
RENT:                    money, whether to be received in money, goods, labor
                         or otherwise, including all receipts, cash, credits
                         and property and services of any kind or nature.
                         A request to hold a room for a potential guest that
                         includes the following information and is documented
RESERVATION:             in writing: (i) the potential guest's name and contact
                         information; and (ii) the date and time when the
                         contact was made.
                         Any portion of a hotel, which is designed, used or
ROOM:                    intended for occupancy by a person for lodging or
                         sleeping purposes.
                         Any car, truck, trailer, motorcycle, or other
                         machinery used for transporting people or goods and is
VEHICLE:                 normally required to be registered with a state in
                         order to be legally operated or towed on a public
                         roadway.
                         A person, who is not a guest, who is on the premises
VISITOR:                 of a hotel at the invitation of a guest, but without
                         the express permission of the operator of the hotel.
                         (Ord. 22-03, 5-2-2022)
 
3-23-2: LICENSE REQUIRED:
It shall be unlawful for any person to operate a hotel, take a reservation, or
rent any room in a hotel without a valid hotel operator's license. Licenses
issued under this chapter shall be issued in the name of the proprietor/owner
and shall apply to and authorize the rental of all rooms on the premises of the
hotel for which it is issued. (Ord. 22-03, 5-2-2022)
3-23-3: LICENSE TERM; TIMING OF APPLICATION:
   (A)   A hotel operator's license shall be valid from May 1 of the calendar
year through April 30 of the following calendar year.
   (B)   Applications for the issuance and renewal of a license shall be filed
no later than thirty (30) days prior to the desired effective date of the
license. (Ord. 22-03, 5-2-2022)
3-23-4: APPLICATION FOR ISSUANCE/RENEWAL:
Persons seeking to obtain or renew a hotel operator's license shall file an
application with the Village Clerk on forms to be provided by the village. The
application must be completed and signed by the proprietor/owner. The
application shall set forth, with the required attachments, the following
information:
   (A)   Name, home address, business address, home phone number, business
phone number, mobile phone number and facsimile number of the proprietor/owner;
   (B)   The street address of the hotel, permanent index number of land on
which it is located, and number of rooms in the hotel;
   (C)   Proof of ownership of the land/building; and
   (D)   Name, home address, business address, home phone number, business
phone number, mobile phone number and facsimile number of each manager. (Ord.
22-03, 5-2-2022)
3-23-5: LICENSE REQUIREMENTS:
The Village Clerk shall issue and/or renew a license if the following
requirements are met:
   (A)   The applicant has filed an application containing all information
required under Section
3-23-4;
   (B)   The applicant has paid the annual license fee of one hundred dollars
($100.00), and there are no outstanding debts due and owing the village from
the owner, including but not limited to, outstanding fines imposed for
violating the terms of this chapter;
   (C)   The operator, hotel, and operations of the hotel, otherwise comply
with the provisions of this chapter and the Code, in general;
   (D)   There is no reason to deny the license for the reasons provided in
subsection
3-23-13(A); and
   (E)   The applicant has not had a hotel operator's license revoked for
violating the provision of this Code. (Ord. 22-03, 5-2-2022)
3-23-6: TRANSFERABILITY:
No license issued under this chapter shall be transferable. (Ord. 22-03, 5-2-
2022)
3-23-7: SECURED PREMISES:
   (A)   All publicly accessible entry doors of a hotel shall: (i) have
operating automatic closures with keycard access for entry; (ii) remain locked
at all times between the hours of nine o’clock (9:00) P.M. and six o’clock (6:
00) A.M.; and (iii) be equipped with an audible or visible chirp, alarm, strobe
or other device to alert hotel employees that a door has been opened or remains
opened. An existing hotel shall come into compliance with this subsection no
later than six (6) months following the issuance of the initial hotel
operator's license.
   (B)   Newly constructed hotels shall require magnetic or electronic keycard/
locking devices for access to all publicly accessible entry doors.
   (C)   The requirements of this section are not applicable to: (i) entry
points that enter directly into the lobby of the hotel as long as the lobby is
physically manned by a bona fide employee twenty-four (24) hours a day; or (ii)
entry points that enter directly into a banquet hall, conference room, or other
facility utilized for a special event or meeting hosted by a hotel as long as
there is a bona fide employee staffing the banquet hall, conference room, or
other facility utilized for the duration of that event. (Ord. 22-03, 5-2-2022)
3-23-8: HOUSEKEEPING SERVICES:
All hotels shall provide housekeeping services including, but not limited to,
room cleaning, linen change and towel service a minimum of once every three (3)
days, but not less than each time a new guest checks in to a room. (Ord. 22-03,
5-2-2022)
3-23-9: MAXIMUM STAY LENGTH:
   (A)   No operator shall permit a person to occupy a hotel as a guest for
more than twenty-eight (28) consecutive days.
   (B)   No operator shall permit a person occupying a hotel as a guest for
twenty-eight (28) consecutive days to enter into a new rental agreement or to
otherwise occupy any room in a hotel as a guest without at least a seven (7)
day vacancy between stays.
   (C)   No operator shall permit a person to occupy a hotel as a permanent
resident and/or utilize the hotel address for a personal mailing address.
   (D)   The provisions of subsections (A) through (C) of section shall not
apply in the following situations:
      1.   When there is a written contract or documented agreement between a
hotel and a business, corporation, firm or governmental agency to house
employees or individuals on valid work orders;
      2.   When there is documentation, consistent with HIPPA privacy rules,
that a hotel guest is considered family or is providing care for a patient who
is admitted at local hospital;
      3.   When an insurance company or federal, state or local governmental
agency has provided documentation that a hotel guest has been displaced from
their home by a natural disaster or fire;
      4.    Where there is a written contract or documented agreement between a
hotel and a not-for-profit organization to provide emergency or transitional
housing/shelter provided such emergency or transitional housing/shelter shall
not exceed sixty (60) days in a calendar year per guest; provided, further, no
hotel shall be permit the occupancy of more than five percent (5%) of its rooms
on a per night basis to accommodate such transitional housing/shelter. (Ord.
22-03, 5-2-2022)
3-23-10: OCCUPANCY LIMITATIONS:
   (A)   No operator shall rent or permit the overnight occupancy of any room
if the number of guests will exceed the sleeping accommodations of the room
   (B)   No operator shall permit any room to be occupied (guests and visitors)
by number of persons in excess of two (2) times the number for which sleeping
accommodations are provided in the room. (Ord. 22-03, 5-2-2022)
3-23-11: REPORTING AND RECORD-KEEPING:
   (A)   Each operator shall require each guest checking in to a hotel to
provide a valid identification document before permitting occupancy of any
room. The hotel operator shall maintain a copy of such identification document
on file.
   (B)   Every operator shall keep a record of all room rentals and of all
rental agreements between the hotel and its guests. The following information,
at a minimum, must be recorded at the time of registration:
      1.   The full name, phone number, and home address of each overnight
guest over the age of eighteen (18), including such information for person
checking any guest in to the hotel;
      2.   The number of guests occupying each room;
      3.   The room letter, symbol or number the guest is occupying;
      4.   The make, type and license number of the guest's vehicle if the
vehicle will be parked on the hotel premises;
      5.   The day, month, year and time of arrival of each guest;
      6.   The date that each guest is scheduled to depart;
      7.   The rate charged and amount collected for rental of the room
assigned to each guest; and
      8.   Documentation used to verify a stay in excess of twenty-eight (28)
consecutive days, as applicable.
   (C)   Operators shall report to law enforcement of the village violations of
applicable law occurring on the premises immediately after the same is reported
to or witnessed by the operator.
   (D)   Each hotel shall have a manager on duty or on-call capable of
assisting, communicating, and cooperating with the police or other law
enforcement officials in maintaining the public health, welfare, and safety.
   (E)   The records required to be generated or obtained pursuant to this
section shall be maintained by the operator for a period of no less one hundred
eighty (180) days after the rental agreement's termination, and the hotel shall
make such records available to the village within forty-eight (48) hours upon
request. (Ord. 22-03, 5-2-2022)
3-23-12: UNLAWFUL OPERATION DECLARED A NUISANCE:
   (A)   Any hotel operated, conducted or maintained contrary to the provisions
of this chapter is hereby declared to be unlawful and a public nuisance.
   (B)   The village may, in addition, or in lieu of all other remedies,
commence actions or proceedings for abatement, removal or enjoinment thereof,
in the manner provided by state law and the code. (Ord. 22-03, 5-2-2022)
3-23-13: SUSPENSION/REVOCATION OF LICENSE:
   (A)   All hotel operator's licenses are subject to suspension or revocation
in whole or in part. The basis for suspension or revocation shall include, but
not be limited to: (i) violations by the licensee of this chapter or Code, in
general; (ii) conviction of the licensee of any felony or of a misdemeanor
where such conviction indicates their inability to operate a safe, honest and
legitimate business within the village; (iii) failure of the licensee to pay
any fine, penalty or charge owed to the village; (iv) fraud, misrepresentation,
or false statement contained in the application for the license; or (v) failure
to make records available to the village as required by this chapter.
   (B)   Proceedings to suspend or revoke a license shall be initiated by the
Director. The Director shall initiate such proceedings by filing written
charges with the Mayor. The Mayor shall send written notice of the charges to
the licensee no later than forty-eight (48) hours after they are filed. The
notice shall include a copy of the charges as well as notification as to the
date, time and location for the hearing on the charges. Notice shall be
provided by Certified U.S. Mail, return receipt requested, to the address
listed for the licensee.
   (C)   The hearing shall take place no sooner than twenty-five (25) days nor
more than forty-five (45) days after charges are filed by the Mayor. The Mayor
shall preside over the hearing and base his/her decision upon the evidence
submitted. The formal rules of evidence will not apply at the hearing. All
witnesses proposed to testify shall be presented live, sworn in, and subject to
direct and cross-examination. The Director shall have the burden of proof and
shall be required to prove its case by a preponderance of evidence.
   (D)   A court reporter will be provided on the timely request (no later than
five (5) business days before the scheduled hearing) by either party. The party
requesting the court reporter shall be responsible for the costs of his/her
attendance and the reproduction of the transcript to be made a part of the
record.
   (E)   Licensees may, but are not required to, be represented by an attorney.
The Director may be represented by an attorney. The Village Attorney shall sit
as counsel for the Mayor.
   (F)   No continuance will be granted except for the most extenuating
circumstances.
   (G)   No later than thirty (30) days after the close of the hearing, the
Mayor shall issue his/her decision in writing setting forth his findings of
fact and legal conclusions. The written decision shall be mailed to all
interested parties by Certified U.S. Mail, return receipt requested. Fines for
violations of this article may be included as a part of the Mayor's decision in
addition to the suspension or revocation of the license.
   (H)   Either party to the proceeding may appeal the Mayor's ruling to the
board of Trustees.
   (I)   The Mayor's decision shall be final and take immediate effect fourteen
(14) days after it is issued assuming no appeal is taken.
   (J)   Nothing herein shall prevent the immediate suspension of a license by
the Director as circumstances dictate. Under such circumstances, post-
deprivation proceedings and/or revocation proceedings shall be afforded to the
licensee. (Ord. 22-03, 5-2-2022)
3-23-14: APPEALS OF DECISIONS TO SUSPEND OR REVOKE:
   (A)   The Mayor's decision to suspend or revoke a license may be appealed to
the Board of Trustees.
   (B)   The licensee shall perfect the appeal by filing a notice of appeal
with the Village Clerk no later than fourteen (14) days after the date of the
Mayor's decision. The notice of appeal shall identify any factual or legal
errors with the Mayor's decision, a short argument in favor of reversal, and a
copy of the Mayor's decision. Any error or argument not raised in the notice of
appeal shall be deemed waived on appeal.
   (C)   The timely filing of a notice of appeal shall stay the Mayor's
decision through the date on which the appeal is decided.
   (D)   Within forty-eight (48) hours of the filing of the notice of appeal,
the Village Clerk shall send written notice of the appeal to the Director and
the licensee. The notice shall include a copy of the notice of appeal as well
notification as to the date, time and location for the hearing on the appeal.
Notice shall be provided by Certified U.S. Mail, return receipt requested, to
the business addresses listed for the licensee.
   (E)   The hearing shall take place no sooner than twenty-five (25) days nor
more than forty-five (45) days after the notice of appeal is filed by the
licensee. No continuance will be granted except for the most extenuating
circumstances.
   (F)   The Board of Trustees shall decide the appeal based upon the record
generated before the Mayor. The record shall consist of all evidence submitted
at the hearing before the Mayor and a copy of the transcript of the proceedings
assuming the appellant files a copy with the Village Clerk no later than seven
(7) days after the notice of appeal is filed. The standard of review shall be
governed by the standards employed under the Administrative Review Law.
   (G)   The Village Attorney shall sit as counsel for the Board of Trustees on
appeal.
   (H)   No later than thirty (30) days after the hearing, the Board of
Trustees shall issue its written decision either affirming or reversing the
Mayor's decision. The written decision shall be mailed to all interested
parties by Certified U.S. Mail, return receipt requested. The Board of
Trustee's decision on appeal shall be final and shall take effect immediately.
(Ord. 22-03, 5-2-2022)
3-23-15: PENALTY; ADMINISTRATION:
   (A)   Any person that violates, disobeys, omits, neglects, or refuses to
comply with, or who resists the enforcement of any of the provisions of this
chapter shall be fined not less than two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) and
not more than seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00) for each offense. Each day
a violation exists or continues shall constitute a separate and distinct
offense.
   (B)   Any licensee found in violation of the provisions of this chapter or
the Code, in general, shall, in addition to any fine that may be imposed, be
subject to license suspension and/or revocation proceedings.
   (C)   Violations of this chapter may be administered in accordance with the
provisions of Title 1, Administrative, Chapter 17, Administrative Adjudication,
of the Code. (Ord. 22-03, 5-2-2022)
CHAPTER 24
TOBACCO DEALERS
SECTION:
3-24-1: Definitions
3-24-2: Tobacco License
3-24-3: Application; Investigation; Decision
3-24-4: Sanitary And Health Requirements
3-24-5: Prohibited Acts
3-24-6: Vending Machines
3-24-7: Penalty
3-24-8: License Suspension And Revocation
3-24-9: Basis For Suspension And Revocation
3-24-10: Appeals
3-24-1: DEFINITIONS:
For the purposes of this chapter, the following words and phrases shall have
the meanings ascribed to them herein:
             A facility or restricted area (whether open-air or enclosed) where the operator
             ensures or has a reasonable basis to believe (such as by checking identification
             as required under State law, or by checking the identification of any person
ADULT-ONLY   appearing to be under the age of 30) that no person under legal age is present. A
FACILITY:    facility or restricted area need not be permanently restricted to persons under 21
             years of age to constitute an adult-only facility, provided that the operator
             ensures or has a reasonable basis to believe that no person under 21 years of age
             is present during the event or time period in question.
AGE          A signed designated area in a retail establishment to which persons under 21 years
RESTRICTED   of age are not permitted access unless accompanied by a parent of legal guardian.
AREA:
             A product or device not consisting of or containing tobacco that provides for the
             ingestion into the body of nicotine, whether by chewing, smoking, absorbing,
             dissolving, inhaling, snorting, sniffing, or by any other means. “Alternative
ALTERNATIVE  nicotine product” does not include: cigarettes as defined in Section 1 of the
NICOTINE     Cigarette Tax Act and tobacco products as defined in Section 10-5 of the Tobacco
PRODUCT:     Products Tax Act of 1995; tobacco product and electronic cigarette as defined in
             this Section; or any product approved by the United States Food and Drug
             Administration for sale as a tobacco cessation product, as a tobacco dependence
             product, or for other medical purposes, and is being marketed and sold solely for
             that approved purpose.
             (A)   Any device that employs a battery or other mechanism to heat a solution or
             substance to produce a vapor or aerosol intended for inhalation;
             (B)   Any cartridge or container of a solution or substance intended to be used
             with or in the device or to refill the device; or
             (C)   Any solution or substance, whether or not it contains nicotine intended for
             use in the device. “Electronic cigarette” includes, but is not limited to, any
             electronic nicotine delivery system, electronic cigar, electronic cigarillo,
             electronic pipe, electronic hookah, vape pen, or similar product or device, any
             components or parts that can be used to build the product or device, and any
             component, part, or accessory of a device used during the operation of the device,
ELECTRONIC   even if the part or accessory was sold separately.
CIGARETTE:   “Electronic cigarette” does not include: cigarettes as defined in Section 1 of the
             Cigarette Tax Act; tobacco product and alternative nicotine product as defined in
             this Section; any product approved by the United States Food and Drug
             Administration for sale as a tobacco cessation product, as a tobacco dependence
             product, or for other medical purposes, and is being marketed and sold solely for
             that approved purpose; any asthma inhaler prescribed by a physician for that
             condition and is being marketed and sold solely for that approved purpose; any
             device that meets the definition of cannabis paraphernalia under Section 1-10 of
             the Cannabis Regulation and Tax Act; or any cannabis product sold by a dispensing
             organization pursuant to the Cannabis Regulation and Tax Act or the Compassionate
             Use of Medical Cannabis Program Act.
LINE OF      Visible to a cashier or other employee.
SIGHT:
NICOTINE:    Any form of the chemical nicotine, including any salt or complex, regardless of
             whether the chemical is naturally or synthetically derived.
             Any person, firm, corporation, partnership, or association who establishes for
             operation by another, or leases or distributes for the purpose of operation for
             another, any device or machine for the vending of tobacco products, electronic
OPERATOR:    cigarettes, alternative nicotine products, tobacco accessories or smoking herbs
             whether or not such establishment for operation, leasing or distribution be for a
             fixed charge or rental, or on the basis of the division of the income obtained
             from said machine.
OWNER:       An operator who acquired possession and control of a vending machine purchase,
             lease or otherwise.
SMOKELESS    Any tobacco products that are suitable for dipping or chewing.
TOBACCO:
             All substances of plant origin and their derivatives, including but not limited to
SMOKING      broom, calea, California poppy, damiana, hops, ginseng, lobelia, jimson weed and
HERBS:       other members of the Datur genus, passion flower and wild lettuce, which are
             processed or sold primarily for use as smoking materials.
             Cigarette papers, pipes, holders of smoking materials of all types, cigarette
TOBACCO      rolling machines, and other items, designed primarily for the smoking or ingestion
ACCESSORIES: of tobacco products or of substances made illegal under any statute or of
             substances whole sale, gift, barter, or exchange is made unlawful hereunder.
             Any person, at wholesale or retail, selling, offering for sale, furnishing or
TOBACCO      offering to furnish, tobacco products, electronic cigarettes, alternative nicotine
DEALER:      products, tobacco accessories or smoking herbs. Tobacco Dealers include operators
             of vending machines.
             Any product containing or made from tobacco that is intended for human
             consumption, whether smoked, heated, chewed, absorbed, dissolved, inhaled,
             snorted, sniffed, or ingested by any other means, including, but not limited to,
             cigarettes, cigars, little cigars, chewing tobacco, pipe tobacco, snuff, snus, and
             any other smokeless tobacco product which contains tobacco that is finely cut,
TOBACCO      ground, powdered, or leaf and intended to be placed in the oral cavity. “Tobacco
PRODUCT:     product” includes any component, part, or accessory of a tobacco product, whether
             or not sold separately. “Tobacco product” does not include: an alternative
             nicotine product as defined in this Section; or any product that has been approved
             by the United States Food and Drug Administration for sale as a tobacco cessation
             product, as a tobacco dependence product, or for other medical purposes, and is
             being marketed and sold solely for that approved purpose.
             Any person, at wholesale of retail, selling, offering for sale, furnishing or
TOBACCO      offering to furnish, tobacco products, electronic cigarettes, or smoking herbs
SPECIALTY    where such business is the main business being conducted at a specific premises.
DEALER:      For example, a gasoline services station, convenience store, or grocery store
             would not be included within this definition. (Ord. 24-10, 9-3-2024)
 
3-24-2: TOBACCO LICENSE:
   (A)   o person shall engage in the business of tobacco dealer in the village
without first having obtained a tobacco license. The annual fee for a tobacco
license shall be $200. A tobacco dealer license shall be valid from May 1
through April 30.
   (B)   No person shall engage in the business of or tobacco specialty dealer
in the village without first having obtained a license therefore. The annual
fee for a tobacco specialty dealer license shall be $250. The maximum number of
tobacco specialty dealer licenses that the Village is allowed to issue for
tobacco specialty dealers is four (4). The number of tobacco specialty dealer
licenses authorized shall remain at the number set forth above; provided,
however, that any license revoked, or not used because of the termination of
tobacco specialty dealer business on the premises for which the license has
been issued, shall automatically reduce the number of authorized licenses by
the total number of revoked or not used licenses and shall reduce the total
number of licenses available. A tobacco specialty dealer license shall be valid
from May 1 through April 30.
   (C)   Tobacco licenses shall be specific to the licensee at the licensed
premises, only. No license may be assigned, sold, loaned, transferred, used as
collateral, or otherwise encumbered.
   (D)   The village president is authorized to promulgate rules and
regulations requiring mandatory education of all persons holding a tobacco
license. (Ord. 24-10, 9-3-2024)
3-24-3: APPLICATION; INVESTIGATION; DECISION:
   (A)   The application for a tobacco license shall be filed by the applicant
with the village clerk stating the name and address of the applicant, the name
and address of any member, officer, director or manager of such firm,
corporation, partnership or association, or any stockholder owning or having
more than five percent (5%) interest therein, the name and address of the
proposed location or business or the locations in which the vending machine
will be located, the name of the maker of such vending machine and factory
number thereof (as applicable), and proof of legal right to possess, or place
the vending machine in, the business premises.
   (B)   The application shall be referred to the Police Department for an
investigation and verification of the facts stated therein and the business
methods of the applicant. The application shall also be referred to the
Building and Zoning Department for an investigation and verification that the
licensed premises complies with all building, zoning, and property maintenance
requirements. The village clerk shall issue available licenses unless there are
grounds for denial, in which case the application shall be denied. Reasons for
denying an available license shall be: (a) failure to supply required
information or documentation in or as a part of its application; (b)
falsification of information on the application; (c) the applicant is not in
good standing with the State of Illinois; (d) the applicant is in arrears of
the payment of any debt or tax due and owing to the village, Kankakee County,
or the State of Illinois; (e) applicant has not paid the applicable license
fee; (f) the applicant’s denial or revocation of a license issued under this
chapter, or similar license in another unit of local government, within the
immediate past year, unless the applicant can and does show that the basis for
the previous denial or revocation no longer exists; and/or (g) the licensed
premises is in violation of building, zoning, or property maintenance
requirements imposed by law, or is otherwise sited in violation of any
locational restriction imposed by this chapter. If the owner is a firm,
corporation, partnership or association, the application shall be approved
unless the village clerk finds that a member, officer, director or manager of
such firm, corporation, partnership or association, or any stockholder owning
more than five percent (5%) interest therein would be ineligible if he were the
sole owner.
   (C)   The village clerk shall make a good-faith effort to complete an
application review and advise an applicant of his/her decision within five (5)
business days. If, upon the expiration of the five (5) business day review
period, the village clerk has not advised an applicant of his/her decision to
grant or deny a license, an applicant may request, and the village clerk shall
be obligated to issue, a temporary license.
   (D)   If a temporary license is issued, and further review identifies a
basis for which a license should be denied, an applicant shall be immediately
notified by telephone that the temporary license is revoked, and his/her
application has been denied. In no event shall an application review take
longer than ten (10) business days during the license year in which the
application is intended. At the expiration of ten (10) business days and
provided no oral decision has been made concerning the issuance of the license,
the applicant may request, and the village clerk shall be obligated to issue a
license to the applicant. Once issued, the license shall only be subject to
suspension or revocation as provided by §
3-24-8 and §
3-24-9 of this chapter.
   (E)   The village clerk shall notify the applicant of his/her decision to
grant or deny a license by the telephone number listed on the application. The
village clerk shall advise the applicant of the basis for the denial.
   (F)   If an application is incomplete, the village clerk shall allow the
applicant an opportunity to provide the information necessary for his/her
review.
   (G)   In the case of a denial, the village clerk shall issue a written
decision advising the applicant why the license was denied. The written
decision shall be mailed to the applicant via U.S. Mail at the address
contained on the application. The written decision shall be postmarked no later
than three (3) business days subsequent to the expiration of the five (5)
business day review period or the oral advisement of a denial of a license,
whichever is later.
   (H)   A denial of a license may be appealed in the manner provided in §
3-24-10 of this chapter.
   (I)   A record of all licenses issued and denied pursuant to this chapter
shall be maintained by the village clerk for a period of two (2) years. (Ord.
24-10, 9-3-2024)
3-24-4: SANITARY AND HEALTH REQUIREMENTS:
It shall be the duty of all persons licensed hereunder, upon the demand of the
village, to furnish for inspection samples of all tobacco products, electronic
cigarettes, alternative nicotine products, tobacco accessories and smoking
herbs in any form sold or offered for sale by them, and it shall be the duty of
such persons to keep their premises and buildings in a clean and sanitary
condition. The village shall inspect and examine, or cause to be inspected and
examined, as often as is deemed necessary, all places where tobacco products,
electronic cigarettes, alternative nicotine products, tobacco accessories and
smoking herbs in any form are licensed to be sold at retail with the village,
and to determine whether all applicable laws of the state and provisions of the
Municipal Code of the Village of Manteno are being complied with. (Ord. 24-10,
9-3-2024)
3-24-5: PROHIBITED ACTS:
   (A)   No person shall sell, offer for sale, give away, deliver or to keep
with the intention of selling, giving away or delivering tobacco products,
electronic cigarettes, alternative nicotine products, tobacco accessories or
smoking herbs within the village without having first obtained a tobacco
license.
   (B)   No person shall sell, offer for sale, give away or deliver any tobacco
product, electronic cigarette, alternative nicotine product, tobacco accessory
or smoking herb to any person under the age of 21 years.
   (C)   No person, including any officer, associate, member, representative,
agent or employee of a licensee under 16 years of age may sell any tobacco
product, electronic cigarette, alternative nicotine product, tobacco accessory
or smoking herb in a licensed premises. This subsection does not apply to a
sale’s clerk in a family-owned business which can prove that the sale’s clerk
is in fact a son or daughter of the owner.
   (D)   Before selling, offering for sale, giving, or furnishing a tobacco
product, electronic cigarette, alternative nicotine product, tobacco accessory
or smoking herb to another person, the person selling, offering for sale,
giving, or furnishing the tobacco product, electronic cigarette, alternative
nicotine product, smoking accessory or smoking herb shall verify that the
person is at least 21 years of age by examining from any person that appears to
be under 30 years of age a government-issued photographic identification that
establishes the person to be 21 years of age or older.
   (E)   The sale or distribution by any person of a tobacco product, including
but not limited to a single or loose cigarette, that is not contained within a
sealed container, pack, or package as provided by the manufacturer, which
container, pack, or package bears the health warning required by federal law,
is prohibited.
   (F)   All single packs of tobacco products, electronic cigarettes,
alternative nicotine products, tobacco accessories and smoking herbs must be
sold from behind the counter or in an age restricted area or in a sealed
display case. Any other tobacco products must be sold in line of sight. The
restrictions described in this subsection do not apply to a retail tobacco
store that (i) derives at least ninety percent (90%) of its revenue from
tobacco and tobacco related products; (ii) does not permit persons under the
age of 21 to enter the premises unless accompanied by a parent or legal
guardian; and (iii) posts a sign on the main entrance way stating that persons
under the legal age of 21 are prohibited from entering unless accompanied by a
parent or legal guardian. This subsection does not prohibit the sale of tobacco
products, electronic cigarettes, alternative nicotine products, tobacco
accessories and smoking herbs from vending machines if the location of the
vending machines are otherwise in compliance with the provision of this
article.
   (G)   No person shall sell, offer for sale, give away or deliver any tobacco
product or alternative nicotine product within 100 feet of any school, child
care facility or other building used for education or recreational programs for
persons under 18 years of age.
   (H)   No person shall distribute without charge samples of any tobacco
product, electronic cigarette, alternative nicotine product, tobacco accessory
or smoking herbs to any other person, regardless of age. This subsection does
not apply to the distribution of a tobacco product, electronic cigarette,
alternative nicotine product, tobacco accessory or smoking herb sample in any
adult-only facility.
   (I)   No person, including shall sell, offer for sale, give away or deliver
any tobacco product, electronic cigarette, alternative nicotine product,
tobacco accessory or smoking herb without posting at or near every display of
such products, or upon every vending machine which offers those products for
sale, a sign stating the following:
      THE SALE OF TOBACCO PRODUCTS, ELECTRONIC CIGARETTES, ALTERNATIVE NICOTINE
PRODUCTS, TOBACCO ACCESSORIES, AND SMOKING HERBS TO PERSONS UNDER 21 YEARS OF
AGE OR THE MISREPRESENTATION OF AGE TO PROCURE SUCH A SALE IS PROHIBITED BY
LAW.
   The text of such signs shall be in red letters on a white background; the
letters to be at least one inch high. Such signs shall be posted in a
conspicuous place on the premises or the vending machine, as the case may be.
   (J)   No person shall honor or accept any discount, coupon, or other benefit
or reduction in price that is inconsistent with 21 CFR 1140, subsequent United
States Food and Drug Administration industry guidance, or any rules adopted
under 21 CFR 1140.
   (K)   No person shall use or display any licensed that has been improperly
acquired.
   (L)   No person shall alter, deface, forge, or counterfeit any licensed
issued by the village. (Ord. 24-10, 9-3-2024)
3-24-6: VENDING MACHINES:
No tobacco product, electronic cigarette, alternative nicotine product, tobacco
accessory or smoking herb may be sold through a vending machine unless such
tobacco product, electronic cigarette, alternative nicotine product, tobacco
accessory or smoking herb are not placed together with any non-tobacco product,
other than matches, and only if the vending machine is in any of the following
locations: (a) places to which persons under 21 years of age are not permitted
access to at any time; or (b) places where alcoholic beverages are sold and
consumed on the premises and vending machine operation is under the direct
supervision of the owner or manager. (Ord. 24-10, 9-3-2024)
3-24-7: PENALTY:
   (A)   Any person found in violation of any of the provisions of this chapter
shall be fined no less than $100 and no more than $750 for each offense. Each
day that a violation occurs or is permitted to continue shall constitute a
separate and distinct offense.
   (B)   Any licensee found in violation of the provisions of this chapter
shall, in addition to any fine that may be imposed, be subject to license
suspension and/or revocation proceedings.
   (C)   Violations of this chapter may be administered as a part of license
proceedings or separately in accordance with the provisions of Title 1,
Administrative, Chapter 17, Administrative Adjudication, of the Manteno
Municipal Code. (Ord. 24-10, 9-3-2024)
3-24-8: LICENSE SUSPENSION AND REVOCATION:
   (A)   Any license issued under this chapter may be suspended or revoked by
the village president after notice and a hearing for any basis identified in §
3-24-9 of this chapter. Notice and a hearing prior to a suspension or
revocation shall not be given if village president determines that an immediate
suspension or revocation is necessary. In such cases, a post-deprivation
hearing will be provided.
   (B)   The village clerk shall provide notice to the licensee via U.S. Mail
setting forth the time and place of the hearing. The notice shall consist of
the charges for which the license’s suspension or revocation is being
considered. The notice shall contain the date(s) on which any charge is alleged
to have occurred along with the name(s) of any witness(es) that will testify at
the hearing. Any written or tangible evidence of the occurrence shall be
identified in the notice.
   (C)   A hearing pursuant to this section shall occur no earlier than seven
(7) days nor later than fourteen (14) days from the date the notice of hearing
is postmarked.
   (D)   The licensee shall be responsible for obtaining a court reporter in
order to preserve the record for appeal.
   (E)   After the hearing, the village president shall orally advise the
licensee of his/her decision to impose any fine and/or suspend or revoke a
license under this chapter. After the decision has been orally related to the
licensee, the village president shall issue a written decision setting forth
his/her decision and the basis for the ruling. The written decision shall be
mailed to the licensee via U.S. Mail at the address contained in the
application. The written decision shall be postmarked no later than five (5)
business days subsequent to the hearing. (Ord. 24-10, 9-3-2024)
3-24-9: BASIS FOR SUSPENSION OR REVOCATION:
Any license may be suspended or revoked for:
   (A)   Any reason for which a license could be or could have been denied
under §
3-24-3;
   (B)   Engaging in any activities prohibited by this chapter, or violations
of federal, State, or other local law, rule, or regulation, including the
Manteno Municipal Code; or,
   (C)   Violations of building, zoning, and property maintenance laws imposed
by the Manteno Municipal Code. (Ord. 24-10, 9-3-2024)
3-24-10: APPEALS:
   (A)   Any person aggrieved by the action or decision of the village clerk or
village president to deny, suspend or revoke a license shall have the right to
appeal such action to the Corporate Authorities within fourteen (14) days from
the date on which the decision has been mailed to the applicant/licensee. This
date shall be determined by the date on which the written decision was
postmarked. In the event the village clerk or village president fails to issue
a written decision, the appellant shall have seventeen days (17) from the date
on which he/she was orally informed of the decision to deny, suspend or revoke
a license to appeal that decision.
   (B)   An appeal shall be perfected by filing a written statement with the
village clerk or village president setting forth the grounds for the appeal. If
a written decision was provided to the appellant from the village clerk or
village president, a copy of that decision shall be attached to the appellant’s
written statement. After the receipt of said appeal, the village clerk or
village president shall schedule the appeal for the next regularly scheduled
meeting of the Corporate Authorities. Provided, however, if said appeal is
received within ninety-six (96) hours of a regularly scheduled meeting, said
appeal shall be heard at the following regularly scheduled meeting.
   (C)   A hearing shall be set no later than thirty (30) days from the date on
which an appeal is received.
   (D)   Notice of the time and place of the appeal hearing shall be given to
the appellant via U.S. Mail at the address provided on the person’s
application.
   (E)   An appellant shall be given notice of the hearing at least seventy-two
(72) hours before the hearing.
   (F)   A decision to affirm or reverse the decision of the village president
concerning the suspension or revocation of a license shall be limited to the
record generated at the hearing in front of the village president.
   (G)   The decision of the corporate authorities of the Village shall be
final and binding on all parties concerned.
   (H)   A decision to affirm or reverse a decision of the village clerk or
village president shall be made by a majority vote of the Corporate Authorities
present at the meeting. (Ord. 24-10, 9-3-2024)
TITLE 4
POLICE REGULATIONS
CHAPTER 1
MISDEMEANOR CODE
SECTION:
Article 1. General Provisions
4-1-1-1: Short Title
4-1-1-2: Village Jurisdiction
4-1-1-3: Civil Remedies Preserved
4-1-1-4: Penalties
4-1-1-5: Definitions
4-1-1-6: Saving Clause
Article 2. Civil Emergency Provisions
4-1-2-1: Definitions
4-1-2-2: Declaration Of Emergency
4-1-2-3: General Curfew
4-1-2-4: General Orders
4-1-2-5: Duration Of Proclamation
4-1-2-6: Notice Of Proclamation
4-1-2-7: Construction
Article 3. Offenses Involving Public Order
4-1-3-1: Disorderly Conduct; Breach Of Peace
4-1-3-2: Public Intoxication; Breach Of Peace; Incapacitated
4-1-3-3: Vagrancy
4-1-3-4: Disturbing Lawful Assemblies
4-1-3-5: Disturbing Elections; Process
4-1-3-6: Assault, Battery And Affray
4-1-3-7: Assault Defined
4-1-3-8: Battery Defined
4-1-3-9: Reckless Conduct
4-1-3-10: Unlawful Assemblies
4-1-3-11: Mob Action
4-1-3-12: Obstructing Stairways Or Exits
4-1-3-13: Resisting Arrest
4-1-3-14: Police And Fire Officers; Interfering And Obeying
4-1-3-15: Unlawful Use Of Weapons
4-1-3-16: Firing Or Discharging Weapons
4-1-3-17: Carrying Loaded Weapons
4-1-3-18: Unlawful Display Of Weapon
4-1-3-19: Confiscation And Disposition Of Weapons
4-1-3-20: Disorderly Conduct/Fighting In Or Near An Establishment Licensed To
Sell Alcohol
Article 4. Offenses Involving Health, Safety And Children
4-1-4-1: Dangerous Fires
4-1-4-2: Bonfires
4-1-4-3: Nuisances; Creating, Maintaining
4-1-4-4: Loud, Disturbing And Unnecessary Noises
4-1-4-5: Stench Bombs; Nauseous Gases And Substances
4-1-4-6: Throwing Missiles Or Bottles
4-1-4-7: Articles In Windows
4-1-4-8: Sale Of Alcoholic Liquor To Minors Prohibited
4-1-4-9: Possession Of Alcoholic Liquor By Minors Prohibited
4-1-4-10: Consumption Of Alcoholic Liquor By Minors Prohibited
4-1-4-11: Exception To Sections
4-1-4-9 And
4-1-4-10
4-1-4-12: Use Of Forged Identification Card To Obtain Liquor Prohibited
4-1-4-13: Sale Of Firearms Or Weapons To Minors Prohibited
4-1-4-14: Sniffing Or Inhaling Of Intoxicants Prohibited
4-1-4-15: Truancy
4-1-4-16: Possession, Sales And Use Of Fireworks
4-1-4-17: Possession/Use Of Cannabis Or Drug Paraphernalia
4-1-4-18: Tobacco And Related Products
4-1-4-19: Public Urination Or Defecation
Article 5. Offenses Involving Property
4-1-5-1: Criminal Housing Management
4-1-5-2: Trespass To Land And Buildings
4-1-5-3: Malicious Mischief Or Destruction
4-1-5-4: Coin Operated Devices; Slugs, Tampering
4-1-5-5: Public Camping
Article 6. Offenses Involving Morality
4-1-6-1: Prostitution Defined
4-1-6-2: Keeping A Place Of Prostitution
4-1-6-3: Patronizing A Prostitute
4-1-6-4: Soliciting For A Prostitute
4-1-6-5: Pandering
4-1-6-6: Pimping
4-1-6-7: Public Indecency; Acts Or Language Prohibited
4-1-6-8: Obscenity Defined; Prohibited
4-1-6-9: Obscene Marking In Public View Prohibited
4-1-6-10: Obscenity; Affirmative Defense
4-1-6-11: Window Peeping Prohibited
4-1-6-12: Gambling
Article 7. Miscellaneous Provisions
4-1-7-1: Violation Of Civil Rights; Elements
4-1-7-2: Violation Of Civil Rights; Sanctions
4-1-7-3: Necessity As Affirmative Defenses
4-1-7-4: Bribery; Offering Or Accepting
4-1-7-5: Solicitation To Commit Offense
4-1-7-6: Conspiracy To Commit Offense
4-1-7-7: Solicitation And Conspiracy; Affirmative Defense
4-1-7-8: Telephone Solicitation Or Promotion; Registration Required
4-1-7-9: Telephones; Obscene, Anonymous, Misrepresented Calls
4-1-7-10: False Alarms; Security Systems, Police, Fire, Ambulance
4-1-7-11: Climbing Utility Poles
4-1-7-12: Intimidation Defined; Prohibited
ARTICLE 1. GENERAL PROVISIONS
4-1-1-1: SHORT TITLE:
This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the MISDEMEANOR CODE OF
MANTENO, ILLINOIS. (1974 Code)
4-1-1-2: VILLAGE JURISDICTION:
   (A)   A person is subject to prosecution by the village for an offense which
he commits, while either within or outside the village, by his own conduct or
that of another for which he is legally accountable, if:
      1.   The offense is committed either wholly or partly within the village;
or
      2.   The conduct outside the village constitutes an attempt to commit an
offense within the village; or
      3.   The conduct outside the village constitutes a conspiracy to commit
an offense within the village and an act in furtherance of the conspiracy
occurs in the village; or
      4.   The conduct within the village constitutes an attempt, solicitation
or conspiracy to commit in another jurisdiction an offense under the laws of
both this village and such other jurisdiction.
   (B)   An offense is committed partly within the village if either the
conduct which is an element of the offense or the result which is such an
element, occurs within the village.
   (C)   An offense which is based on an omission to perform a duty imposed by
the laws of the village is committed within the village regardless of the
location of the offender at the time of the omission. (1974 Code)
4-1-1-3: CIVIL REMEDIES PRESERVED:
This chapter does not bar, suspend or otherwise affect any right or liability
to damages, penalty, forfeiture or other remedy authorized by law to be
recovered or enforced in a civil action for any conduct which this chapter
makes punishable; and the civil injury is not merged in the offense. (1974
Code)
4-1-1-4: PENALTIES:
Unless otherwise specifically provided in this chapter, violations of any
provision thereof shall be punishable as provided by section
1-4-1 of this code. (1974 Code)
4-1-1-5: DEFINITIONS:
ACT: Includes a failure or omission to take action.
AIR RIFLE: Means and includes any air gun, air pistol, spring gun, spring
pistol, BB gun or pellet gun which impels a pellet constructed of hard plastic,
steel, lead, stone or other hard materials with force that reasonably is
expected to cause bodily harm or property damage.
ANOTHER: A person or persons as defined in this chapter other than the
offender.
PERSON: Any individual, public or private corporation, government, partnership
or unincorporated association. The masculine gender shall include the feminine,
and the singular shall include the plural.
POLICE OFFICER: Any person who by virtue of his office or public employment is
vested by law with a duty to maintain public order or to make arrests for
offenses, whether that duty extends to all offenses or is limited to specific
offenses.
PUBLIC EMPLOYEE: A person, other than a public officer, who is authorized to
perform any official function on behalf of, and is paid by, the village or any
of its subdivisions or agencies.
PUBLIC OFFICER: A person who is elected to office pursuant to a statute or
ordinance, or who is appointed to an office which is established, and the
qualifications and duties of which are prescribed by statute or ordinance to
discharge a public duty for the village or any of its subdivisions or agencies.
REASONABLE BELIEF OR REASONABLY BELIEVES: The person concerned, acting as a
reasonable man, believes that the described facts exist. (1974 Code)
4-1-1-6: SAVING CLAUSE:
If any part, article, section or subdivision of this chapter shall be held
unconstitutional or invalid for any reason, such holding shall not be construed
to invalidate or impair the remaining provisions of this chapter, which shall
continue in full force and effect notwithstanding such holding. (1974 Code)
ARTICLE 2. CIVIL EMERGENCY PROVISIONS
4-1-2-1: DEFINITIONS:
For the purposes of this chapter:
CIVIL EMERGENCY:
   (A)   Any riot or unlawful assembly characterized by the use of actual force
or violence or any threat to use force if accompanied by immediate power to
execute, by three (3) or more persons acting together without authority of law;
or
   (B)   Any natural disaster or manmade calamity, including flood,
conflagration, cyclone, tornado, earthquake or explosion within the corporate
limits of the village resulting in the death or injury of persons or the
destruction of property to such an extent that extraordinary measures must be
taken to protect the public health, safety and welfare.
CURFEW: A prohibition against any person or persons walking, running,
loitering, standing or motoring upon any alley, street, highway, public
property or vacant premises within the corporate limits of the village,
excepting officials of any governmental unit and persons officially designated
to duty with reference to said civil emergency. (1974 Code)
4-1-2-2: DECLARATION OF EMERGENCY:
Whenever a "civil emergency", as defined in section
4-1-2-1 of this article exists, the president shall declare its existence by
means of a written declaration setting forth the facts which constitute the
emergency. (1974 Code)
4-1-2-3: GENERAL CURFEW:
After proclamation of a civil emergency by the president, he may order a
general curfew applicable to such geographical areas of the village or the
village as a whole as he deems advisable, and applicable during such hours of
the day or night as he deems necessary in the interest of the public safety and
welfare. (1974 Code)
4-1-2-4: GENERAL ORDERS:
After the proclamation of a civil emergency, the president may also in the
interest of public safety and welfare make any or all of the following orders:
   (A)   Order the closing of all retail alcoholic liquor businesses, including
taverns and private clubs or portions thereof wherein the consumption of
intoxicating liquor and beer is permitted.
   (B)   Order the discontinuance of the sale of alcoholic liquor by any
wholesaler or retailer.
   (C)   Order the discontinuance of selling, distributing or giving away of
gasoline or other liquid flammable or combustible products in any container
other than a gasoline tank properly affixed to a motor vehicle.
   (D)   Order the discontinuance of selling, distributing, dispensing or
giving away of any firearms or ammunition of any character whatsoever.
   (E)   Issue such other orders as are imminently necessary for the protection
of life and property.
   (F)   Call out the state militia to aid in suppressing riots or the carrying
into effect of any law or ordinance subject to approval of the governor of
Illinois as provided in 65 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/3-11-4. (1974 Code)
4-1-2-5: DURATION OF PROCLAMATION:
The proclamation herein authorized shall be effective for a period of forty
eight (48) hours unless sooner terminated by a proclamation of the president
indicating that the civil emergency no longer exists. The president shall have
the power to reproclaim the existence of a civil emergency at the end of each
forty eight (48) hour period during the time the said civil emergency exists.
(1974 Code)
4-1-2-6: NOTICE OF PROCLAMATION:
Upon issuing the proclamation herein authorized, the chief of police shall
notify any news media situated within the village and shall cause three (3)
copies of the proclamation declaring the existence of the emergency to be
posted at the village hall. (1974 Code)
4-1-2-7: CONSTRUCTION:
Nothing contained in this chapter shall be construed to impair the powers
contained in other chapters of this code or any rules or regulations pursuant
thereto, giving powers to the police and fire departments, but shall be
construed together with existing ordinances that are now, or shall be, in
effect for the safety and welfare of the citizens of the village. (1974 Code)
ARTICLE 3. OFFENSES INVOLVING PUBLIC ORDER
4-1-3-1: DISORDERLY CONDUCT; BREACH OF PEACE:
It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in any violent, tumultuous,
offensive or disorderly conduct; by threatening, traducing, quarreling,
challenging to fight or fighting; or by using obscene, offensive, profane or
unseemly language to the annoyance, disturbance or vexation of another; or to
be guilty of any conduct calculated to breach the peace. (1974 Code)
4-1-3-2: PUBLIC INTOXICATION; BREACH OF PEACE; INCAPACITATED:
It shall be unlawful for any person in any public place to be in such a state
of intoxication that:
   (A)   He is unreasonably loud, obscene or disorderly so as to breach the
peace; or
   (B)   He is incoherent, incapacitated or asleep so as not to be able to
control, direct or protect himself.
It shall be the duty of police officers to arrest any such person when they
reasonably believe such condition exists. (1974 Code)
4-1-3-3: VAGRANCY:
It shall be unlawful for any person to be guilty of vagrancy as herein defined.
The following persons shall be deemed vagrants:
   (A)   Burglar's Tools: Any person upon whose possession shall be found any
instrument, tool or other implement for picking locks or pockets, or any
implement that is usually employed or that reasonably may be inferred to have
been designed to be employed in the commission of any felony or misdemeanor or
in the violation of any ordinance, and who shall fail to account satisfactorily
for the possession of the same.
   (B)   Unlawful Occupancy: Any person wandering abroad and occupying, lodging
or sleeping in any vacant or unoccupied barn, garage, shed, shop or other
building or structure, or in any automobile, truck, railroad car or other
vehicle, without owning the same or without permission of the owner or person
entitled to the possession of the same, or sleeping in any vacant lot during
the hours of darkness and not giving a satisfactory account for himself.
   (C)   Begging: Any person wandering abroad and begging; or any person who
goes about from door to door of private homes or commercial and business
establishments, or places himself in or upon any public way or public place to
beg or receive alms for himself.
   (D)   Loitering: Any person found loitering or strolling, in, about or upon
any street, alley or other public way or public place, or at any public
gathering or assembly, or in or around any store, shop or business or
commercial establishment, or on any private property or place without lawful
business and conducting himself in a lewd, lascivious manner in speech or
behavior. (1974 Code)
4-1-3-4: DISTURBING LAWFUL ASSEMBLIES:
It shall be unlawful for any person to wilfully interrupt or disturb any
funeral assembly, funeral procession, school, any assembly met for the worship
of God or any other assembly met for a lawful purpose by any offensive
behavior, or by any disorderly conduct. (1974 Code)
4-1-3-5: DISTURBING ELECTIONS; PROCESS:
It shall be unlawful for any person to create any disturbance at an election
poll or to interfere with the election process. (1974 Code)
4-1-3-6: ASSAULT, BATTERY AND AFFRAY:
It shall be unlawful for any person to knowingly start a fight, or to fight, or
to commit any assault or assault and battery anywhere within the village. (1974
Code)
4-1-3-7: ASSAULT DEFINED:
A person commits an assault when, without lawful authority, he engages in
conduct which places another in reasonable apprehension of receiving a battery.
(1974 Code)
4-1-3-8: BATTERY DEFINED:
A person commits battery if he intentionally or knowingly, without legal
justification and by any means: a) causes bodily harm to an individual, or b)
makes physical contact of an insulting or provoking nature with an individual.
(1974 Code)
4-1-3-9: RECKLESS CONDUCT:
A person who causes bodily harm to or endangers the bodily safety of an
individual by any means commits reckless conduct if he performs recklessly the
acts which cause the harm or endangers the safety of an individual, whether
they are lawful or are unlawful. (1974 Code)
4-1-3-10: UNLAWFUL ASSEMBLIES:
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any two (2) or more persons to assemble
together for any unlawful purpose or being assembled to act in concert to do an
unlawful act against the property of the village or the person or property of
another or against the public peace, or to make any movement or preparation
therefor.
   (B)   It shall be unlawful for any person to knowingly suffer or permit any
assemblage for the purpose of committing any unlawful act or breach of the
peace or any riotous, offensive or disorderly conduct in or upon premises owned
or occupied by him, or under his control, within the village. (1974 Code)
4-1-3-11: MOB ACTION:
It shall be unlawful for any person to participate in mob action, as defined
herein:
   (A)   The use of force, violence or other disruptive conduct by two (2) or
more persons acting together, without lawful authority, so as to constitute a
breach of the peace; or
   (B)   The assembly of two (2) or more persons to do an unlawful act; or
   (C)   The assembly of two (2) or more persons without authority of law to do
violence to the person or property of another. (1974 Code)
4-1-3-12: OBSTRUCTING STAIRWAYS OR EXITS:
It shall be unlawful to obstruct or permit the obstruction of any stairway,
aisles, corridor or exit in any office building, factory, hotel, school,
church, theater, assembly hall, lodge or other public hall or any building used
by two (2) or more tenants or families in such a manner that it interferes with
the free use of such stairway, aisle, corridor or exit. (1974 Code)
4-1-3-13: RESISTING ARREST:
It shall be unlawful for any person to knowingly or wilfully resist an arrest
which he knows is being made by a police officer, or by a private person
summoned and directed by a police officer to make an arrest, even if he
believes that the arrest is unlawful, and the arrest is in fact unlawful. (1974
Code)
4-1-3-14: POLICE AND FIRE OFFICERS; INTERFERING AND OBEYING:
It shall be unlawful for any person:
   (A)   To knowingly prevent, obstruct, harass or endanger, by any means, any
police officer, fire officer or other official or employee or any military
personnel on emergency duty within the village, in the lawful performance of
his duties.
   (B)   To knowingly or wilfully refuse or neglect to obey, without reasonable
justification therefor, any lawful order or direction of any police officer,
fire officer or other official or employee or any military personnel on
emergency duty within the village. (1974 Code)
4-1-3-15: UNLAWFUL USE OF WEAPONS:
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to:
      1.   Possess or carry any bludgeon, blackjack, slingshot, sand club,
sandbag, metal knuckles or any knife, commonly referred to as a switchblade
knife, which has a blade that opens automatically by hand pressure applied to a
button, spring or other device in the handle of the knife; or
      2.   Carry or posses with intent to use the same unlawfully against
another, a dagger, dirk, billy, dangerous knife, razor, stiletto, broken bottle
or other piece of glass, or any other dangerous or deadly weapon or instrument
of like character; or
      3.   Carry on or about his person or in any vehicle a tear gas gun
projector or bomb, or any object containing noxious liquid gas or substance; or
      4.   Carry concealed in any vehicle or concealed on or about his person,
except when on his land or in his own abode or fixed place of business, any
pistol, revolver or other firearm; or
      5.   Set a spring gun; or
      6.   Possess any device or attachment of any kind designed, used or
intended for use in silencing the report of any firearm; or
      7.   Possess or carry any weapon from which more than eight (8) shots or
bullets may be discharged by a single function of the firing device, any
shotgun with a barrel less than eighteen inches (18") in length, or any
bombshell, grenade, bottle or other container containing an explosive
substance, such as, but not limited to, black powder bombs and Molotov
cocktails; or
      8.   Carry or possess any firearm or other deadly weapon in any place
which is licensed to sell alcoholic liquor, or at any public gathering held
pursuant to a license issued by any governmental body or any public gathering
at which an admission is charged, excluding any place where a showing,
demonstration or lecture involving the exhibition of unloaded firearms is
conducted within the limits of the village.
   (B)   The presence in any automobile other than a public omnibus of any
weapon, instrument or substance referred to in subsection (A)7 of this section
is prima facie evidence that it is in the possession of, and is being carried
by, all persons occupying such automobile at the time such weapon, instrument
or substance is found, except under the following circumstances:
      1.   If such weapon, instrument or instrumentality is found upon the
person of one of the occupants therein; or
      2.   If such weapon, instrument or substance is found in an automobile
operated for hire by a duly licensed driver in the due, lawful and proper
pursuit of his trade, then such presumption shall not apply to the driver.
   (C)   Subsections (A)3 and (A)4 of this section shall not be construed to
apply to any duly authorized and appointed police officer or agent of this
village or of the state of Illinois, or of the United States, or to any member
of the armed forces or reserve forces of the United States or the Illinois
national guard, while in the performance of their duties. (1974 Code)
4-1-3-16: FIRING OR DISCHARGING WEAPONS:
It shall be unlawful for any person to fire or discharge any firearm, air gun,
slingshot, bow, crossbow, or other device designed to fire, project, or throw
any stone, bullet, or other hard substance within the village; provided,
however, that this section shall not apply to any police officer discharging a
firearm in the performance of his duty, nor any citizen from discharging any
firearm when lawfully defending his person or property. (1974 Code)
4-1-3-17: CARRYING LOADED WEAPONS:
It shall be unlawful for any person, except persons permitted by law, to have
or carry any shotgun, rifle, or air gun in or on any vehicle, unless such
shotgun, rifle, or air gun is dismantled to render it incapable of being fired
or is unloaded when enclosed in a case; the removal of the bolt from a bolt
action rifle shall not be construed as dismantled so as to render it incapable
of firing. (1974 Code)
4-1-3-18: UNLAWFUL DISPLAY OF WEAPON:
It shall be unlawful for any person in possession of any weapon or device set
forth in this chapter to display or flourish any such weapon in a threatening
or boisterous manner such as might alarm a reasonable man. (1974 Code)
4-1-3-19: CONFISCATION AND DISPOSITION OF WEAPONS:
   (A)   Upon conviction of a violation of sections
4-1-3-15 through
4-1-3-18 of this chapter, any weapons seized shall be confiscated by the Trial
Court.
   (B)   Any stolen weapon so confiscated when no longer needed for evidentiary
purposes shall be returned to the person entitled to possession, if known. All
other confiscated weapons when no longer needed for evidentiary purposes shall,
in the discretion of the Trial Court, be destroyed or preserved as the property
of the Village. (1974 Code)
4-1-3-20: DISORDERLY CONDUCT/FIGHTING IN OR NEAR AN ESTABLISHMENT LICENSED TO
SELL ALCOHOL:
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to knowingly do any act in such an
unreasonable manner as to alarm or disturb another and to provoke a breach of
the peace in an establishment licensed to sell alcohol, or upon any sidewalk,
street, alley, or other public property in the vicinity of an establishment
licensed to sell alcohol.
   (B)   It shall be unlawful for any person to quarrel, fight, or to commit
any assault or assault and battery in an establishment licensed to sell
alcohol, or upon any sidewalk, street, alley, or other public property in the
vicinity of establishment licensed to sell alcohol.
   (C)   It shall be unlawful for any retailer licensed to sell alcohol to
suffer any person to engage in any conduct referenced in subsections (A) and
(B) of this section in the establishment for which it is licensed to sell
alcohol, or upon any sidewalk, street, alley, or other public property in the
vicinity of such licensed establishment.
   (D)   It shall be unlawful for any retailer licensed to sell alcohol to:
      1.   Fail or refuse to contact Police if an incident as referenced in
subsections (A) through (C) of this section occurs in or outside that
establishment.
      2.   Fail or refuse to allow Police to view and/or make copies of any
video recording which may have recorded an incident as referenced in
subsections (A) through (C) of this section regardless of any claim that the
video recording equipment failed to depict the incident or was otherwise
inoperable at the time of the incident.
      3.   Fail or refuse to provide the names of individuals involved in an
incident as referenced in subsections (A) through (C) of this section or
provide a description of the incident to Police.
   (E)   Any individual, corporation, partnership or other entity licensed to
sell alcohol may be held liable for the acts or omissions of its employees/
agents in violation of this section. (Ord. 16-38, 4-3-2017)
ARTICLE 4. OFFENSES INVOLVING HEALTH, SAFETY AND CHILDREN
4-1-4-1: DANGEROUS FIRES:
It shall be unlawful for any person to start by any means, or to permit another
to start, any fire which endangers or damages the health, person, or property
of another. (1974 Code)
4-1-4-2: BONFIRES:
It shall be unlawful to build or light any bonfire so close to any building or
other structure as to endanger such building or structure or upon any asphalt
street or sidewalk pavement. (1974 Code)
4-1-4-3: NUISANCES; CREATING, MAINTAINING:
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to create or maintain anywhere
within the Village any nuisance as declared in title 5, chapter 1 of this Code,
or to permit or direct another to do the same.
   (B)   Notice of such nuisance and violation thereof shall be given to the
person responsible or his agent, and to the proper Village official whose
duties include the abatement of such nuisances. (1974 Code)
4-1-4-4: LOUD, DISTURBING AND UNNECESSARY NOISES:
The creating of any unreasonably loud, disturbing, and unnecessary noise within
the limits of the Village is prohibited.
The following acts are declared to be loud, disturbing, and unnecessary noises
in violation of this section, but this enumeration shall not be deemed to be
exclusive, namely:
   (A)   Blowing Horns: The sounding of any horn or signal device on any
automobile, motorcycle, or bus so as to create an unreasonably loud or harsh
sound; and the sounding of such device for an unnecessary and unreasonable
period of time.
   (B)   Radios, Phonographs, Etc.: The playing of any radio, phonograph, or
musical instrument with such volume, particularly between the hours of eleven
o'clock (11:00) P.M. and seven o'clock (7:00) A.M., as to unreasonably annoy or
disturb the quiet, comfort, or repose of persons in any office, hospital,
dwelling, hotel, or other such building.
   (C)   Yelling, Shouting, Hooting, Etc.: Yelling, shouting, hooting,
whistling, or singing, particularly on the public streets between the hours of
eleven o'clock (11:00) P.M. and seven o'clock (7:00) A.M., or at any other time
or place, so as to unreasonably annoy or disturb the quiet, comfort or repose
of any person in the vicinity.
   (D)   Pets: The keeping of any animal, bird, or fowl which, by causing
frequent or long continued noises, shall disturb the comfort or repose of any
person in the vicinity.
   (E)   Blowing Whistles: The blowing of any steam whistle attached to any
stationary boiler, other than to give notice of the time to begin or stop work,
or as a warning of fire or danger, or upon request of proper Village
authorities.
   (F)   Exhaust Discharge: The discharge into the open air of the exhaust of
any steam engine, stationary internal combustion engine, motor vehicle or
motorboat engine, except through a muffler or other device which will
effectively prevent loud or explosive noises therefrom. (1974 Code)
   (G)   Building Operations: The erection (including excavation), demolition,
alteration or repair of any building, or the excavation of streets or public
places in any residential area, other than between the hours of seven o'clock
(7:00) A.M. and seven o'clock (7:00) P.M., Monday through Saturday, and ten
o'clock (10:00) A.M. and seven o'clock (7:00) P.M. on Sunday and village
holidays, except in case of urgent necessity in the interest of public health
and safety, and then only with a written permit from the building inspector.
(Ord. 95-11, 10-9-1995)
   (H)   Noises Near Schools, Hospitals, Churches, Etc.: The creation of any
excessive noise on any street adjacent to any school, institution of learning,
church, or court while the same are in session, or adjacent to any hospital,
which unreasonably interferes with the workings or sessions thereof.
   (I)   Noises To Attract Attention: The use of any drum, loudspeaker or other
instrument or device for the purpose of attracting attention by creation of
noise to any performance, show, or sale or display of merchandise.
   (J)   Loudspeakers Or Amplifiers: The unreasonable use of any amplifiers or
loudspeakers in the course of any public address. (1974 Code)
4-1-4-5: STENCH BOMBS; NAUSEOUS GASES AND SUBSTANCES:
   (A)   Prohibited Acts And Substances: It shall be unlawful for any person to
throw, drop, pour, deposit, or discharge upon the person or the property of
another any liquid, gaseous, or solid substance which is injurious to person or
property or which is nauseous, sickening, irritating or offensive to any of the
senses, with the intent to unlawfully injure, molest, discomfort or discommode
another in the use, management, conduct, or control of his personal property.
No person shall attempt, or aid in the attempt or commission of, any act
prohibited herein.
   (B)   Accepted Uses: The prohibitions of subsection (A) of this section
shall not apply to police officers acting in the line of duty or to proprietors
of business premises or to their employees using such substances for the
protection of such business premises when the substances referred to herein are
kept solely for the purpose of repelling robbers, thieves, burglars, or other
such persons violating the law. (1974 Code)
4-1-4-6: THROWING MISSILES OR BOTTLES:
It shall be unlawful for any person purposely or recklessly to cast, throw,
drop or break any stone, rock, brick, glass bottle, or other missile or
substance from any overpass or onto any street, alley, or other public way or
in, at, or against any person, residence, building, car, or other property.
(1974 Code)
4-1-4-7: ARTICLES IN WINDOWS:
It shall be unlawful to place any movable article on window ledges abutting a
public street, alley or sidewalk, in such a manner that the same can be or is
in danger of falling onto such street, alley, or sidewalk. (1974 Code)
4-1-4-8: SALE OF ALCOHOLIC LIQUOR TO MINORS PROHIBITED:
It shall be unlawful for any person, after purchasing or otherwise obtaining
alcoholic liquor, to sell, give, or deliver such alcoholic liquor to another
person under the age of twenty one (21) years, except in the performance of a
religious ceremony or service. (1974 Code; amd. Ord. 00-27, 11-20-2000)
4-1-4-9: POSSESSION OF ALCOHOLIC LIQUOR BY MINORS PROHIBITED:
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to whom the sale, gift or delivery
of alcoholic liquor is prohibited by this chapter to purchase or accept a gift
of alcoholic liquor or to have alcoholic liquor in his possession.
   (B)   The presence in a vehicle, other than a public omnibus, of any
alcoholic liquor shall be prima facie evidence that is in the possession of,
and is being carried by, all persons occupying such vehicle at the time of
which such alcoholic liquor is found, except under the following circumstances:
      1.   If such liquor is found on the person of one of the occupants
therein; or
      2.   If such vehicle contains at least one occupant over twenty one (21)
years of age. (1974 Code)
4-1-4-10: CONSUMPTION OF ALCOHOLIC LIQUOR BY MINORS PROHIBITED:
It shall be unlawful for any person under twenty one (21) years of age to
consume alcoholic liquor, except as set forth in section
4-1-4-11 of this article. (Ord. 00-27, 11-20-2000)
4-1-4-11: EXCEPTION TO SECTIONS 4-1-4-9 AND 4-1-4-10:
Nothing in sections
4-1-4-9 and
4-1-4-10 of this article shall be deemed to prohibit the possession,
dispensing, or consumption by a minor of alcoholic liquor in the performance of
a religious service or ceremony, or the consumption by a minor under the direct
supervision and approval of the parent or parents or legal guardian of such
minor in the privacy of a home. (1974 Code)
4-1-4-12: USE OF FORGED IDENTIFICATION CARD TO OBTAIN LIQUOR PROHIBITED:
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to display an identification card
that:
      1.   Is altered or defaced in any manner; or
      2.   Is false or forged; or
      3.   Is the identification card of another; or
      4.   Was obtained by means of false information;
to induce another to sell, give or deliver alcoholic liquor to the bearer.
   (B)   For the purposes of this section, an "identification card" is defined
as any document issued by a public officer in the performance of his official
duties which on its face purports to identify the name and age of the bearer.
(1974 Code)
4-1-4-13: SALE OF FIREARMS OR WEAPONS TO MINORS PROHIBITED:
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to sell to any minor person any
firearm, bludgeon, blackjack, slingshot, sand club, sandbag, metal knuckles,
dagger, dirk, billy, dangerous knife, stiletto or any knife commonly referred
to as a switchblade, which has a blade that opens automatically by hand
pressure applied to a button, spring or other device in the handle of the
knife.
   (B)   It shall be unlawful for any person to sell, lend, rent, give or
otherwise transfer any "air rifle" to a person under thirteen (13) years of age
except where the relationship of parent-child, guardian-ward, or adult
instructor-pupil exists between such person and the person under thirteen (13)
years of age.
   (C)   It shall be an affirmative defense for any person having sold such
weapon that:
      1.   The minor procured the sale by use of false or forged identification
cards; and
      2.   He did not know, and could not reasonably have known, of the falsity
or forgery; and
      3.   He exercised reasonable diligence to determine the veracity of the
representation. (1974 Code)
4-1-4-14: SNIFFING OR INHALING OF INTOXICANTS PROHIBITED:
   (A)   Unless otherwise authorized or exempted by state law, it shall be
unlawful for any person to inhale, sniff, swallow, inject, or breath the vapors
of glue, kerosene, gasoline, paint, cleaning fluids, or any other illegal
substance not manufactured or produced for such human consumption for the
purpose of becoming intoxicated.
   (B)   It shall be unlawful for any person to command, encourage, request,
aid or abet any other person to violate the provisions of this section.
   (C)   The penalty for the violation of this section shall be fifty dollars
($50.00), and if not paid within ten (10) days to be increased to one hundred
dollars ($100.00). (Ord. 02-02, 5-20-2002; amd. Ord. 19-32, 1-21-2020)
4-1-4-15: TRUANCY:
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any child between the ages of seven (7) and
seventeen (17) years who is subject to compulsory school attendance to be
absent without valid cause except as permitted by the School Code.
   (B)   It shall be unlawful for any person having custody or control of a
child between the ages of seven (7) and seventeen (17) years who is subject to
compulsory school attendance to allow such child to be absent without valid
cause except as permitted by the School Code. (Ord. 06-60, 1-15-2007)
4-1-4-16: POSSESSION, SALES AND USE OF FIREWORKS:
   (A)   Fireworks shall be as defined in 425 Illinois Compiled Statutes 35/
1 et seq., and shall include any explosive composition, or any substance or
combination of substances, or article prepared for the purpose of producing a
visible or audible effect of a temporary exhibitional nature by explosion,
combustion, deflagration or detonation, and shall include toy cannons, in which
explosives are used, the type of balloons which require fire underneath to
propel the same, firecrackers, torpedoes, skyrockets, roman candles, bombs, or
other fireworks of like construction and any fireworks containing any explosive
compound, or any tablets or other device containing any explosive substance, or
containing combustible substances producing visual effects. The term
"fireworks" shall not include snake or glowworm pellets; smoke devices;
sparklers; trick noisemakers known as "party poppers", "booby traps",
"snappers", "trick matches", "cigarette loads", and "auto burglar alarms"; toy
pistols, toy canes, toy guns, or other devices in which paper or plastic caps
containing twenty five hundredths (0.25) grain or less of explosive compound is
used, providing they are so constructed that the hand cannot come in contact
with the cap when in place for the explosion; and toy pistol paper or plastic
caps which contain less than twenty hundredths (0.20) grain of explosive
mixture; the sale and use of which shall be permitted at all times.
   (B)   No person, firm, copartnership or corporation shall knowingly possess,
offer for sale, expose for sale, sell at retail or use or explode any
fireworks, flame effects, or pyrotechnic displays except as herein provided.
   (C)   The Village President and the Board of Trustees shall have the
authority to adopt reasonable rules and regulations for the granting of permits
for supervised displays of fireworks by the Village, park district and other
organizations or groups of individuals. Permits may be granted and approved in
accordance with the regulations for the display upon application to the Village
of Manteno Chief of Police and upon filing a proof of insurance with the
Village in the sum of not less than one million dollars ($1,000,000.00) with
the Village of Manteno named as an additional insured on the insurance policy.
(See NFPA 1123, code for fireworks display and NFPA 1126, standard for the use
of pyrotechnics before a proximate audience.) Every such display shall be
handled by a competent operator, licensed or certified as to competency. Every
such display shall be of such composition and character and shall be located,
discharged, or fired so as, in the opinion of the Chief of Police and the
Manteno fire protection district Fire Chief, after proper site inspection, not
to be hazardous to any person or property. No permit granted hereunder shall be
transferable.
   (D)   Applications for a pyrotechnic display permit shall be made in writing
to the Chief of Police at least thirty (30) days in advance of the date of the
pyrotechnic display. Based on the recommendation of the Chief of Police and the
Fire Chief the application for permit will be presented to the Village Board
for consideration. If a permit is granted, sales, possession, use, and
distribution of display fireworks for the display shall be lawful for that
purpose only.
   (E)   Before any permit for a pyrotechnic display shall be issued, the
person, firm, or corporation making application therefor shall furnish proof of
financial responsibility (proof of insurance in the amount of $1,000,000.00
with the Village named as additional insured) to satisfy claims for damages to
property or personal injuries arising out of any act or omission on the part of
such person, firm, or corporation or any agent or employee thereof, in such
amount, character, and form as the Chief of Police and Fire Chief determine to
be necessary for the protection of the public.
   (F)   A permit shall be issued only after the Chief of Police and Fire
Chief, or his or her designees, have inspected the site and determined that the
display can be performed in full compliance with the rules adopted by the State
Fire Marshal and that the display shall not be hazardous to property or
endanger any person or persons.
   (G)   Nothing in this section shall be construed to prohibit any of the
following (as enumerated):
      1.   The sale at wholesale of any fireworks for supervised displays by
any approved resident manufacturer, wholesaler, dealer, or jobber in accordance
with regulations of the U.S. Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco and Firearms (see title
27, Code of Federal Regulations, subchapter C) and the U.S. Department of
Transportation.
      2.   The manufacture, transportation or storage of fireworks at a
manufacturing facility. The testing of fireworks under the direction of its
manufacturer provided permission for such testing has been obtained from the
Village of Manteno.
      3.   The sale, transportation, handling or use of industrial pyrotechnic
devices or fireworks such as railroad torpedoes, fuses, automotive,
aeronautical and marine flares and smoke signals.
      4.   The sale and use of blank cartridges for use in a show or theater,
for signal or ceremonial purposes, in athletics or sports, or legal power
tools.
      5.   The transportation, handling, or use of pyrotechnic devices by the
armed forces of the United States.
      6.   The use of pyrotechnics in training by the fire service, law
enforcement or similar government agencies.
      7.   The use of fireworks for agricultural purposes under the direct
supervision of the U.S. Department of the Interior or an equivalent State or
local agency. (See title 16, Code of Federal Regulations, part 1500.17(a)(8).)
   (H)   The Village shall seize, take, remove or cause to be removed at the
expense of the owner all stocks of fireworks offered or exposed for sale or
stored or held in violation of this section. If the court finds that the owner
possessed the seized fireworks or combustibles in violation of this section
and/or the Fireworks Use Act, the Village shall seek a judgment ordering the
confiscation, forfeiture, and destruction of the seized fireworks or
combustibles. Fireworks or combustibles subject to the court's order shall be
destroyed under the supervision of the Village at the expense of the owner of
the fireworks or combustibles.
   (I)   If the owner of real property on which any of the prohibited
activities cited in this section takes place is present while the prohibited
activity or activities occurs, the owner shall have violated this section by
failing to exercise proper responsibility for those committing any of the acts
set forth in this section and said other persons shall be deemed to have
committed the said acts with the knowledge and permission of the owner, in
violation of this section.
   (J)   Upon being given notice by any member of the Manteno Police Department
of the existence or occurrence of any of the prohibited activities set forth in
this section occurring on his or her property, the owner of said property shall
immediately take appropriate actions to terminate and/or prevent said
activities. The owner's failure to terminate and/or prevent the prohibited
activities shall constitute a further violation of this section. (Ord. 09-38,
4-19-2010)
4-1-4-17: POSSESSION/USE OF CANNABIS OR DRUG PARAPHERNALIA:
   (A)   Except as otherwise authorized in the Cannabis Regulation and Tax Act,
it shall be unlawful for any person to knowingly possess more than thirty (30)
grams of Cannabis Flower, more than five hundred (500) milligrams of THC
contained in cannabis-infused product, more than five (5) grams of cannabis
concentrate. It is also unlawful for anyone to grow or possess cannabis plants
unless they are a patient under the Compassionate Use of Medical Cannabis Act.
   (B)   It is unlawful for anyone under the age of twenty-one (21) to possess
or consume cannabis unless they are a patient of the Compassionate Use of
Medical Cannabis Act.
   (C)   It is unlawful for anyone to use Cannabis in a Public Place or in
Public View: If possessed in public or a motor vehicle it must be packaged in a
sealed, odor-proof, and child resistant cannabis container.
   (D)   It is also unlawful for any person to be in the possession of drug
paraphernalia as defined by the Drug Paraphernalia Control Act.
   (E)   Any person found in violation of the provisions of this section shall
be fined not less than one hundred dollars ($100.00) and not more than two
hundred dollars ($200.00) for each offense. Each day a violation continues
shall constitute a separate and distinct offense.
   (F)   Violations of this section may be administered in accordance with the
provisions of title 1, chapter 17, "Administrative Adjudication", of this Code.
(Ord. 19-13, 8-5-2019, eff. 1-1-2020; amd. Ord. 19-32, 1-21-2020)
4-1-4-18: TOBACCO AND RELATED PRODUCTS:
   (A)   Definitions: For the purposes of this section, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning:
      ADULT-ONLY FACILITY: Means a facility or restricted area (whether open-
air or enclosed) where the operator ensures or has a reasonable basis to
believe (such as by checking identification as required under State law, or by
checking the identification of any person appearing to be under the age of 30)
that no person under legal age is present. A facility or restricted area need
not be permanently restricted to persons under twenty one (21) years of age to
constitute an adult-only facility, provided that the operator ensures or has a
reasonable basis to believe that no person under twenty one (21) years of age
is present during the event or time period in question.
      AGE RESTRICTED AREA: Means a signed designated area in a retail
establishment to which persons under twenty one (21) years of age are not
permitted access unless accompanied by a parent or legal guardian.
      ALTERNATIVE NICOTINE PRODUCT: Means a product or device not consisting of
or containing tobacco that provides for the ingestion into the body of
nicotine, whether by chewing, smoking, absorbing, dissolving, inhaling,
snorting, sniffing, or by any other means. Alternative nicotine product does
not include: cigarettes as defined in section 1 of the Cigarette Tax Act and
tobacco products as defined in section 10-5 of the Tobacco Products Tax Act of
1995; tobacco product and electronic cigarette as defined in this subsection;
or any product approved by the United States Food and Drug Administration for
sale as a tobacco cessation product, as a tobacco dependence product, or for
other medical purposes, and is being marketed and sold solely for that approved
purpose.
      ELECTRONIC CIGARETTE: Means: 1) any device that employs a battery or
other mechanism to heat a solution or substance to produce a vapor or aerosol
intended for inhalation; 2) any cartridge or container of a solution or
substance intended to be used with or in the device or to refill the device; or
3) any solution or substance, whether or not it contains nicotine intended for
use in the device. Electronic cigarette includes, but is not limited to, any
electronic nicotine delivery system, electronic cigar, electronic cigarillo,
electronic pipe, electronic hookah, vape pen, or similar product or device, and
any components or parts that can be used to build the product or device.
Electronic cigarette does not include: cigarettes as defined in section 1 of
the Cigarette Tax Act and tobacco products as defined in section 10-5 of the
Tobacco Products Tax Act of 1995; tobacco product and alternative nicotine
product as defined in this subsection; any product approved by the United
States Food and Drug Administration for sale as a tobacco cessation product, as
a tobacco dependence product, or for other medical purposes, and is being
marketed and sold solely for that approved purpose; any asthma inhaler
prescribed by a physician for that condition and is being marketed and sold
solely for that approved purpose; or any therapeutic product approved for use
under the Compassionate Use of Medical Cannabis Pilot Program Act.
      LINE OF SIGHT: Means visible to a cashier or other employee.
      LUNCH WAGON: Means a mobile vehicle designed and constructed to transport
food and from which food is sold to the general public.
      NICOTINE: Means any form of the chemical nicotine, including any salt or
complex, regardless of whether the chemical is naturally or synthetically
derived.
      SMOKELESS TOBACCO: Means any tobacco products that are suitable for
dipping or chewing.
      TOBACCO PRODUCT: Means any product containing or made from tobacco that
is intended for human consumption, whether smoked, heated, chewed, absorbed,
dissolved, inhaled, snorted, sniffed, or ingested by any other means,
including, but not limited to, cigarettes, cigars, little cigars, chewing
tobacco, pipe tobacco, snuff, snus, and any other smokeless tobacco product
which contains tobacco that is finely cut, ground, powdered, or leaf and
intended to be placed in the oral cavity. Tobacco product includes any
component, part, or accessory of a tobacco product, whether or not sold
separately. Tobacco product does not include: an electronic cigarette and
alternative nicotine product as defined in this subsection; or any product that
has been approved by the United States Food and Drug Administration for sale as
a tobacco cessation product, as a tobacco dependence product, or for other
medical purposes, and is being marketed and sold solely for that approved
purpose.
   (B)   Sale, Delivery, Display, Purchase, And Possession Prohibited:
      1.   No person shall sell, buy for, distribute samples of or furnish any
tobacco product, electronic cigarette, or any alternative nicotine product to
any person under twenty one (21) years of age.
      2.   Unless otherwise expressly permitted by State law, no person under
twenty one (21) years of age shall buy, purchase, or possess any tobacco
product, electronic cigarette, or alternative nicotine product.
      3.   No person under sixteen (16) years of age may sell any tobacco
product, electronic cigarette, or alternative nicotine product at a retail
establishment selling tobacco products, electronic cigarettes, or alternative
nicotine products. This subsection does not apply to a sales clerk in a family-
owned business which can prove that the sales clerk is in fact a son or
daughter of the owner.
      4.   Before selling, offering for sale, giving, or furnishing a tobacco
product, electronic cigarette, or alternative nicotine product to another
person, the person selling, offering for sale, giving, or furnishing the
tobacco product, electronic cigarette, or alternative nicotine product shall
verify that the person is at least twenty one (21) years of age by: a)
examining from any person that appears to be under thirty (30) years of age a
government-issued photographic identification that establishes the person to be
twenty one (21) years of age or older; or b) for sales of tobacco products,
electronic cigarettes, or alternative nicotine products made through the
internet or other remote sales methods, performing an age verification through
an independent, third party age verification service that compares information
available from public records to the personal information entered by the person
during the ordering process that establishes the person is twenty one (21)
years of age or older.
      5.   Tobacco products, electronic cigarettes, and alternative nicotine
products may be sold through a vending machine only if such tobacco products,
electronic cigarettes, and alternative nicotine products are not placed
together with any non-tobacco product, other than matches, in the vending
machine and the vending machine is in any of the following locations: a) places
to which persons under twenty one (21) years of age are not permitted access at
any time; b) places where alcoholic beverages are sold and consumed on the
premises and vending machine operation is under the direct supervision of the
owner or manager.
      6.   The sale or distribution by any person of a tobacco product,
including but not limited to a single or loose cigarette, that is not contained
within a sealed container, pack, or package as provided by the manufacturer,
which container, pack, or package bears the health warning required by Federal
law, is prohibited.
      7.   All single packs of cigarettes, and electronic cigarettes, and
alternative nicotine products must be sold from behind the counter or in an age
restricted area or in a sealed display case. Any other tobacco products must be
sold in line of sight. The restrictions described in this section do not apply
to a retail tobacco store that: a) derives at least ninety percent (90%) of its
revenue from tobacco and tobacco related products; b) does not permit persons
under the age of twenty one (21) to enter the premises unless accompanied by a
parent or legal guardian; and c) posts a sign on the main entrance way stating
that persons under the age of twenty one (21) are prohibited from entering
unless accompanied by a parent or legal guardian. This subsection does not
prohibit the sale of tobacco products, electronic cigarettes, or alternative
nicotine products from vending machines if the location of the vending machines
are otherwise in compliance with the provisions of this section.
      8.   A person shall not distribute without charge samples of any tobacco
product to any other person, regardless of age, except for smokeless tobacco in
an adult-only facility. This subsection does not apply to the distribution of a
tobacco product, electronic cigarette, or alternative nicotine product sample
in any adult-only facility.
   (C)   Penalties And Administration:
      1.   Any person found in violation of the provisions of this section
shall be fined not less than two hundred dollars ($200.00) and not more than
seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00) for each offense. Each day a violation
continues shall constitute a separate and distinct offense. To the extent
applicable, business licensees shall be responsible for the violations of this
section by their employees and agents.
      2.   Any business licensee found in violation of the provisions of this
section shall, in addition to any fine that may be imposed, be subject to
business license suspension and/or revocation proceedings.
      3.   Violations of this section may be administered in accordance with
the provisions of title 1, chapter 17, "Administrative Adjudication", of this
Code. (Ord. 19-09, 7-1-2019)
4-1-4-19: PUBLIC URINATION OR DEFECATION:
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to urinate or defecate in public
view or outdoors on any public or private property in the village.
   (B)   Any person found in violation of this Section shall be fined no less
than one hundred dollars ($100.00) and no more than seven hundred and fifty
dollars ($750.00) for each offense. Each day that a violation occurs or is
permitted to continue shall constitute a separate and distinct offense. (Ord.
25-20, 10-6-2025)
ARTICLE 5. OFFENSES INVOLVING PROPERTY
4-1-5-1: CRIMINAL HOUSING MANAGEMENT:
A person commits the offense of criminal housing management when, having
personal management or control of residential real estate, whether as legal or
equitable owner, or as a managing agent or otherwise, he knowingly permits by
his gross carelessness or neglect the physical condition or facilities of the
residential real estate to become or remain so deteriorated that the health or
safety of any person is endangered. (1974 Code)
4-1-5-2: TRESPASS TO LAND AND BUILDINGS:
   (A)   Trespasses Prohibited: It shall be unlawful for any person, firm, or
corporation to commit a trespass within this Municipality upon either public or
private property.
   (B)   Specifically Enumerated Trespasses, Suppression: Without constituting
any limitation upon the provisions of subsection (A) of this section, any of
the following acts by any person, firm or corporation shall be deemed included
among those that constitute trespasses in violation of the provisions of said
subsection (A) of this section, and appropriate action may be taken hereunder
at any time, or from time to time, to prevent or suppress any violation or
violations of this chapter, the aforesaid enumerated acts so included, being as
follows:
      1.   To enter upon the premises, or any part thereof, of another,
including any public property in violation of a notice posted or exhibited at
the main entrance to said premises or at any point of approach or entry or in
violation of any notice, warning or protest, given orally or in writing, by any
owner or occupant thereof; or
      2.   To pursue a course of conductor action incidental to the making of
an entry upon the land of another in violation of a notice posted or exhibited
at the main entrance to said premises or at any point of approach or entry, or
in violation of any notice, warning or protest given orally or in writing by
the owner or occupant thereof; or
      3.   To fail or refuse to depart from the premises of another in case of
being requested, either orally or in writing, to leave by any owner or occupant
thereof; or
      4.   To enter into or upon any vehicle, aircraft or watercraft made
without the consent of the person having the right to the possession or control
thereof, or a failure or refusal to leave any such vehicle, aircraft or
watercraft after being requested to leave by the person having such right.
(1974 Code)
4-1-5-3: MALICIOUS MISCHIEF OR DESTRUCTION:
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to wilfully and maliciously tear
up, injure, deface or destroy any property, real or personal, belonging to the
Village; or any property, used in any business impressed with a public interest
and usually designated as a public service corporation, i.e., waterworks, gas,
electric light, telephone, street, railroad or steam heating companies.
   (B)   It shall be unlawful for any person to wilfully and maliciously
interfere or meddle in any way with the operation of any such business, as
above enumerated. (1974 Code)
   (C)   It shall be unlawful for any person to willfully and maliciously tear,
break, injure, deface, damage or destroy the property of another.
   (D)   Any person found in violation of this section shall be fined in an
amount of not less than one hundred dollars ($100.00) plus the replacement
value of the property torn, broken, injured, defaced, damaged or destroyed, but
in no event more than seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00). The fine imposed
and/or paid shall be distributed as follows: 1) the first one hundred dollars
($100.00) received shall go to the Village; and 2) the balance of the fine
shall be distributed to the owner of the property as restitution. (Ord. 19-11,
8-5-2019)
4-1-5-4: COIN OPERATED DEVICES; SLUGS, TAMPERING:
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to insert, or attempt to insert,
in any parking meter, vending machine or other coin operated device, any slug,
counterfeit coin or other foreign or metallic substance not a coin of the
United States currency.
   (B)   It shall be unlawful for any person to wilfully and maliciously
injure, deface, destroy or otherwise tamper with any parking meter, vending
machine or other coin operated device. (1974 Code)
4-1-5-5: PUBLIC CAMPING:
   (A)   Definitions. The following definitions apply to this Section:
 
BEDDING:                  A sleeping bag, or any other material, used for
                          bedding purposes.
                          Any physical space that is not within an established
                          structure, where Bedding or any stove or fire is
                          placed, established or maintained for the purpose of
CAMPSITE:                 maintaining a temporary place to live, whether or not
                          such place incorporates the use of any tent, lean-to,
                          shack, or any other structure, or any vehicle or part
                          thereof.
                          Items which would otherwise constitute Personal
                          Property under the terms of this Section, but which
                          (i) have no apparent utility or monetary value; (ii)
                          are unsanitary to store or otherwise maintain; (iii)
                          any weapon possessed illegally; (iv) drug
EXEMPT PERSONAL PROPERTY: paraphernalia; (v) items appearing to be stolen or
                          otherwise appearing to be evidence of a crime; (vi)
                          items which the person cannot demonstrate the
                          requisite lawful authority to possess; and (vii)
                          items of food which can reasonably be expected to
                          spoil or otherwise perish within the next 30 days.
                          Any item reasonably recognizable as belonging to a
PERSONAL PROPERTY:        person and having apparent utility or monetary value,
                          except for Exempt Personal Property.
PUBLIC CAMPING:           To cause or participate in the establishment of, or
                          the act of remaining in or at, a Campsite.
 
   (B)   Public Camping Prohibited. Public Camping is hereby declared to be a
nuisance within the Village of Manteno. Except for parcels of property
otherwise specifically designated by the Village for camping purposes, property
located within the corporate boundaries of the Village of Manteno is neither
intended nor permitted to be used for the purpose of Public Camping. The
following is strictly prohibited in the Village of Manteno:
      1.   Sleeping, or otherwise engaging in Public Camping, on a public
sidewalk, street, alley, lane, other public right-of-way, park, bench, or any
other publicly owned property, or on or under any bridge or viaduct, at any
time.
      2.   Sleeping, or otherwise engaging in Public Camping, in any pedestrian
or vehicular entrance to public or private property abutting a public right-of-
way.
      3.   Sleeping, or otherwise engaging in Public Camping, on any real
property owned or otherwise maintained by the Village.
      4.   Parking a vehicle overnight within the Village for the purpose of
sleeping or otherwise engaging in Public Camping in said vehicle. Parking or
leaving a vehicle parked for two consecutive hours, and/or remaining within a
public vehicle on any property under the jurisdiction of the Village for the
purpose of Public Camping, for two consecutive hours without permission from
the Village President and Board of Trustees, between the hours of midnight and
6:00 a.m. shall be considered a violation of this Section.
   (C)   Exceptions. Notwithstanding the foregoing, it shall not be a violation
to engage in Public Camping when done: (i) in a manner specifically authorized
by this Code; (ii) after a formal declaration of the Village in emergency
circumstances; or, (iii) upon resolution of the President and Board of Trustees
of the Village, the same may exempt a special event from the prohibitions of
this Section, if the President and Board of Trustees of the Village finds such
exemption to be in the public interest and consistent with the goals and
objectives of the Village, and with such conditions imposed as the President
and Board of Trustees of the Village deems necessary. Any conditions imposed
will include a condition requiring that the applicant provide evidence of
adequate insurance coverage and agree to indemnify the Village for any
liability, damage or expense incurred by the Village as a result of the
activities of the applicant. Any findings by the President and Board of
Trustees of the Village shall specify the exact dates and location covered by
the exemption.
   (D)   Removal of Campsite and Personal Property. The Village may cause the
removal of a Campsite in violation of this Section under the following
circumstances:
      1.   Prior to removing a Campsite, the Village shall post a notice, 24
hours in advance of the removal, unless immediate removal of the Campsite is
deemed to be necessary for one of the reasons in subparagraphs i-iv below. The
Village may cause the immediate removal of a Campsite for the following
reasons, and the basis for causing the immediate removal of such Campsite
should be adequately documented by the appropriate person(s):
         a.   Immediate removal of the Campsite is necessary to maintain access
to a property;
         b.   Immediate removal of the Campsite is necessary to maintain the
sanitary condition of the property;
         c.   Immediate removal of the Campsite is necessary because the
Campsite is an obstruction to any public right-of-way; or
         d.   Immediate removal of the Campsite is necessary because the
Campsite poses a risk to the health and safety of the Village and its
residents.
      2.   Upon any action pursuant to paragraph (D)(1) above, the person
causing such action to be taken shall inform an appropriate agency delivering
social services to homeless individuals in the Village of the location of the
Campsite and the persons found to be in violation of this Section, so said
agency may determine whether or not it would be appropriate to offer its
services to those persons.
      3.   If a 24-hour notice has been posted, and the 24-hour notice period
has passed, then the Campsite, as well as all Personal Property thereon shall
be removed by the appropriate person(s) acting on behalf of the Village.
      4.   No portion of this Section shall be construed to prohibit any person
found to be engaging in Public Camping from removing their Personal Property
from the Campsite; however, such Personal Property that constitutes Exempt
Personal Property and which a reasonably prudent law enforcement officer,
exercising the applicable constitutional standard, would conclude that said
Exempt Personal Property constitutes items appearing to be stolen or otherwise
appearing to be evidence of a crime, or items which the person cannot
demonstrate the requisite lawful authority to possess, may be retained and
stored as evidence.
   (E)   Disposition and Release of Personal Property.
      1.   All Personal Property removed from any Campsite which is not Exempt
Personal Property shall be stored by the police department for a minimum of
thirty (30) days, during which time the Personal Property shall be reasonably
available for and released to an individual confirming ownership.
      2.   All Exempt Personal Property may be disposed of or retained as
evidence by the Village police department.
   (F)   Penalty; Mitigation.
      1.   The penalty for any person’s first violation of this Section within
a rolling twenty-four (24) month period shall be $75.
      2.   The penalty for any person’s second violation of this Section within
a rolling twenty-four (24) month period shall be $150.
      3.   The penalty for any person’s third violation of this Section within
a rolling twenty-four (24) month period shall be $350.
      4.   The penalty for any person’s fourth violation of this Section within
a rolling twenty-four (24) month period shall be $500.
      5.   The penalty for any person’s fifth violation of this Section within
a rolling twenty-four (24) month period shall be $750.
      6.   The penalty for any person’s sixth or subsequent violation of this
Section within a rolling twenty-four (24) month period may be a monetary
penalty of $750 or incarceration for a period not exceeding the maximum time
allowed pursuant to Section 1-2-1.1 of the Illinois Municipal Code (65 ILCS 5/
1-2-1.1).
      7.   As a substitute for any monetary penalty assessed pursuant to
paragraphs 1-6, above, and if consented to by the Village, the penalty assessed
to any person found in violation of this Section may be that said person must
engage in public service by cleaning the rights-of-way and other public
facilities of the Village for an amount of time that, if the person found to
have violated this Section was being paid the minimum wage under Illinois law,
the amount paid for that person’s labors would have been equal to the monetary
penalty assessed under this Section.
      8.   The Village is hereby empowered to exercise all powers afforded to
it, at law or in equity, to collect any fines assessed against a person
pursuant to this Section, including but not limited to seeking incarceration of
said person for a period of time that conforms with Section 1-2-1.1 of the
Illinois Municipal Code (65 ILCS 5/1-2-1.1).
      9.   Penalties imposed under this Section may be mitigated by whether or
not the person immediately removed all Personal Property and litter, including
but not limited to bottles, cans, and garbage, from the Campsite after the
person was informed that the person was in violation of this Section
      10.   A separate offense of this Section shall be deemed committed on
each day on which a violation occurs or continues.
      11.   In addition to any other remedy provided by law or this Section,
any person found in violation of this Section may be immediately removed from
the premises where the Campsite is located. (Ord. 24-12, 9-16-2024)
ARTICLE 6. OFFENSES INVOLVING MORALITY
4-1-6-1: PROSTITUTION DEFINED:
Any person who performs or offers or agrees to perform any of the following
acts for money commits an act of prostitution:
   (A)   Any act of sexual intercourse; or
   (B)   Any act of deviate sexual conduct, meaning any act of sexual
gratification involving the sex organs of one person and the mouth or anus of
another. (1974 Code)
4-1-6-2: KEEPING A PLACE OF PROSTITUTION:
Any person who keeps, maintains or exercises control over the use of any
premises which could offer seclusion or shelter for the practice of
prostitution, and who performs any of the following acts, shall be deemed to
keep a place of prostitution:
   (A)   Knowingly grants or permits the use of such premises for the purpose
of prostitution; or
   (B)   Grants or permits the use of such premises under circumstances from
which he should reasonably be aware that such premises are used or about to be
used for purposes of prostitution; or
   (C)   Permits the continued use of premises after becoming aware of facts or
circumstances from which he should reasonably know that such premises are being
used for purposes of prostitution. (1974 Code)
4-1-6-3: PATRONIZING A PROSTITUTE:
Any person who performs any of the following acts with a person not his spouse
commits the offense of patronizing a prostitute:
   (A)   Engages in an act of sexual intercourse or deviate sexual conduct with
a prostitute; or
   (B)   Enters or remains in a place of prostitution in the company of a
prostitute with the intent to engage in an act of sexual intercourse or deviate
sexual conduct. (1974 Code)
4-1-6-4: SOLICITING FOR A PROSTITUTE:
Any person who performs any of the following acts commits soliciting for a
prostitute:
   (A)   Solicit another person for the purpose of prostitution; or
   (B)   Arranges or offers to arrange a meeting of persons for the purpose of
prostitution; or
   (C)   Directs another person to a place knowing such direction is for the
purpose of prostitution. (1974 Code)
4-1-6-5: PANDERING:
Any person who performs any of the following acts for money commits pandering:
   (A)   Compels a female to become a prostitute; or
   (B)   Arranges or offers to arrange a situation in which a female may commit
prostitution. (1974 Code)
4-1-6-6: PIMPING:
Any person who receives money or other property from a prostitute, not for a
lawful consideration, knowing it was earned in whole or in part from an act of
prostitution commits pimping. (1974 Code)
4-1-6-7: PUBLIC INDECENCY; ACTS OR LANGUAGE PROHIBITED:
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to commit any indecent, lewd or
lascivious act in any public place in the village, or to utter any lewd or
offensive words or to use any threatening or abusive language publicly and
within the hearing of another person.
   (B)   It shall be unlawful for any person to appear in a public place in a
state of nudity, or to make any indecent exposure of his person or to be guilty
of any other lewd or indecent act or behavior.
   (C)   "Public place", for purposes of this section, means any place where
such conduct may reasonably be expected to be viewed by others. (1974 Code)
4-1-6-8: OBSCENITY DEFINED; PROHIBITED:
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person knowingly to exhibit, sell, print,
offer to sell, give away, circulate, publish, distribute or attempt to
distribute any obscene book, magazine, pamphlet, paper, writing, card,
advertisement, circular, print, picture, photograph, motion picture film, play,
image, instrument, statue, drawing or other article which is obscene.
   (B)   "Obscene" for the purpose of this section, is defined as follows:
Whether to a reasonable person applying contemporary community standards, the
dominant theme of the material taken as a whole appeals to prurient interests,
and is without redeeming social value. (1974 Code)
4-1-6-9: OBSCENE MARKING IN PUBLIC VIEW PROHIBITED:
It shall be unlawful for any person to write, mark, draw, cut or make any
profane or indecent words, sentence, design or figure in any place open to
public view. (1974 Code)
4-1-6-10: OBSCENITY; AFFIRMATIVE DEFENSE:
It shall be an affirmative defense to charge under sections
4-1-6-8 and
4-1-6-9 of this chapter that the dissemination:
   (A)   Was not for sale or gain, and was made only to personal associates
other than children under eighteen (18) years of age; or
   (B)   Was to institutions or individuals having scientific or other special
education purpose for possession of such material. (1974 Code)
4-1-6-11: WINDOW PEEPING PROHIBITED:
It shall be unlawful for any person to look, peer, peep into or be found
loitering about and within view of any window within a building occupied as a
residence of another, with the intent of watching or observing the activities
of persons therein. (1974 Code)
4-1-6-12: GAMBLING:
   (A)   Definitions. The following words, terms, phrases and their
derivations, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed
herein, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:
ACT: The Video Gaming Act, 230 ILCS 40/1, et seq.
BOARD: The Illinois Gaming Board.
COMMERCIAL MOTOR VEHICLES: As defined in Section 18b-101 of the Illinois
Vehicle Code, 625 ILCS 5/18b-101.
GAMBLING:
   1.   The playing of a game of chance or skill for money or other thing of
value including but not limited to baccarat, twenty-one, poker, craps, slot
machines, a video game of chance, roulette, klondike, punchboard, faro, keno,
numbers ticket, push card, jar ticket, pull tab, bingo, lotteries, and raffles;
   2.   Wagering on the result of any game, contest or any political
nomination, appointment or election;
   3.   The playing or use of any gambling device or the operation, keeping,
owning, use, purchase, exhibition, rental, sale, or bargain for the sale or
lease of any gambling device;
   4.   The ownership or possession of any books, instruments or apparatus by
means of which bets or wagers have been recorded or registered;
   5.   Sale of pools upon the result of any game or contest of skill or
chance, political nominations, appointments or elections;
   6.   The establishment or promotion of any lottery or the sale, or offering
for sale, or to knowingly posses or transfer any policy ticket or similar
device; and
   7.   The knowing advertisement of any lottery or policy game including the
drafting, printing or publishing of any lottery ticket, share, policy ticket or
similar device;
   8.   The knowing transmittal of information as to wagers, betting odds or
chances by telephone, telegraph, radio, semaphore or similar means, or the
knowing installation of equipment for the transmission or receipt of such
information except that nothing herein shall prohibit the transmission or
receipt of such information for the use of news reporting of sporting events or
contests.
GAMBLING DEVICE: Any clock, tape machine, video machine, video gaming terminal,
slot machine, mechanism, table, furniture, fixture, equipment, instrument or
other thing used for the reception of money or other thing of value on chance
or skill or upon which the action of money or other thing of value is staked,
hazarded, bet, won or lost, or which is primarily for use for gambling. A
"gambling device" shall not include:
   1.   A coin operated mechanical device played for amusement which awards the
player with the right to replay such mechanical device and is so constructed or
devised as to make the result for the operation thereof depend, in part, upon
the skill of the player and which does not return to the player money, property
or right to receive money or property; or
   2.   Vending machines by which full and adequate return is made for the
money invested and there is no element of chance or hazard.
LICENSED ESTABLISHMENT : Any licensed retail establishment where alcoholic
liquor is drawn, poured, mixed, or otherwise served for consumption on the
premises, whether the establishment operates on a nonprofit or for-profit
basis. "Licensed establishment" includes any such establishment that has a
contractual relationship with an inter-track wagering location licensee
licensed under the Illinois Horse Racing Act of 1975, provided any contractual
relationship shall not include any transfer or offer of revenue from the
operation of video gaming under this Act to any licensee licensed under the
Illinois Horse Racing Act of 1975. Provided, however, that the licensed
establishment that has such a contractual relationship with an inter-track
wagering location licensee may not, itself, be:
   1.   An inter-track wagering location licensee;
   2.   The corporate parent or subsidiary of any licensee licensed under the
Illinois Horse Racing Act of 1975; or
   3.   The corporate subsidiary of a corporation that is also the corporate
parent or subsidiary of any licensee licensed under the Illinois Horse Racing
Act of 1975.
"Licensed establishment" does not include a facility operated by an
organization licensee, an inter-track wagering licensee, or an inter-track
wagering location licensee licensed under the Illinois Horse Racing Act of 1975
or a riverboat licensed under the Illinois Gambling Act, except as provided in
this paragraph.
LICENSED FRATERNAL ESTABLISHMENT: The location where a qualified fraternal
organization that derives its charter from a national fraternal organization
regularly meets.
LICENSED VETERANS ESTABLISHMENT: The location where a qualified veterans
organization that derives its charter from a national veterans organization
regularly meets.
LICENSED TRUCK STOP ESTABLISHMENT: A facility:
   1.   That is at least a three (3)-acre facility with a convenience store;
   2.   With separate diesel islands for fueling commercial motor vehicles;
   3.   That sells at retail more than ten thousand (10,000) gallons of diesel
or biodiesel fuel per month; and
   4.   With parking spaces for commercial motor vehicles.
"Commercial motor vehicles" has the same meaning as defined in Section 18b-101
of the Illinois Vehicle Code. The requirement of item 3. of this paragraph may
be met by showing that estimated future sales or past sales average at least
ten thousand (10,000) gallons per month.
LICENSED LARGE TRUCK STOP ESTABLISHMENT: A facility located within three (3)
road miles from a freeway interchange, as measured in accordance with the
Department of Transportation's rules regarding the criteria for the
installation of business signs:
   1.   That is at least a three (3)-acre facility with a convenience store;
   2.   With separate diesel islands for fueling commercial motor vehicles;
   3.   That sells at retail more than fifty thousand (50,000) gallons of
diesel or biodiesel fuel per month; and
   4.   With parking spaces for commercial motor vehicles.
"Commercial motor vehicles" has the same meaning as defined in Section 18b-101
of the Illinois Vehicle Code. The requirement of item 3. of this paragraph may
be met by showing that estimated future sales or past sales average at least
fifty thousand (50,000) gallons per month.
LOTTERY: Any scheme or procedure whereby one or more prizes are distributed by
chance among persons who have paid or promised consideration for a chance to
win such prizes, whether such scheme or procedure is called a lottery, raffle,
gift, sale, or some other name.
POLICY GAME: Any scheme or procedure whereby a person promises or guarantees by
an instrument, bill, certificate, writing, token or other device that any
particular number, character, ticket or certificate shall, in the event of any
contingency in the nature of a lottery, entitle the purchaser or holder to
receive money, property or evidence of debt.
TERMINAL OPERATOR: An individual, partnership, corporation, or limited
liability company that is licensed under this Act and this section and that
owns, services, and maintains video gaming terminals for placement in licensed
establishments, licensed truck stop establishments, licensed large truck stop
establishments, licensed fraternal establishments, or licensed veterans
establishments.
VIDEO GAMING TERMINAL: Any electronic video game machine that, upon insertion
of cash, electronic cards or vouchers, or any combination thereof, is available
to play or simulate the play of a video game, including but not limited to
video poker, line up, and blackjack, as authorized by the Board utilizing a
video display and microprocessors in which the player may receive free games or
credits that can be redeemed for cash. The term does not include a machine that
directly dispenses coins, cash, or tokens or is for amusement purposes only.
   (B)   Gambling Prohibited. Except as otherwise excepted in this section, it
shall be unlawful for any person to gamble within the corporate limits of the
village, or for any person or entity which owns, occupies or controls an
establishment within the village, to knowingly permit others to gamble on the
premises.
   (C)   Exceptions. Nothing in this section shall be deemed to prohibit or
make unlawful the following activities or forms of gambling:
      1.   The keeping, possession, ownership, use or playing of a video gaming
terminal in a licensed establishment, licensed truck stop establishment,
licensed large truck stop establishment, licensed fraternal establishment or
licensed veterans establishment, which is licensed by the Board and the Village
of Manteno to conduct or allow such specific activities under the Act and this
section;
      2.   A licensee, licensed by the village, to conduct a raffle in
accordance with the Raffles Act, 230 ILCS 15/0.01, et seq.;
      3.   A licensee, licensed by the Illinois Department of Revenue, to
conduct or allow bingo play in accordance with the Bingo License and Tax Act,
230 ILCS 25/1, et. seq.; or a licensee, licensed by the Illinois Department of
Revenue, to conduct or allow gambling in accordance with the Charitable Games
Act, 230 ILCS 30/1, et seq.
   (D)   Video Gaming Licenses and License Fees. Video gaming licenses shall be
valid from May 1 through April 30. No video gaming license shall be issued to
an applicant that does not meet the provisions of this section or who has not
been issued an applicable license by the Board. The annual business license fee
for each licensed establishment, licensed fraternal establishment, licensed
veteran's establishment, licensed truck stop establishment, or licensed large
truck stop establishment in or on which there is located or sited at least one
(1) video gaming terminal shall be one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) per
establishment. The annual license fee for the operation of a video gaming
terminal shall be two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) per terminal. The cost of
the video gaming terminal fee shall be shared equally between the licensed
terminal operator and the video gaming establishment which owns or operates the
video gaming terminal. No refunds or partial refunds shall be given by the
village in the event either the licensed terminal operator or video gaming
establishment ceases operations. No license fee shall be prorated.
   (E)   Licensed Establishments. Any business, liquor or food licensee within
the corporate limits of the village that allows gambling to occur on premises
in violation of this section shall be subject to having his/her/its license
immediately revoked for a period of sixty (60) days. Any business, liquor or
food licensee within the corporate limits of the village that allows gambling
to occur on premises in violation of this section a second time shall have his/
her/its license permanently revoked and, thereafter, barred from obtaining any
business, liquor or food license within the village.
   (F)   Seizure of Unauthorized Gambling Devices and Gambling Funds. Any
gambling device which is not authorized by this section shall be subject to
immediate seizure and confiscation by the village. Any money or other thing of
value intrinsically related to acts of gambling not authorized by this section
shall be seized and forfeited as contraband. Disposition of such gambling
devices and funds seized or confiscated shall be made in accordance with the
law.
   (G)   Penalty. In addition to any other remedy authorized herein or under
the law, any person found in violation of the provisions of this section shall
be fined not less than two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) and not more than
seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00) for each offense. Each day a violation
continues shall constitute a separate and distinct offense. (Ord. 12-02, 5-7-
2012; amd. Ord. 21-22, 1-18-2022; Ord. 25-17, 9-15-2025)
ARTICLE 7. MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS
4-1-7-1: VIOLATION OF CIVIL RIGHTS; ELEMENTS:
A person commits a violation of civil rights when:
   (A)   He prevents, interferes with or denies to another, or conspires to do
the same, the full and equal access to and enjoyment of the facilities and
services of any office, place, business, accommodation, amusement or conveyance
because of race, religion, color or national ancestry; or
   (B)   As an official he refuses to employ, discriminates in employment, or
participates in a scheme which discriminates in employment for any work, job,
office or project because of race, religion, color or national ancestry; or
   (C)   As an official, he denies or refuses to any person the full and equal
access, use or enjoyment of the services, facilities, accommodations,
advantages or privileges of his office, or of any property accommodations or
facilities under his care, because of race, religion, color or national
ancestry. (1974 Code)
4-1-7-2: VIOLATION OF CIVIL RIGHTS; SANCTIONS:
   (A)   Enjoining As A Public Nuisance: Any violation of civil rights
occurring in any public office, accommodation or amusement is declared to be a
public nuisance and may be abated in any manner provided by this code for the
abatement of public nuisances.
   (B)   Discharge Of Public Officials: Whenever any public official shall be
found guilty of a violation of civil rights, the person aggrieved, or the
village attorney on his behalf, may file a petition in the circuit court to
discharge such official from office. The court shall order that such official
be immediately relieved of his office or duties and shall order such official
to resign or be removed or discharged. Any person violating or refusing to
enforce any such court order or decree shall be deemed in contempt of court.
   (C)   Penalties Not Mutually Exclusive: The penalties and remedies herein
provided shall not be deemed mutually exclusive. (1974 Code)
4-1-7-3: NECESSITY AS AFFIRMATIVE DEFENSES:
Conduct which would otherwise be an offense under this chapter is justifiable
by reason of necessity if the accused was without blame in occasioning or
developing the situation, and he reasonably believed such conduct was necessary
to avoid a public or private injury greater than the injury which might
reasonably result from his own conduct. (1974 Code)
4-1-7-4: BRIBERY; OFFERING OR ACCEPTING:
It shall be unlawful for any person:
   (A)   To offer, promise or give to any official, police officer or employee
of the village any money, reward, service, privilege or thing of value which he
may not otherwise lawfully accept, with intent to influence the performance or
nonperformance of any official act, function, duty or employment.
   (B)   To agree to accept, receive or retain any money, reward, service,
privilege or thing of value which he may not otherwise lawfully accept, knowing
or with reason to know that such benefit was offered, promised or given with
intent to influence him in the performance or nonperformance of any official
act, function, duty or employment. (1974 Code)
4-1-7-5: SOLICITATION TO COMMIT OFFENSE:
A person commits solicitation when, with intent that an offense be committed,
he commands, encourages or requests another person to commit that offense.
(1974 Code)
4-1-7-6: CONSPIRACY TO COMMIT OFFENSE:
A person commits conspiracy when, with intent that an offense be committed, he
agrees with another person to the commission of that offense. No person may be
convicted of conspiracy to commit an offense unless an act in furtherance of
such agreement is alleged and proved to have been committed by him or by a
coconspirator. (1974 Code)
4-1-7-7: SOLICITATION AND CONSPIRACY; AFFIRMATIVE DEFENSE:
It shall be a defense to a charge of solicitation or conspiracy that if the
criminal objects were achieved the accused would not be guilty of the offense.
(1974 Code)
4-1-7-8: TELEPHONE SOLICITATION OR PROMOTION; REGISTRATION REQUIRED:
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person in his own name, or in the name of
or for the benefit of any other person to conduct any sales campaign or sales
promotion of any nature whatsoever through the use of the telephone, without
having first obtained a certificate of registration from the clerk.
   (B)   Application for such registration shall be made to the clerk, setting
forth the name of the applicant, his employer or organization, the article or
goods proposed to be sold, terms of sale, length of time such campaign or
promotion is sought to be continued, and names and addresses of all persons
assisting in such campaign or promotion within the village.
   (C)   It shall be unlawful for any person to conduct or make any
solicitation by telephone for any pecuniary compensation or other profit on
behalf of any actual or purported charitable use, purpose, association,
corporation or institution. (1974 Code)
4-1-7-9: TELEPHONES; OBSCENE, ANONYMOUS, MISREPRESENTED CALLS:
It shall be unlawful for any person to make, or permit another to make, any
obscene, anonymous or falsely represented telephone calls to another person for
the purpose or reason of nuisance or harassment. (1974 Code)
4-1-7-10: FALSE ALARMS; SECURITY SYSTEMS, POLICE, FIRE, AMBULANCE:
   (A)   Definitions:
      AUTOMATIC DIALER ALARM: Any device attached to a telephone line that
automatically dials a preprogrammed telephone number and electronically
transmits a prerecorded message to report criminal activity or other emergency.
Automatic dialer alarms are prohibited.
      CENTRAL STATION ALARM: Alarms which cause a signal to be sent to a
private central location resulting in an operator telephoning the sheriff's
department communications center advising of the activation.
      DIRECT STATION ALARM: Alarms which run directly from a specific location
to the sheriff's department communications center and are connected by leased
telephone lines.
      EXCESSIVE FALSE ALARMS: A fourth false alarm (see definition of False
Alarm) in any calendar month or a sixteenth alarm in any calendar year shall be
an excessive number of false alarms.
      FALSE ALARM:
      1.   The accidental or unintentional activation of an alarm system by
faulty alarm equipment or human error of a person authorized to maintain such
system. An alarm activated by power failure or weather condition shall not be
classified as a false alarm.
      2.   The intentional act to make, turn in or give any false alarm of fire
or of need of police or ambulance assistance, or to aid or abet in the
commission of such act.
   LOCAL ALARMS: Alarms which sound audibly on the premises of the subscriber
and are not connected to any central station. All owners of local alarms shall
be responsible for arrangements, when they are not available, to maintain and
turn the system off in case of malfunction.
   (B)   False Alarm Fees: The user of an alarm device shall be assessed a fee
for each "false alarm", as defined in subsection (A) of this section, in excess
of five (5) false alarms per calendar year as follows:
      6th–8th false alarm within a calendar year: $25.00 per false alarm.
      9th–12th false alarm within a calendar year: $50.00 per false alarm.
   For each false alarm in excess of 12 within a calendar year: $75.00 per
false alarm.
   (C)   Warnings: After the fourth "false alarm", as defined in subsection (A)
of this section, in a calendar year is answered for the same user, the police
department shall send the user a warning letter containing the list of fees for
false alarms. However, the failure of the department to send such a warning
letter shall not invalidate the imposition of any fee for answering a false
alarm assessed in accordance with the schedule set forth in subsection (B) of
this section.
   (D)   Penalty: Any one of the following shall constitute a separate offense
and any person, firm or corporation found guilty of violating any provision
thereof shall be punished by a fine not less than one hundred dollars ($100.00)
nor more than five hundred dollars ($500.00) for each such separate offense:
      1.   The failure of the alarm user to properly maintain his/her alarm
system or cause it to be properly maintained according to recognized minimum
standards of the alarm industry.
      2.   The failure of the alarm user to pay the false alarm fees required
by this section.
      3.   An excessive number of false alarms.
      4.   Failure of an alarm user to comply with direction to cease using
malfunctioning alarm equipment that produces excessive false alarms.
      5.   The intentional act to make, turn in or give any false alarm, or the
aiding or abetting in the commission of same. (Ord. 98-26, 4-19-1999)
4-1-7-11: CLIMBING UTILITY POLES:
It shall be unlawful for any person to climb upon any telegraph pole, telephone
pole, electric light pole or sign pole unless in the performance of his duties.
(1974 Code)
4-1-7-12: INTIMIDATION DEFINED; PROHIBITED:
A person commits intimidation when, with intent to cause another person to
perform or to omit the performance of any act, he communicates to another
without otherwise lawful authority a threat to perform any of the following
acts:
   (A)   Inflict physical harm on the person threatened or any other person or
property; or
   (B)   Subject any person to physical confinement or restraint; or
   (C)   Commit any criminal offense; or
   (D)   Accuse any person of an offense; or
   (E)   Expose any person to hatred, contempt or ridicule; or
   (F)   Take action as a public official against anyone or anything or
withhold official action, or cause such action or withholding; or
   (G)   Bring about or continue any strike, boycott or other collective or mob
action. (1974 Code)
CHAPTER 2
MINORS; CURFEW
SECTION:
4-2-1: Offenses Against
4-2-2: Curfew
4-2-3: Railroads
4-2-4: Intoxicants
4-2-5: Giving Intoxicants
4-2-6: Gaming
4-2-7: Firearms To Minors
4-2-8: Prohibited Uses Of Minor
4-2-9: Tobacco (Rep. by Ord. 19-09, 7-1-2019)
4-2-10: Parental Irresponsibility
4-2-1: OFFENSES AGAINST:
It shall be unlawful for any person to commit, cause or knowingly permit any of
the following offenses against children:
   (A)   Abandon any child.
   (B)   Unnecessarily fail to provide any child in his charge or custody with
proper food, drink, shelter and raiment.
   (C)   Cruelly beat, torture, overwork or mutilate any child.
   (D)   Wilfully expose to inclement weather or in any manner injure a child
in health or limb. (1956 Code § 40-1)
4-2-2: CURFEW:
   (A)   Definitions: For purposes of this section the following terms,
phrases, words and their derivations shall have the meanings given therein.
When not inconsistent within the context, words used in the present tense
include the future, words in the plural number include the singular and words
in the singular include the plural. The word "shall" is always mandatory and
not merely directory.
      ADULT: Any person at least nineteen (19) years of age.
      EMERGENCY: An unforeseen combination of circumstances or the resulting
state that calls for immediate action. The term includes, but is not limited
to, a fire, natural disaster, or automobile accident, or any situation
requiring immediate action to prevent serious injury to persons or property.
      ESTABLISHMENT: Any privately owned place of business operated for a
profit to which the public is invited, including, but not limited to, any place
of amusement or entertainment.
      JUVENILE: Any person sixteen (16) years of age or younger.
      OPERATOR: Any individual, firm, association, partnership, or corporation
operating, managing, or conducting any establishment. The term includes the
members or partners of an association or partnership and the officers of a
corporation.
      PARENT: Any person having legal custody of a juvenile: 1) as a natural or
adoptive parent, 2) as a legal guardian, 3) as a person who stands in loco
parentis, or 4) as a person to whom legal custody has been given by court
order.
      PUBLIC PLACE: Any place to which the public or a substantial group of the
public has access and includes, but is not limited to, streets, common areas,
shopping centers, private businesses, streets, and similar areas that are open
to the use of the public.
   (B)   Curfew For Juveniles: It shall be unlawful for any juvenile to be or
remain in or upon a public place within the Village of Manteno during the
following hours:
      1.   Between one minute after twelve o'clock (12:01) A.M. and six o'clock
(6:00) A.M. Saturday.
      2.   Between one minute after twelve o'clock (12:01) A.M. and six o'clock
(6:00) A.M. Sunday.
      3.   Between eleven o'clock (11:00) P.M. on Sunday to Thursday,
inclusive, and six o'clock (6:00) A.M. on the following day.
   (C)   Exceptions And Affirmative Defense: It shall not be a violation of
this section, and it shall otherwise be an affirmative defense if a juvenile
is:
      1.   Accompanied by the juvenile's parent, custodian or guardian;
      2.   Accompanied by an adult at least nineteen (19) years of age or older
authorized by a parent of such juvenile to take said parent's place in
accompanying said juvenile for a designated period of time and for purposes
within a specified area.
      3.   When a juvenile is on the sidewalk or property where the juvenile
resides, or on either side of or across the street from the place where the
juvenile resides and the adult owner or resident of that property has given
permission for the juvenile to be there.
      4.   When the juvenile is married or has been married pursuant to state
law.
      5.   In the case of an operator of an establishment, when the operator
has notified the police that a juvenile was present on the premises of the
establishment during curfew hours and refused to leave.
      6.   Participating in, going to, or returning from:
         (a)   Lawful employment;
         (b)   A school sanctioned activity;
         (c)   An emergency situation, or errand of urgent necessity involving
the protection of persons or property;
         (d)   An activity involving the exercise of the juvenile's rights
protected under the first amendment of the United States constitution and
article 1, sections 3, 4, and 5 of the Illinois constitution, or both, such as
freedom of speech, religion and the right of assembly; or
         (e)   Engaged in the interstate or international travel originating
outside the state of Illinois or originating in the state of Illinois.
   (D)   Operator Responsibility: It shall be unlawful for any operator of an
establishment to knowingly permit a juvenile to remain at the establishment
under circumstances not constituting an exception to, or otherwise beyond the
scope of, this section. The term "knowingly" includes knowledge that an
operator should reasonably be expected to have concerning the patrons of the
establishment. The standard for "knowingly" shall be applied through an
objective test: whether a reasonable person in the operator's position would
have known that the patron was a juvenile in violation of this section.
   (E)   Parental Responsibility: It shall be unlawful for a parent having
legal custody of a juvenile knowingly to permit or by inefficient control to
allow the juvenile to remain in any village public place under circumstances
not constituting an exception to, or otherwise beyond the scope of, this
section. The term "knowingly" includes knowledge that a parent should
reasonably be expected to have concerning the whereabouts of a juvenile in that
parent's legal custody. It shall be no defense that a parent was completely
indifferent to the activities or conduct or whereabouts of such juvenile.
   (F)   Duties Of Police Officers: It shall be the duties of the police
officer upon discovering any juvenile, unattended by an adult, to:
      1.   Inquire of such juvenile their age, place of residence and telephone
number;
      2.   Inquire as to why the juvenile is out past curfew;
      3.   Assess whether the activity the juvenile is engaged in is/was
protected under this section;
      4.   Assess whether such an exception or defense is reasonable given the
surrounding circumstances, such as time elapsed from beginning or end of said
activity, allowing the juvenile a reasonable amount of time to go to or return
from such activity without violating this section.
After the above inquiries are made by the officer, and no exceptions or
defenses are applicable, it shall be the duties of the police officers to
promptly notify the parent, guardian, or custodian of such juvenile who has
been detained for violations of the provisions of this section and to report to
the police station for the return of said juvenile to their custody. Whenever
it is impractical to do so, the said juvenile may be returned forthwith to his
home or to the person entitled to his custody. (Ord. 03-36, 4-26-2004)
4-2-3: RAILROADS:
It shall be unlawful for any person under the age of eighteen (18) years to
climb, jump upon, cling to, or in any way attach himself to any railroad
locomotive or car of any kind while the same is in motion. (1956 Code § 40-3)
4-2-4: INTOXICANTS:
Any minor who shall be intoxicated, or who shall purchase, offer to purchase or
in any manner obtain unlawfully for his personal use any intoxicating liquor,
shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor. (1956 Code § 40-4)
4-2-5: GIVING INTOXICANTS:
Any person who shall sell, deliver to or procure for any child sixteen (16)
years of age or under any material saturated with or enclosing any spirituous,
vinous or fermented liquor shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor. (1956 Code
§ 40-5)
4-2-6: GAMING:
No minor shall play with dice, dominoes, cards, balls or other articles used in
gaming in any place where intoxicating liquors are sold or given away, or in
any poolroom, billiard hall, cigar store, bowling alley or other public store
or place. (1956 Code § 40-6)
4-2-7: FIREARMS TO MINORS:
No person shall sell, loan or furnish to any minor any gun, pistol or other
firearm, or any toy gun or toy pistol or other toy firearm in which any
explosive substance can be used within the Village. (1956 Code § 40-7)
4-2-8: PROHIBITED USES OF MINOR:
No person having the care, custody or control of any child under the age of
fourteen (14) years shall cause or permit any such child to be exhibited, used
or employed, or shall apprentice or let out, or otherwise dispose of any such
child to any person for the occupation or purpose of singing or playing on
musical instruments on the public ways or of rope or wire walking, dancing,
begging or peddling or as a gymnast, contortionist, rider or acrobat in any
place whatsoever, or for any obscene, indecent or immoral exhibition or
purpose, or in or above any business, exhibition or occupation injurious to the
health or dangerous to the life or limb of such child, or cause, procure or
encourage any such child to engage therein.
No person shall take, receive, employ, use, exhibit or have in custody any
child under the age of fourteen (14) years for the purpose of employing such
child in the manner expressly prohibited in this section, and no person having
the care or custody of any child shall wilfully cause or permit such child to
be placed in such a situation that its life or health may be endangered. (1956
Code § 40-8)
4-2-9: TOBACCO:
(Rep. by Ord. 19-09, 7-1-2019)
4-2-10: PARENTAL IRRESPONSIBILITY:
   (A)   Definitions: For the purpose of this section, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning:
      LEGAL GUARDIAN: A person appointed guardian or given custody of a minor
by the Circuit Court of this State, but does not include a person appointed
guardian or given custody of a minor under the Illinois Juvenile Court Act, 705
Illinois Compiled Statutes 405/1-1 et seq.
      MINOR: A person who has attained eleven (11) years of age, but who has
not yet reached eighteen (18) years of age.
      PROPERTY: Any real estate including improvements thereon and tangible
personal property.
   (B)   Offense Of Parental Irresponsibility:
      1.   Offense: It shall be unlawful for a parent or legal guardian of an
unemancipated minor residing with that parent or legal guardian to fail to
exercise proper parental responsibility by allowing or permitting the minor to
commit any violation of a State Statute concerning vandalism, battery, curfew,
disorderly conduct, obscene conduct, trespass or possession or use of alcohol,
liquor, cannabis or controlled substances, or any other offense of wilful or
malicious acts to persons or property within Village limits.
      2.   Presumption: A parent or legal guardian shall be presumed to have
allowed or permitted the minor to have committed a violation of a State Statute
under all of the following conditions:
         (a)   The minor has been either adjudicated to be in violation of a
State Statute, or has been charged with any such violation (except if found to
be not guilty); or has incurred nonjudicial sanctions from any peace officer or
conservator of the peace resulting from an admission of guilt to any such
offenses; and
         (b)   The parent or legal guardian has received a written notice by
certified mail, return receipt requested, or by personal service in
substantially the following form; and
         (c)   Said minor, within two (2) years of the receipt of said notice
by the parent or legal guardian, has either adjudicated to have committed, has
been charged with the violation (except if found not to be guilty) of, or has
admitted to having committed any violation of any statute as described above.
   LEGAL NOTICE
                               
   (Date)
TO: (Parent's Names)
   FROM: Village of Manteno
   YOU ARE HEREBY NOTIFIED that  (minor's name)  has been involved in a
violation of the state statute concerning vandalism, battery, curfew,
disorderly conduct, obscene conduct, trespass, possession or use of alcohol,
liquor, cannabis or controlled substances, or any other offense or willful or
malicious acts to persons or property. If said minor is again involved in a
violation of one of the above-type state statutes, you may be found guilty of
the offense of parental irresponsibility. Conviction for said offense can
result in a fine of not less than $25.00 nor more than $500.00.
   You are hereby further notified that you must exercise proper parental
responsibility over said minor by controlling his unlawful conduct.
                             
   (Signature)
                             
   (Title or Position)
   (Ord. 94-9, 8-1-1994)
   (C)   Penalty: Any parent or legal guardian who violates this section is
guilty of a petty offense and shall be fined in accordance with section
1-4-1 of this Code. (Ord. 99-09, 8-2-1999)
CHAPTER 3
ABANDONED MOTOR VEHICLES
SECTION:
4-3-1: Definitions
4-3-2: Abandonment
4-3-3: Notify Municipal Police
4-3-4: Removal
4-3-5: Record Of Removal
4-3-6: Unknown Owner
4-3-7: Notify State Police
4-3-8: Reclaim Vehicle
4-3-9: Public Sale
4-3-10: Disposal Without Notice
4-3-11: Report Maintained
4-3-12: Proceeds Of Sale
4-3-13: Not Liable For Damages
4-3-1: DEFINITIONS:
For the purpose of this chapter, the following words shall have the meanings
ascribed to them as follows:
ABANDONED VEHICLE: All motor vehicles or other vehicles in a state of disrepair
rendering the vehicle incapable of being driven in its condition; or any motor
vehicle or other vehicle that has not been moved or used for seven (7)
consecutive days or more and is apparently deserted.
ANTIQUE VEHICLE: Any motor vehicle or other vehicle twenty five (25) years of
age or older.
HIGHWAY: Any street, alley or public way within the village. (9-21-70)
4-3-2: ABANDONMENT:
The abandonment of a motor vehicle or other vehicle or any part thereof on any
highway in the municipality is unlawful and subject to penalties as set forth
in this code. The abandonment of a motor vehicle or other vehicle or any part
thereof on private or public property (other than a highway), in view of the
general public, anywhere in this municipality is unlawful. A motor vehicle or
other vehicle or any part thereof so abandoned on private property may be
authorized for removal by or upon the order of the village police chief after a
waiting period of seven (7) days or more has expired. (Ord. 82-6, 8-2-1982)
4-3-3: NOTIFY MUNICIPAL POLICE:
When an abandoned, lost, stolen or unclaimed motor vehicle or other vehicle
comes into the temporary possession or custody of a person in this state, not
the owner of the vehicle, such person shall immediately notify the municipal
police department when the vehicle is within the corporate limits of the
municipality. Upon receipt of such notification, the police chief shall
authorize a towing service to remove and take possession of the abandoned,
lost, stolen or unclaimed motor vehicle or other vehicle. The towing service
will safely keep the towed vehicle and its contents, maintain a record of the
tow until the vehicle is claimed by the owner or any other person legally
entitled to possession thereof, or until it is disposed of as provided in this
chapter. (9-21-70)
4-3-4: REMOVAL:
   (A)   When a motor vehicle or other vehicle is abandoned on a highway in the
village ten (10) hours or more, its removal by a towing service may be
authorized by order of the police chief.
   (B)   When an abandoned, unattended, wrecked, burned or partially dismantled
motor vehicle or other vehicle is creating a traffic hazard because of its
position in relation to the highway or its physical appearance is causing the
impeding of traffic, its immediate removal from the highway by a towing service
may be authorized by order of the police chief.
   (C)   When a vehicle removed from either public or private property is
authorized by order of the police chief, the owner of the vehicle will be
responsible for all towing costs. (9-21-70)
4-3-5: RECORD OF REMOVAL:
When a motor vehicle or other vehicle is authorized to be towed away, the
police department shall keep and maintain a record of the vehicle towed,
listing the color, year of manufacture, manufacturer's trade name,
manufacturer's series name, body style, vehicle identification number and
license plate year and number displayed on the vehicle. The record shall also
include the date and hour of tow, location towed from, location towed to,
reason for towing and the name of the officer authorizing the tow. (9-21-70)
4-3-6: UNKNOWN OWNER:
When the police department does not know the identity of the registered owner
or other legally entitled person, they will cause the motor vehicle
registration records of the state of Illinois to be searched by a directed
communication to the secretary of state for the purpose of obtaining the
required ownership information.
The police department will cause the stolen motor vehicle files of the Illinois
state police to be searched by a directed communication to the Illinois state
police for stolen or wanted information on the vehicle. When the Illinois state
police files are searched with negative results, the information contained in
the national crime information center (NCIC) files will be searched by the
Illinois state police. The information determined from these record searches
will be used by the police department in sending a notification by certified
mail to the owner or legally entitled person advising where the vehicle is
held, requesting a disposition be made and setting forth public sale
information. (9-21-70)
4-3-7: NOTIFY STATE POLICE:
When the registered owner or other person legally entitled to the possession of
motor vehicle or other vehicle cannot be identified from the registration files
of this state or from the registration files of a foreign state, if applicable,
the police department shall notify the Illinois state police for the purpose of
identifying the vehicle's owner or other person legally entitled to the
possession of the vehicle. The information obtained by the Illinois state
police will be immediately forwarded to the law enforcement agency having
custody of the vehicle for notification of owner. (9-21-70)
4-3-8: RECLAIM VEHICLE:
Any time before a motor vehicle or other vehicle is sold at public sale or
disposed of as provided herein, the owner or other person legally entitled to
its possession may reclaim the vehicle by presenting to the police department
proof of ownership or proof of the right to possession of the vehicle. No
vehicle shall be released to the owner or other person under this section until
all towing and storage charges have been paid. (9-21-70)
4-3-9: PUBLIC SALE:
Whenever an abandoned, lost, stolen or unclaimed motor vehicle or other
vehicle, seven (7) years of age or newer, remains unclaimed by the registered
owner or other person legally entitled to its possession for a period of thirty
(30) days after notice has been given as provided herein, the police department
having possession of the vehicle shall cause it to be sold at public sale to
the highest bidder. Notice of the time and place of the sale shall be posted in
a conspicuous place for at least ten (10) days prior to the sale on the
premises where the vehicle has been impounded. At least ten (10) days prior to
the sale, the police department shall cause a notice of the time and place of
the sale to be sent by certified mail to the registered owner or other person
known by the police department or towing service to be legally entitled to the
possession of the vehicle. Such notice shall contain a complete description of
the vehicle to be sold and what steps must be taken by any legally entitled
person to reclaim the vehicle.
In those instances where the certified notification specified herein has been
returned by the postal authorities to the police department due to the
addressee having moved, or being unknown at the address obtained from the
registration records of this state, the sending of a second certified notice
will not be required. (9-21-70)
4-3-10: DISPOSAL WITHOUT NOTICE:
When the identity of the registered owner or other person legally entitled to
the possession of an abandoned, lost or unclaimed vehicle of seven (7) years of
age or newer cannot be determined by any means provided for in this chapter,
the vehicle may be sold as provided herein or disposed of in the manner
authorized by this chapter without notice to the registered owner or other
person legally entitled to the possession of the vehicle.
When an abandoned vehicle of more than seven (7) years of age is impounded as
specified by this chapter, it will be kept in custody for a minimum of ten (10)
days for the purpose of determining ownership, the contacting of the registered
owner by the U.S. mail, public service or in person for a determination of
disposition; and, an examination of the Illinois state police stolen motor
vehicle files for theft and wanted information. At the expiration of the ten
(10) day period, without the benefit of disposition information being received
from the registered owner, the police chief will authorize the disposal of the
vehicle as junk only.
A motor vehicle or other vehicle classified as an antique vehicle is excluded
from this chapter. (9-21-70)
4-3-11: REPORT MAINTAINED:
When a motor vehicle or other vehicle in the custody of the police department
is reclaimed by the registered owner or other legally entitled person, or when
the vehicle is sold at public sale or otherwise disposed of as provided in this
chapter, a report of the transaction will be maintained by the police
department for a period of one year from the date of the sale or disposal. (9-
21-70)
4-3-12: PROCEEDS OF SALE:
When a vehicle located within the corporate limits of this municipality is
authorized to be towed away by the police chief and disposed of as set forth in
this chapter, the proceeds of the public sale or disposition after the
deduction of towing, storage and processing charges shall be deposited in the
municipal treasury. (9-21-70)
4-3-13: NOT LIABLE FOR DAMAGES:
Any police officer, towing service owner, operator or employee shall not be
held to answer or be liable for damages in any action brought by the registered
owner, former registered owner, or his legal representative, or any other
person legally entitled to the possession of a motor vehicle or other vehicle
when the vehicle was processed and sold or disposed of as provided by this
chapter. (9-21-70)
CHAPTER 4
ANIMALS AND FOWL
SECTION:
4-4-1: Animal Commissioner Established
4-4-2: Animal Commissioner's Bond
4-4-3: Animal Commissioner's Oath
4-4-4: Animal Commissioner's Duties
4-4-5: Cruelty To Animals
4-4-6: Exhibits And Parades Of Animals, Permits
4-4-7: Noisy Animals
4-4-8: Livestock, Poultry, And Housing
4-4-9: Diseased Or Sickly Animals
4-4-10: Burial Of Dead Animals
4-4-11: Authority To Euthanize; Deprivation Of Life
4-4-12: Disposition And Redemption Of Impounded Animals
4-4-13: Care Of Impounded Animals
4-4-14: Dogs And Cats Required To Bear Current Kankakee County Rabies Tag
4-4-15: Running At Large Defined
4-4-16: Running At Large Prohibited
4-4-17: Impoundment Of Dogs And Cats Running At Large
4-4-18: Impoundment Of Dogs And Cats; Notice To Owner
4-4-19: Dog Or Cat Bites; Rabies; Observation Period
4-4-20: Costs
4-4-21: Penalty
4-4-22: Cleaning Up After Pets
4-4-23: Stray Animals
4-4-24: Dangerous And Vicious Dogs And Cats
4-4-25: Violations
4-4-26: Feeding Of Certain Animals
4-4-1: ANIMAL COMMISSIONER ESTABLISHED:
The Village President by and with the advice and consent of the Board of
Trustees shall appoint the Village Chief of Police as Animal Commissioner, and/
or such deputy as may be chosen by the Chief. (Ord. 01-31, 1-21-2002)
4-4-2: ANIMAL COMMISSIONER'S BOND:
The Animal Commissioner shall furnish a bond in such sum as shall be designated
by the President and Board of Trustees with sureties to be approved by the
President and the Board of Trustees. (Ord. 01-31, 1-21-2002)
4-4-3: ANIMAL COMMISSIONER'S OATH:
The Animal Commissioner shall take the oath of office required for Village
employees. (Ord. 01-31, 1-21-2002)
4-4-4: ANIMAL COMMISSIONER'S DUTIES:
The Animal Commissioner shall have the duty of appointing Animal Control
Officers as necessary to enforce all the provisions of this chapter. The Animal
Commissioner, in the role of Animal Commissioner, shall also have the authority
to trap, haul or dispose of wildlife. (Ord. 17-02, 5-1-2017)
4-4-5: CRUELTY TO ANIMALS:
No person shall in any way cruelly treat any animal in the Village and any
person who inhumanely beats, underfeeds, overloads, abandons or otherwise
cruelly treats any animal shall be deemed guilty of a violation of this
section. (Ord. 01-31, 1-21-2002)
4-4-6: EXHIBITS AND PARADES OF ANIMALS, PERMITS:
Exhibitions or parades of animals may be conducted only upon securing a permit
from the Chief of Police. (Ord. 01-31, 1-21-2002)
4-4-7: NOISY ANIMALS:
It shall be unlawful to keep any animal, bird or other pet which, by causing
loud, frequent or long continued noises, shall disturb the comfort or repose of
any person in the vicinity. (Ord. 01-31, 1-21-2002)
4-4-8: LIVESTOCK, POULTRY, AND HOUSING:
It shall be unlawful to keep in any manner, except as provided in section
9-7A-4  of this Code, any cattle, horse, swine, sheep, goats, rabbits or
poultry in the Village, or to erect or maintain any coop, hutch, cage, barn,
house, pen, stable, or other form of housing for the same. (Ord. 01-31, 1-21-
2002; amd. Ord. 19-39, 4-6-2020)
4-4-9: DISEASED OR SICKLY ANIMALS:
No diseased or sickly animal, nor any animal that has been exposed to any
disease that is contagious to such animals, shall be brought into the village.
(Ord. 01-31, 1-21-2002)
4-4-10: BURIAL OF DEAD ANIMALS:
No person shall leave in or throw into any public way, public place or public
water, or offensively expose or bury within the village, the body or any part
thereof of any dead animal or fatally sick or injured animal; nor shall any
person keep any dead animal in a place where the same may be dangerous to the
life, or detrimental to the health, of any person. (Ord. 01-31, 1-21-2002)
4-4-11: AUTHORITY TO EUTHANIZE; DEPRIVATION OF LIFE:
   (A)   Any animal found in a public way or public place within the village
and which, in the opinion of any police officer, the animal commissioner, or
any animal control officer, appears to be injured or diseased beyond a
reasonable likelihood of recovery, and which is not being attended or properly
cared for by the owner, or which has not been removed to private property or to
some place designated by such officer, within one hour after being found or
left in such condition, may be deprived of life by such officer, or as he may
direct.
   (B)   Any police officer, and any other person designated by the animal
commissioner, shall be authorized to take the life of any dangerous animal when
deemed necessary to protect any person or other animal from physical harm or
death. (Ord. 11-29, 3-5-2012)
4-4-12: DISPOSITION AND REDEMPTION OF IMPOUNDED ANIMALS:
Any person seeking to redeem any impounded animals shall pay a fee for
apprehension plus a per day fee for boarding, not to exceed three (3) days. The
amount of such fees will be established by the village board and amended from
time to time to cover actual costs. If the owner does not redeem the animal
within three (3) days after impounding, the animal may be redeemed by any other
person paying the above fees. Unredeemed animals shall be disposed of as
provided by the village board of trustees. All animals which have been
impounded under the provisions of this chapter shall be humanely dispatched or
disposed of by the animal commissioner, when not redeemed by the owner, after a
period of seventy two (72) hours. (Ord. 01-31, 1-21-2002)
4-4-13: CARE OF IMPOUNDED ANIMALS:
Animals which are kept in the village animal holding area shall be humanely
treated and fed. The village animal holding area shall be under the charge of
the chief of police who shall be responsible for the care and custody of the
same. (Ord. 01-31, 1-21-2002)
4-4-14: DOGS AND CATS REQUIRED TO BEAR CURRENT KANKAKEE COUNTY RABIES TAG:
It shall be unlawful to own, keep or harbor any dog or cat in the village for
more than fourteen (14) days without a current Kankakee County rabies tag
firmly affixed to its collar. Dogs and cats under the age of four (4) months
old shall be exempt from the provisions of this section. (Ord. 11-29, 3-5-2012)
4-4-15: RUNNING AT LARGE DEFINED:
An animal is deemed to be running at large when it is on any street, alley,
sidewalk or other public place, or on any private property without the
permission of the property owner and is not either securely leashed or confined
in an automobile. (Ord. 01-31, 1-21-2002)
4-4-16: RUNNING AT LARGE PROHIBITED:
It shall be unlawful to permit any animal to run at large in the village. (Ord.
01-31, 1-21-2002)
4-4-17: IMPOUNDMENT OF DOGS AND CATS RUNNING AT LARGE:
Dogs or cats found running at large in the village shall be apprehended and
impounded and held in a village and/or Kankakee County animal holding area.
When a dog or cat is apprehended and impounded, it must be scanned for the
presence of a microchip. If not microchipped, every reasonable attempt must be
made to find the owner of the dog or cat. The owner of any redeemed dog or cat
shall have that animal microchipped, and proof of such microchipping shall be
filed at the office of Manteno animal control, no later than fourteen (14) days
after redemption. (Ord. 11-29, 3-5-2012)
4-4-18: IMPOUNDMENT OF DOGS AND CATS; NOTICE TO OWNER:
When a dog or cat is apprehended and impounded, and the owner is known, notice
shall be provided to the owner as soon as is reasonably possible, but in no
event later than twenty four (24) hours after the owner has been identified.
(Ord. 11-29, 3-5-2012)
4-4-19: DOG OR CAT BITES; RABIES; OBSERVATION PERIOD:
Whenever any dog or cat bites a person, the owner of the dog or cat shall
immediately notify the animal commissioner. The animal commissioner shall
notify the administrator or deputy administrator for Kankakee County. The
animal control act shall govern the terms of the dog or cat's confinement and
observation. (Ord. 11-29, 3-5-2012)
4-4-20: COSTS:
Any costs incurred in connection with the carrying out of the provisions of
this chapter shall be paid to the village by the owner or keeper of such animal
or animals. In the event of refusal to so pay, the village is hereby authorized
to sue said owner or keeper to recover same. In the event of a prosecution for
violation of any provisions of this chapter, the court may assess, as costs,
any costs incurred in connection with the carrying out of the provisions of
this chapter. (Ord. 01-31, 1-21-2002)
4-4-21: PENALTY:
Any person who violates this chapter is guilty of a petty offense and shall be
fined in accordance with section
1-4-1 of this code. (Ord. 01-31, 1-21-2002)
4-4-22: CLEANING UP AFTER PETS:
   (A)   Responsibility: Any person owning, keeping, possessing or harboring
any dog or cat shall promptly remove and dispose of all feces left by the dog
or cat on any public property and on any private property not owned by such
person or lawfully occupied by such person.
   (B)   Penalty: Any person, who violates this section shall be guilty of a
petty offense and shall be fined in accordance with section
1-4-1 of this code. (Ord. 01-31, 1-21-2002)
4-4-23: STRAY ANIMALS:
"Stray animals" are any domestic animals that run loose throughout the village
without visible signs of ownership.
   (A)   Ownership And Responsibility: Residents who feed, house or otherwise
maintain a stray animal for seven (7) days or more will be viewed as having
accepted ownership of such animal, and any cost incurred by the village for
animal control services for the animal will be the responsibility of such
owner.
   (B)   Animal Control; Nuisance: Stray animals will be picked up by animal
control only if considered by the animal control officer to be posing an
immediate safety threat or declared as a public nuisance. (Ord. 01-31, 1-21-
2002)
4-4-24: DANGEROUS AND VICIOUS DOGS AND CATS:
   (A)   Definitions: The terms used in this section, unless the context
otherwise indicates, mean the following:
      ANIMAL COMMISSIONER: The appointed animal commissioner of the village.
      CAT: Felis catus.
      DANGEROUS DOG OR CAT:
      1.   Any individual dog or cat anywhere other than upon the property of
the owner or custodian of the dog or cat and is unmuzzled, unleashed, or
unattended by its owner or custodian that behaves in a manner that a reasonable
person would believe poses a serious and unjustified imminent threat of serious
physical injury or death to a person or a companion animal; or
      2.   A dog or cat that, without justification, bites a person and does
not cause serious injury.
      DOG: All members of the family Canidae.
      ENCLOSURE: A fence or structure of at least six feet (6') in height,
forming or causing an enclosure suitable to prevent the entry of young
children, and suitable to confine a vicious dog or cat, in conjunction with
other measurers that may be required of an owner or keeper, such as tethering
of the vicious dog or cat within the enclosure. The enclosure shall be securely
enclosed, locked and designed to prevent the animal from escaping from the
enclosure.
      HEARING OFFICER: Any person appointed by the village president to conduct
administrative hearings pursuant to the provisions of title 1,
"Administrative", chapter 17, "Administrative Adjudication", of this code.
      IMPOUNDED: Taken into custody of a public animal control facility or
animal welfare shelter.
      OWNER: Any person having a property right in a dog or cat, or who keeps
or harbors a dog or cat, or who has a dog or cat in his care, or acts as the
custodian for a dog or cat, or who knowingly permits a dog or cat to remain on
any premises owned or occupied by him or her.
      PHYSICAL INJURY: The impairment of physical condition.
      POTENTIALLY DANGEROUS DOG: A dog running at large and unsupervised with
three (3) or more other dogs.
      SERIOUS PHYSICAL INJURY: A physical injury that creates a substantial
risk of death or that causes death, serious or protracted disfigurement,
protracted impairment of health, or impairment of the function of any bodily
organ or plastic surgery.
      VICIOUS DOG OR CAT: A dog or cat that, without justification, attacks a
person and causes serious physical injury or death, or any individual dog or
cat that has been found to be a dangerous dog or cat upon two (2) separate
occasions.
   (B)   Potentially Dangerous Dogs; Dangerous Dogs; And Vicious Dogs: The
animal control commissioner, or any police officer, shall be obligated to
notify the administrator or deputy administrator of the Kankakee County of any
potentially dangerous dogs, dangerous dogs, or vicious dogs. Potentially
dangerous dogs, dangerous dogs and vicious dogs shall be governed by the animal
control act.
   (C)   Dangerous Or Vicious Cats:
      1.   Upon the filing of a complaint by any person, a ticket shall be
issued to an owner alleged to have a dangerous or vicious cat. The hearing
officer shall preside over a hearing to determine whether a cat is a dangerous
or vicious cat. Hearings shall be administered in accordance with the
provisions of title 1, "Administrative", chapter 17, "Administrative
Adjudication", of this code.
      2.   A cat shall not be declared dangerous or vicious if the hearing
officer determines the conduct of the cat was justified because:
         (a)   The threat was sustained by a person who was committing a crime
or offense upon the owner of the cat or was committing a wilful trespass or
other tort upon the premises or property occupied by the owner of the cat;
         (b)   The threatened person was abusing, assaulting, or physically
threatening the cat or its offspring;
         (c)   The injured, threatened, or killed companion animal was
attacking or threatening to attack the cat or its offspring; or
         (d)   The cat was responding to pain or injury or was protecting
itself, its owner, custodian or a member of its household, pride, or offspring.
      3.   If the hearing officer determines that the cat is a dangerous or
vicious cat, the hearing officer shall order the cat be spayed or neutered and
microchipped within ten (10) days at the owner's expense. If the cat is not
spayed or neutered and microchipped within the ten (10) days, the animal
commissioner shall order the cat impounded and euthanized. If the owner of the
cat has not appealed the impoundment and euthanization order within fourteen
(14) days, the cat may be euthanized. All owners shall be required to file
proof of compliance with an order of the hearing officer with the animal
commissioner no later than fourteen (14) days after the determination of the
hearing officer.
      4.   Impoundment and euthanization orders may be appealed to the circuit
court of Kankakee County.
      5.   It shall be unlawful for any person that owns a vicious cat to allow
that cat outdoors without being properly restrained so as to prohibit it from
leaving the owner's property. Any owner that possesses a vicious cat shall
provide an enclosure for the outdoor area in which the vicious cat may be
allowed. Any owner found to have violated the provisions of this subsection
shall have his/her cat impounded and euthanized. (Ord. 11-29, 3-5-2012)
4-4-25: VIOLATIONS:
Violations of this chapter shall be administered in accordance with the
provisions of title 1, "Administrative", chapter 17, "Administrative
Adjudication", of this code. (Ord. 11-29, 3-5-2012)
4-4-26: FEEDING OF CERTAIN ANIMALS:
   (A)   Definitions: For purposes of this section, the following definitions
shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different
meaning to be applied:
 
                  Any substance, material or product being or consisting of any
EDIBLE SUBSTANCE: liquid (excepting natural water), meat, grain, vegetable,
                  fruit, seed, dairy, or by-product thereof.
FEED:             To give, distribute, place, expose, deposit, or scatter any
                  edible substance for consumption.
PERSON:           Any individual, corporation, company, partnership, firm,
                  association or other entity.
WILDLIFE:         Coyotes, wild turkeys, foxes, skunks, racoons, opossums,
                  squirls, rabbits, ducks, gees, crows, pigeons, and gulls.
 
   (B)   Feeding of Wildlife Prohibited:
      1.   It shall be unlawful for any person to feed wildlife on public or
private property.
      2.   It shall be unlawful for any person to leave or store any edible
substance in such a manner as to attract, or be capable of consumption by,
wildlife.
      3.   It shall be unlawful for any person to fail to take remedial action
to maintain property or to cease engaging in any activity that is resulting in
the feeding or attraction of wildlife, in accordance with the direction of the
Village of Manteno Code Enforcement Officer or the Animal Control Officer.
   (C)   Exceptions: Nothing in this section shall be interpreted as
prohibiting the following activities:
      1.   Landscaping, farming, gardening, and the planting or maintaining
vegetable gardens, fruit trees, nut trees, or other plants provided such
activities are not conducted for the purposes of feeding wildlife;
      2.   Feeding of birds outdoors and on private residential property using
bird feeders, provided: (a) only liquid and/or seeds shall be used as edible
substances therein; (b) bird feeders shall be placed at least five (5) feet
above ground and shall be suspended by cable or rope, or otherwise secured so
as to prevent the same from being easily accessible to non-avian wildlife; (c)
the area below bird feeders shall be maintained free of seed; (d) the property
on which the bird feeder is located, as well as surrounding properties, shall
be maintained free of the accumulation of avian feces; and, (d) the feeding
shall not substantially interfere with the rights surrounding property owners
and the enjoyment of their properties.
      3.   Baiting in the permitted and legal take or depredation of wildlife
in accordance with federal, state, and local law.
   (D)   Penalty: Any person found in violation of the provisions of this
section shall be fined not less than one hundred dollars ($100.00) and not more
than seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00) for each offense. Each day a
violation continues shall constitute a separate and distinct offense. (Ord. 21-
12, 9-7-2021)
CHAPTER 5
AUXILIARY POLICE
SECTION:
4-5-1: Appointment; Qualifications; Termination
4-5-2: Residency; Not Conservators Of The Peace
4-5-3: Identification Symbols; Control By Chief
4-5-4: Powers And Duties
4-5-5: Firearms
4-5-1: APPOINTMENT; QUALIFICATIONS; TERMINATION:
The chief of police is hereby authorized to appoint auxiliary police as
employees. Prior to appointment, all proposed auxiliary police shall be
fingerprinted and their fingerprints shall be checked with the federal bureau
of investigation, Washington, D.C., for any possible criminal record. No person
shall be appointed as an auxiliary police if he has been convicted of a felony
or other crime involving moral turpitude. The appointment of any or all
auxiliary police may be terminated by the chief of police. (Ord. 82-7, 9-20-
1982; amd. Ord. 06-46, 12-4-2006)
4-5-2: RESIDENCY; NOT CONSERVATORS OF THE PEACE:
Auxiliary police officers need not be residents of the village and shall not be
considered as members of the regular police department. Auxiliary police
officers shall not be conservators of the peace. (Ord. 06-46, 12-4-2006)
4-5-3: IDENTIFICATION SYMBOLS; CONTROL BY CHIEF:
Identification symbols worn by auxiliary police shall be different and distinct
from those used by the regular police department and shall be selected and
chosen by the chief of police of the village. Auxiliary police shall at all
times during the performance of their duties be subject to the direction and
control of the chief of police of the village. (Ord. 82-7, 9-20-1982; amd. Ord.
06-46, 12-4-2006)
4-5-4: POWERS AND DUTIES:
Auxiliary police officers shall have the following powers and duties when
properly assigned and on duty:
   (A)   To aid or direct traffic.
   (B)   To aid in control of natural or manmade disasters.
   (C)   To aid in case of civil disorder.
   (D)   To aid in crowd control.
   (E)   To assist in the observation and detention of prisoners.
   (F)   To patrol and guard public facilities and grounds. (Ord. 06-46, 12-4-
2006)
4-5-5: FIREARMS:
Auxiliary police officers shall not carry firearms except with the permission
of the chief of police on designated assignments while in uniform, and then
only if such officer has completed the required training promulgated by the
Illinois law enforcement training and standards board. (Ord. 06-46, 12-4-2006)
TITLE 5
HEALTH AND SANITATION
CHAPTER 1
NUISANCES
SECTION:
5-1-1: Notice To Abate
5-1-2: Summary Abatement
5-1-3: Common Law, Statutory Nuisances
5-1-4: Nuisances Detrimental To Health
5-1-5: Unhealthful Business
5-1-6: Nuisances Brought Into Village
5-1-7: Offensive Premises
5-1-8: Weeds
5-1-9: Spreading Of Vermin Poison
5-1-10: Spitting In Public
5-1-11: Facial Tissues
5-1-12: Waste Accumulation; Removal
5-1-13: Vaults
5-1-14: Noise
5-1-15: Rats
5-1-16: Chronic Nuisance Property
5-1-16-1: Definitions
5-1-16-2: Remedy
5-1-16-3: Abatement Of Nuisance
5-1-16-4: Procedure
5-1-16-5: Commencement Of Action, Burden Of Proof
5-1-16-6: Emergency Closing Procedures
5-1-1: NOTICE TO ABATE:
It shall be the duty of the village police chief or deputies to serve notice,
in writing, upon the owner, occupant, agent or person in possession of, or
control of any lot, building or premises, in or upon which any nuisance may be
found, or who may be the owner or cause of such nuisance, requiring him to
abate the same in such manner as he shall prescribe, within a reasonable time.
It shall not be necessary in any case for the police chief or deputies to
specify in said notice the manner in which any nuisance shall be abated, unless
they shall deem it advisable to do so. Such notice may be given or served by
any officer who is so directed or deputed. If the person so notified shall
neglect or refuse to comply with the requirements of such order by abating such
nuisance within the time specified, such person shall be deemed guilty of a
misdemeanor.
It shall be the duty of the police chief or his deputy to proceed at once upon
the expiration of the time specified in said notice to cause such nuisance to
be abated; provided, however, that whenever the owner, occupant, agent or
person in possession or control of any premises in or upon which any nuisance
may be found, is unknown or cannot be found, the police chief or deputy shall
proceed to abate such nuisance without notice. In either case the expense of
such abatement shall be collected from the person who may have created,
continued or suffered such nuisance to exist, in addition to any penalty or
fine. (1956 Code, Sec. 23-1)
5-1-2: SUMMARY ABATEMENT:
Whenever any nuisance shall be found on any premises within the village, the
police chief or his deputy is hereby authorized in his discretion to cause the
same to be summarily abated in such manner as he may direct. (1956 Code, Sec.
23-2)
5-1-3: COMMON LAW, STATUTORY NUISANCES:
In all cases where no provision is herein made defining what are nuisances and
how the same shall be removed, abated or prevented, in addition to what may be
declared such herein, those offenses which are known to the common law of the
land and the statutes of Illinois as nuisances may, in case the same exist
within the village limits or within one mile thereof, be treated as such, and
proceeded against as is provided in this code, or in accordance with any other
provision of law. (1956 Code, Sec. 23-3)
5-1-4: NUISANCES DETRIMENTAL TO HEALTH:
No building, vehicle, structure, receptacle, yard, lot, premises or part
thereof, shall be made, used, kept, maintained or operated in the village, if
such use, keeping, maintaining or operating shall be the occasion of any
nuisance, or shall be dangerous or detrimental to health. (1956 Code, Sec. 23-
4)
5-1-5: UNHEALTHFUL BUSINESS:
No substance, matter or thing of any kind whatever, which shall be dangerous or
detrimental to health, shall be allowed to exist in any work or labor performed
in the village, or be used therein or be used in any work or labor performed in
the village, and no nuisance shall be permitted to exist in connection with any
business or in connection with any such work or labor. (1956 Code, Sec. 23-5)
5-1-6: NUISANCES BROUGHT INTO VILLAGE:
No person shall bring into the village, or keep therein for sale or otherwise,
either for food or any other purpose, any dead or live animal, nor any matter,
substance or thing which shall be a nuisance or which shall occasion a nuisance
in the village, and which may or shall be dangerous or detrimental to health.
(1956 Code, Sec. 23-6)
5-1-7: OFFENSIVE PREMISES:
Premises of any kind or type whatever which shall become nauseous, foul or
offensive, is hereby declared a nuisance; and the person owning, maintaining or
in possession or control of any such premises shall be deemed guilty of a
misdemeanor. (1956 Code, Sec. 23-7)
5-1-8: WEEDS:
All weeds which, due to pollination, are a menace to health are hereby declared
to be a public nuisance.
It shall be unlawful for any person owning, leasing, occupying or controlling
any plot of ground to permit the growth of such weeds thereon.
All such weeds shall be pulled or destroyed by the owner, lessee, tenant,
occupant or person in control of said plot of ground at least twice each year,
once between July 1 and July 15, and once between August 1 and August 15, of
each year.
Any failure to destroy such weeds within the designated periods shall
constitute a violation of this section. (1956 Code, Sec. 23-8)
5-1-9: SPREADING OF VERMIN POISON:
It shall be unlawful for any persons to spread, or to cause or permit any agent
or employee to spread, any poison for the purpose of killing rats, mice,
insects or other vermin, in any public way or public place in the village; and
it shall be unlawful for any person to spread, or to cause or permit any agent
or employee to spread, any poison for such purpose in any yard, court,
passageway or other open place on private premises, or on the outside of any
building or structure, or in any place within a building which is open to the
general public, or where pet dogs, cats or other domestic animals or fowl have
access, without placing the same in a receptacle of such kind or character that
it can be reached only by the kind of vermin which the poison is intended to
kill, or without placing a wire or other guard about the same in such a way
that no child, or domestic animal or fowl, or other harmless creature can reach
the same. (1956 Code, Sec. 23-9)
5-1-10: SPITTING IN PUBLIC:
No person shall spit upon any public sidewalk, or upon the floor of any public
conveyance, or upon the floor of any theater, hall, assembly or public
building. (1956 Code, Sec. 23-10)
5-1-11: FACIAL TISSUES:
No person shall drop, throw or place any used facial tissue or paper
handkerchief upon any public way or other public place or upon the floor of any
public conveyance or upon the floor of any theater, hall, assembly or public
building or upon the surface of any lot or parcel of ground or on the roof of
any building or in any light or airshaft, court or areaway. (1956 Code, Sec.
23-11)
5-1-12: WASTE ACCUMULATION; REMOVAL:
   (A)   Accumulation: It shall be unlawful for any person to accumulate or
permit the accumulation on any open lot or other premises, any lumber, boxes,
barrels, bricks, scrap metal, motor vehicle bodies or parts or similar
materials, rubbish or any articles of junk which provide rat harborage unless
the same shall be placed on open racks that are elevated not less than eighteen
inches (18") above the ground evenly piled or stacked. (1956 Code, Sec. 23-34)
   (B)   Vacating Premises: It shall be the duty of every person occupying or
controlling any lot, building or structure, or any portion thereof, to remove
or cause to be removed therefrom, before vacating the same, all garbage, ashes,
miscellaneous waste and manure. (1956 Code, Sec. 23-24)
   (C)   Vehicles: No person owning or controlling any vehicle used for the
carrying or transportation of any garbage, ashes, miscellaneous waste, manure
or livestock of any kind, shall cause or permit such vehicle when in use for
such purposes to stand or remain before or near any building or structure or
premises occupied by any persons; nor shall any person using any such vehicle
cause or permit the use of an unreasonable or unnecessary length of time in and
about the loading or unloading of any such vehicle when in use for such
purposes, or cause or permit an unreasonable or unnecessary length of time to
be used in passing along any public way; nor shall any such person cause or
permit any such vehicle to be in a condition needlessly or unnecessarily filthy
or offensive. (1956 Code, Sec. 23-25)
   (D)   Dumping: No person shall dump or deposit anywhere within the village
any garbage, ashes, miscellaneous waste, manure or other substance that may
contain disease germs, or be scattered by the wind, or decompose or become
filthy, noxious or unhealthful. Any such dumping is hereby declared to be a
nuisance. (1956 Code, Sec. 23-26)
5-1-13: VAULTS:
All vaults, privies, catch basins, cisterns, cesspools and the like shall be
constructed and maintained in a manner not dangerous or offensive to public
health. (1956 Code, Sec. 23-27)
Any item mentioned in this section which is foul and emits smells and odors
prejudicial to the public health is hereby declared to be a nuisance. (1956
Code, Sec. 23-28)
5-1-14: NOISE 1 :
No person shall make, or cause, permit or allow to be made, upon a public way,
or in such close proximity to a public way as to be distinctly and loudly
audible upon such public way, any noise of any kind by crying, calling or
shouting or by means of any whistle, rattle, bell, gong, clapper, hammer, drum,
horn, hand organ, mechanically operated piano, other musical instrument, wind
instrument, sound amplifier or similar mechanical device without permission
from the village board. (1956 Code, Sec. 23-29)
 
Notes
1 1. See also section 4-1-4-4 of this code.
5-1-15: RATS:
   (A)   Rat Stoppage: Every building or structure within the village shall be
rat stopped, freed of rats and maintained in a rat stopped and rat free
condition.
      The term "rat stoppage" as used herein applies to a form of rat proofing
to prevent the ingress of rats into or under buildings or other structures from
the exterior or from one building or structure to another. It consists
essentially of the closing of all openings in the exterior walls, ground or
first floors, basements and foundations that may be reached by the rats from
the ground by climbing or by burrowing, with concrete, sheet iron, hardware
cloth or other types of rat proofing materials impervious to rat gnawing. (1956
Code, Sec. 23-30)
   (B)   Inspection: The board of health may from time to time order the
inspection of any building or structure to determine evidence of rat
infestation. When any evidence is found by such inspection indicating the
presence of rats, notice shall be served on the owner, agent or occupant of
said building or structure to abate such condition. (1956 Code, Sec. 23-31)
   (C)   Abatement: Upon the receipt of any such notice it shall be the duty of
the owner, occupant or agent to comply therewith at once. Noncompliance after
the time stated in the notice, in no event to be less than fifteen (15) days,
shall be construed as a violation of this chapter by such owner, occupant or
agent. (1956 Code, Sec. 23-32)
   (D)   Dumping: It shall be unlawful for any person to place, leave, dump or
permit to accumulate any garbage or trash in any building, structure or
premises so that the same shall afford food or harborage for rats, or to dump
or place on any premises, land or waterway, any dead animals or waste
vegetables or animal matter of any kind. (1956 Code, Sec. 23-33)
5-1-16: CHRONIC NUISANCE PROPERTY:
   (A)   Any certain property within the village which becomes a chronic
nuisance property is in violation of this chapter and is subject to its
remedies.
   (B)   Any person in charge who permits property under his or her ownership
or control to be a public nuisance property shall be in violation of this
chapter and subject to its remedies. (Ord. 00-20, 11-20-2000)
5-1-16-1: DEFINITIONS:
CHRONIC NUISANCE PROPERTY: Property upon which three (3) or more of the
behaviors listed below have occurred during any sixty (60) day period, as a
result of any three (3) separate factual events that have been independently
investigated by any law enforcement agency:
   (A)   Disorderly conduct as defined in 720 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/26-
1.
   (B)   Unlawful use of weapons as defined in 720 Illinois Compiled Statutes
5/24-1 et seq.
   (C)   Mob action as defined in 720 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/25-1.
   (D)   Discharge of a firearm as defined in 720 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/
24-1.2 and 5/24-1.5.
   (E)   Gambling as defined in 720 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/28-1.
   (F)   Possession, manufacture or delivery of controlled substances as
defined in 720 Illinois Compiled Statutes 570/401 et seq.
   (G)   Assault or battery or any related offense as defined in 720 Illinois
Compiled Statutes 5/12-1 et seq.
   (H)   Sexual abuse or related offenses as defined in 720 Illinois Compiled
Statutes 5/12-15 et seq.
   (I)   Public indecency as defined in 720 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/11-9.
   (J)   Prostitution as defined in 720 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/11-14 et
seq.
   (K)   Criminal damage to property as defined in 720 Illinois Compiled
Statutes 5/21-1 et seq.
   (L)   Possession, cultivation, manufacture or delivery of cannabis as
defined in 720 Illinois Compiled Statutes 550/1 et seq.
   (M)   Illegal consumption or possession of alcohol as defined in 235
Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/1 et seq.
   (N)   Violation of the village of Manteno property maintenance code as
described in the current issue of the international property maintenance code.
CONTROL: The ability to regulate, restrain, dominate, counteract or govern
conduct that occurs on that property.
OWNER: Any person, agent, firm or corporation having any legal or equitable
interest in the property. Owner includes, but is not limited to: a) a mortgagee
in possession in whom is vested: 1) all or part of the legal title to the
property, or 2) all or part of the beneficial ownership and the right to the
present use and enjoyment of the premises; or b) an occupant who can control
what occurs on the property.
PERMIT: To suffer, allow, consent to, acquiesce by failure to prevent, or
expressly assent or agree to the doing of an act.
PERSON: Any natural person, association, partnership or corporation capable of
owning or using property in the village of Manteno.
PERSON IN CHARGE: Any person in actual or constructive possession of a
property, including, but not limited to, an owner, occupant of property under
his or her domain, ownership or control.
PROPERTY: Any real property, including land, or that which is affixed,
incidental or pertinent to land, including, but not limited to, any premises,
room, house, building, or structure or any separate part or portion thereof,
whether permitted or not. (Ord. 00-20, 11-20-2000; amd. Ord. 06-44, 11-20-2006)
5-1-16-2: REMEDY:
   (A)   In the event a court determines property to be a chronic nuisance
property, the court may order that the property be closed and secured against
all use and occupancy for a period of not less than thirty (30) days, but not
more than one hundred eighty (180) days, or the court may employ any other
remedy deemed by it to be appropriate to abate the nuisance.
   (B)   In addition to the remedy provided in subsection (A) of this section,
the court may impose upon the owner of the property a civil penalty in the
amount of up to one hundred dollars ($100.00) per day, payable to the village
of Manteno, for each day the owner had actual knowledge that the property was a
public nuisance property and permitted the property to remain public nuisance
property.
   (C)   In determining what remedy or remedies shall be employed, the court
may consider evidence of other conduct which has occurred on the property,
including, but not limited to:
      1.   The disturbance of neighbors.
      2.   The recurrence of loud and obnoxious noises.
      3.   Repeated consumption of alcohol in public. (Ord. 00-20, 11-20-2000)
5-1-16-3: ABATEMENT OF NUISANCE:
The corporation counsel of the village of Manteno or the state's attorney of
Kankakee County may commence an action to abate public nuisance as described
above. Upon being satisfied by affidavits or other sworn evidence that an
alleged public nuisance exists, the court may, without notice or bond, enter a
temporary restraining order or a preliminary injunction to enjoin any defendant
from maintaining such nuisance and may enter an order restraining any defendant
from removing or interfering with all property used in connection with the
public nuisance. (Ord. 00-20, 11-20-2000)
5-1-16-4: PROCEDURE:
When the chief of police of the village of Manteno receives two (2) or more
police reports documenting the occurrence of nuisance activity on or within a
property, the chief of police shall independently review such reports to
determine whether they describe criminal acts. Upon such findings, the chief of
police may:
   (A)   Notify the person in charge in writing that the property is in danger
of becoming a chronic nuisance property. The notice shall contain the following
information:
      1.   The street address or a legal description sufficient for
identification of the property;
      2.   A statement that the chief of police has information that the
property may be a chronic nuisance property with a concise description of the
nuisance activities that may exist, or that have occurred. The chief of police
shall offer the person in charge an opportunity to propose a course of action
that the chief of police agrees will abate the nuisance activities giving rise
to the violation;
      3.   Demand that the person in charge respond to the chief of police
within ten (10) days to discuss the nuisance activities.
   (B)   After complying with the notification procedures described herein,
when the chief of police receives a police report documenting the occurrence of
a third nuisance activity at or within a property and determines that the
property has become a chronic nuisance property, the chief of police shall:
      1.   Notify the person in charge in writing that the property has been
determined to be a chronic nuisance property. The notice shall contain the
following information:
         (a)   The street address or legal description sufficient for
identification of the property.
         (b)   A statement that the chief of police has determined the property
to be chronic nuisance property with a concise description of the nuisance
activities leading to his/her findings.
         (c)   Demand that the person in charge respond within ten (10) days to
the chief of police and propose a course of action that the chief of police
agrees will abate the nuisance activities giving rise to the violation.
         (d)   Service shall be made either personally or by first class mail,
postage prepaid, return receipt requested, addressed to the person in charge at
the address of the property believed to be a chronic nuisance property, or such
other place which is likely to give the person in charge notice of the
determination by the chief of police.
         (e)   A copy of the notice shall be served on the owner at such
address as shown on the tax rolls of the county in which the property is
located, and/or the occupant, at the address of the property, if these persons
are different than the person in charge, and shall be made either personally or
by first class mail, postage prepaid.
         (f)   A copy of the notice shall also be posted at the property after
ten (10) days have elapsed from the service or mailing of the notice to the
person in charge and the person in charge has not contacted the chief of
police.
         (g)   The failure of any person to receive notice that the property
may be a chronic nuisance property shall not invalidate or otherwise affect the
proceedings under this chapter.
      2.   If after the notification, but prior to the commencement of legal
proceedings by the village pursuant to this chapter, a person in charge
stipulates with the chief of police that the person in charge will pursue a
course of action the parties agree will abate the nuisance activities giving
rise to the violation, the chief of police may agree to postpone legal
proceedings for a period of not less than ten (10) nor more than thirty (30)
days, except in the case of a nuisance activity where a search warrant was
executed at the property. If the agreed course of action does not result in the
abatement of the nuisance activity or if no agreement concerning abatement is
reached within thirty (30) days, the chief of police shall request
authorization for the corporation counsel to commence a legal proceeding to
abate the nuisance.
      3.   Concurrent with the notification procedures set forth herein, the
chief of police shall send copies of the notice, as well as any documentation
which supports legal proceedings to the corporation counsel.
   (C)   Where a person in charge makes a response to the chief of police as
required above, any conduct or statements made in connection with the
furnishing of that response shall not constitute an admission that any nuisance
activities have or are occurring. This subsection does not require the
exclusion of any evidence which is otherwise admissible or offered for any
other purpose. (Ord. 00-20, 11-20-2000)
5-1-16-5: COMMENCEMENT OF ACTION, BURDEN OF PROOF:
   (A)   In an action seeking closure of a chronic nuisance property, the
village shall have the initial burden of showing by preponderance of the
evidence that the property is a chronic nuisance property.
   (B)   It is a defense to an action seeking the closure of chronic nuisance
property that the owner of the property at the time in question could not, in
the exercise of reasonable care or diligence, determine that the property had
become a public nuisance property, or could not, in spite of the exercise of
reasonable care and diligence, control the conduct leading to the findings that
the property is a chronic nuisance property.
   (C)   In establishing the amount of any civil penalty requested, the court
may consider any of the following factors if they need be found appropriate,
and shall cite those found applicable:
      1.   The actions or lack of action taken by the person in charge to
mitigate or correct the problem at the property.
      2.   Whether the problem at the property was repeated or continuous.
      3.   The magnitude or gravity of the problem.
      4.   The cooperation of the person in charge with the village.
      5.   The cost of the village investigating and correcting or attempting
to correct the condition. (Ord. 00-20, 11-20-2000)
5-1-16-6: EMERGENCY CLOSING PROCEDURES:
   (A)   In the event that it is determined that the property is an immediate
threat to the public safety and welfare, the village may apply to the court for
such interim relief, as is deemed by the chief of police to be appropriate. In
such an event the notification provision set forth in section
5-1-16-4 of this chapter need not be complied with, however, the village shall
make a diligent effort to notify the person in charge prior to a court hearing.
   (B)   In the event that the court finds the property constitutes a "chronic
nuisance property" as defined in section
5-1-16-1 of this chapter, the court may order the remedy set out above. In
addition, in the event that it also finds the person in charge had knowledge of
activities or conditions of the property constituting or violating this chapter
and permitted the activities to occur, the court may assess a civil fine as
provided above.
   (C)   The court may authorize the village of Manteno to physically secure
the property against use or occupancy in the event the owner fails to do so
within the time specified by the court. In the event that the village is
authorized to secure the property, all costs reasonably incurred by the village
to effect a closure shall be made and assessed as a lien against the property.
If used herein, "costs" mean these costs actually incurred by the village for
the physical securing of the property, as well as tenant relocation costs.
   (D)   The village of Manteno department of public works effecting the
closure shall prepare a statement of cost and the village of Manteno shall
thereafter submit said statement to the court for its review. If no objection
of the statement is made within the period described by the court, a lien in
said amount may be recorded against said property.
   (E)   Any person who is assessed the cost of closure and/or civil penalty by
the court shall be personally liable for the payment thereof to the village.
   (F)   A tenant is entitled to their reasonable relocation costs, as those
are determined by the court if, without actual notice, the tenant moved into
this property, after either:
      1.   The owner or tenant received notice as described herein of the
police chief's determination as described above.
      2.   Unknown owner or other agent received notice of an action brought
pursuant to this section.
      3.   Any person who is assessed with costs of closure and/or civil
penalty by the court shall be personally liable for the payment thereof to the
village. (Ord. 00-20, 11-20-2000)
CHAPTER 2
HEALTH REGULATIONS
SECTION:
5-2-1: Reports
5-2-2: Neglected Persons
5-2-3: Movement
5-2-4: Disinfecting
5-2-5: Common Towels
5-2-6: Common Drinking Vessels
5-2-7: Violation
5-2-1: REPORTS:
Any physician or any manager, superintendent or any other person in charge or
control of any public or private institution, hotel, boarding house, lodging
house, hospital or dispensary, or any other person who shall discover,
prescribe for, treat, care for, attend or learn of any person within the
village having or suspected of having a contagious, epidemic or communicable
disease, except syphilis, gonorrhea or chancroid, within twenty four (24) hours
after first discovering or learning of the existence or suspected existence of
the disease, shall report the facts in writing to the board of health, giving
the name, if known and the place of residence or the location of the person
having, or suspected of having, the disease, and the character and state of the
disease. (1956 Code, Sec. 18-1)
5-2-2: NEGLECTED PERSONS:
Any person who has any reason to regard any individual in the village as
neglected or not properly cared for, and any physician who hears of any such
sick person and has reason to believe such sick person requires the attention
of the board of health shall at once report the facts to the board of health
regarding the disease, condition, dwelling place and position of such sick
person. (1956 Code, Sec. 18-2)
5-2-3: MOVEMENT:
No person shall move, carry or convey from one place to another within the
village, without a permit from the board of health, any person having, or
suspected of having, any contagious, epidemic or communicable disease; nor
shall any person cause, contribute or promote the spread of any contagious,
epidemic or communicable disease from any person having, or suspected of having
such disease, or by any exposure of any such sick person or the body of a
person dead of such a disease, or by a needless exposure of himself, or by any
negligent act in connection with the care or custody of such sick person or
dead body. (1956 Code, Sec. 18-3)
5-2-4: DISINFECTING:
No person within the village shall move or expose, or aid in moving or
exposing, any household goods, articles or things that have been exposed to any
contagious or epidemic disease until such household goods, articles or things
shall have been disinfected in accordance with the requirements of the board of
health, nor shall any person bring into the village any article or thing
whatsoever from any infected place or from any building in which any person has
been sick of any such disease, without a permit therefor from the board of
health, nor until such article or thing has been thoroughly disinfected. (1956
Code, Sec. 18-4)
5-2-5: COMMON TOWELS:
No person owning, in charge of, or in control of any public lavatory or
washroom shall maintain in or about such lavatory or washroom any towel for
common use. The term "common use" as used in this section shall be construed to
mean for use by more than one person. (1956 Code, Sec. 18-5)
5-2-6: COMMON DRINKING VESSELS:
It shall be unlawful to keep, offer or display for use any common drinking cup,
glass or similar receptacle in any building or place open to the public, or in
any lodging or boarding house, factory, office, store or private school. (1956
Code, Sec. 18-6)
5-2-7: VIOLATION:
Any person who shall violate any of the provisions of this chapter, or who
shall resist or cause resistance to be made against the entry of any officer of
the board of health to any place described in this chapter which such officer
shall desire to make entry into for the purpose of carrying out the provisions
of this chapter, or who shall refuse or fail to comply with any order or
regulation made by the board of health and necessary for the purpose of
carrying into effect the provisions of this chapter, and any principal or
person managing or in control of any public or private school, who shall in any
way attempt to prevent any officer of the board of health from exercising the
power conferred upon him by this chapter, shall be deemed guilty of a
misdemeanor. (1956 Code, Sec. 18-7)
CHAPTER 3
BIRTHS AND DEATHS
SECTION:
5-3-1: Reports To Village Clerk
5-3-2: Births (Rep. by Ord. 01-20, 10-15-2001)
5-3-3: Deaths (Rep. by Ord. 01-21, 10-15-2001)
5-3-4: Copies Of Records
5-3-5: Dead Bodies
5-3-6: Removal Permits
5-3-7: Entering Village
5-3-8: Cemetery
5-3-9: Death From Contagious Disease
5-3-1: REPORTS TO VILLAGE CLERK:
All reports required by the provisions of this chapter shall be made to the
village clerk. (1956 Code, Sec. 17-1)
5-3-2: BIRTHS:
(Rep. by Ord. 01-20, 10-15-2001)
5-3-3: DEATHS:
(Rep. by Ord. 01-21, 10-15-2001)
5-3-4: COPIES OF RECORDS:
The village clerk shall on request furnish a certification of the record of any
birth, stillbirth or death on file to any applicant entitled to the same upon
payment by such applicant of a fee of one dollar ($1.00) for such
certification. The village clerk is also authorized to furnish certified copies
of the same in such manner and to such persons as is provided in section twenty
of "an act in relation to births, stillbirths and deaths and to provide for the
registration and establishment of records thereof", approved July 24, 1943,
upon payment to the village clerk by the applicant of a fee of one dollar
($1.00), except where in such act such fee is waived. (1956 Code, Sec. 17-4)
5-3-5: DEAD BODIES:
No person shall retain, expose or allow to be retained or exposed, the dead
body of any human being to the peril or prejudice of the life or health of any
person. (1956 Code, Sec. 17-5)
5-3-6: REMOVAL PERMITS:
It shall be unlawful for any person to move the dead body of any human being,
or any part of such body, from any hospital or from place to place within the
village or from the village, or to cremate or deposit any human body in any
vault within the village or to inter or disinter, or in any manner dispose of
any dead human body or any part thereof, without first obtaining a permit to do
so from the board of health; nor shall any dead human body or part thereof be
disposed of otherwise than in accordance with the terms of said permit. Permits
for the removal, interment, cremation or disposal of dead bodies shall be
issued only on the presentation of a proper death certificate to the board of
health. Said death certificate shall be signed by a duly licensed physician who
attended the deceased during his last illness, or by the coroner of Kankakee
County. If the death occurred outside of the village the burial or removal
permit shall be signed by the proper authority at the place where the death
occurred.
No permit for the burial or cremation of a dead human body shall be issued to
anyone except an undertaker. (1956 Code, Sec. 17-6)
5-3-7: ENTERING VILLAGE:
No person shall bring or cause to be brought into the village, or be
instrumental in bringing into the village any disinterred human body or any
dead human body in a condition which is offensive or dangerous to the health of
the community without permission in writing first obtained from the board of
health. The board of health shall have the right to refuse such permission or
to grant permission on such conditions as it feels proper to safeguard the
health of the community. (1956 Code, Sec. 17-7)
5-3-8: CEMETERY:
It shall be unlawful to inter or bury any dead human body in any place within
the village, or within a one mile radius thereof, other than a duly established
cemetery. (1956 Code, Sec. 17-8)
5-3-9: DEATH FROM CONTAGIOUS DISEASE:
Bodies of persons who have died from contagious, infectious or epidemic
diseases shall be buried in accordance with regulations established by the
board of health. (1956 Code, Sec. 17-9)
CHAPTER 4
CARE OF FOOD
SECTION:
5-4-1: Definition
5-4-2: Preventing Contamination
5-4-3: Inspection
5-4-4: Pure Food And Drugs
5-4-5: Unwholesome Food
5-4-6: Food Poisoning
5-4-7: Dogs
5-4-8: Horsemeat
5-4-9: Water
5-4-1: DEFINITION:
The term "food" as used in this chapter shall be interpreted to mean any
article of food, confection or drink used for human consumption. (1956 Code,
Sec. 19-1)
5-4-2: PREVENTING CONTAMINATION:
It shall be unlawful for any person to store or keep for the purpose of
selling, expose or offer for sale, transport, convey or carry from one place to
another any food for human consumption or any food sold or procured for the
purpose of selling or offering or exposing the same for sale within the village
unless such food is protected from dust, dirt, flies, vermin, rats, mice, dogs,
cats, promiscuous handling and other contamination. (1956 Code, Sec. 19-2)
5-4-3: INSPECTION:
Every keeper of a wholesale or retail food establishment, or other
establishment where food is kept or stored with the intention of sale, shall
allow duly authorized representatives of the board of health to inspect freely
and fully any meat, milk, fish, vegetables or other foodstuffs kept, offered or
intended for sale and shall answer all reasonable and proper questions by such
representatives relative to the condition thereof and of the places where such
articles may be. (1956 Code, Sec. 19-3)
5-4-4: PURE FOOD AND DRUGS:
No person shall keep, expose or offer for sale or exchange or shall sell or
deliver any drugs not conforming to the rules and standards of the United
States pharmacopoeia, nor any water, liquids or food which shall be impure,
unwholesome, adulterated or to which any harmful or injurious foreign substance
has been added. (1956 Code, Sec. 19-4)
5-4-5: UNWHOLESOME FOOD:
No person shall sell, offer or expose for sale, or have in his possession,
charge or control with intent to sell any article of human food or foodstuffs,
either raw, manufactured or otherwise prepared, which is or has become putrid,
infected, contaminated or unwholesome for human consumption. (1956 Code, Sec.
19-5)
5-4-6: FOOD POISONING:
It shall be the duty of every physician who attends or prescribes for, and of
every superintendent or person in charge of any hospital admitting or caring
for, any person suffering from, or suspected of suffering from, food poisoning
or infection, or any form of such poisoning, either ptomaine, bacterial or
metallic, to at once make a report thereof to the board of health. (1956 Code,
Sec. 19-6)
5-4-7: DOGS:
It shall be unlawful for the owner of, or the person having the care or custody
of a dog, to suffer or permit such dog to enter any store, meat market, bakery
or other place where foodstuffs are sold or on display; provided, that the
person owning or operating such store or place may permit a watchdog to remain
therein if chained or bound in such a way that the dog cannot come in contact
with any of such foodstuffs. (1956 Code, Sec. 19-7)
5-4-8: HORSEMEAT:
It shall be unlawful to use horsemeat in any form, or any species thereof, in
the preparation, manufacture or serving of any food for human consumption. It
shall be unlawful to sell, give or exchange horsemeat in any form for human
food. (1956 Code, Sec. 19-8)
5-4-9: WATER:
No person shall destroy, or in anywise injure or impair any drinking fountain
or part thereof in the village; nor shall any person interfere with the use of
or enjoyment of the water therein or therefrom, or interrupt the flow thereof,
nor shall any person put any dirt, poison, medicinal or noxious substance into
or near such water or hydrant, or into the water supply of the village at any
place, whereby such water is made, or may be regarded as, dangerous or
unwholesome as a drink. (1956 Code, Sec. 19-9)
CHAPTER 5
LIVING AND WORKING CONDITIONS
SECTION:
5-5-1: Heat Required
5-5-2: General Requirements
5-5-3: Unfit For Habitation
5-5-4: Screens Required
5-5-5: Places Of Employment
5-5-1: HEAT REQUIRED:
It shall be the duty of every person owning or controlling any tenement house,
hotel, motel, lodging house, rooming house or boarding house, in which heat is
furnished from a heating plant used in common for the purpose of heating the
various rooms and apartments therein, to furnish heat to such rooms and
apartments from September 15 of each year to June 1 of the succeeding year, so
that the occupants thereof may secure, without such undue restriction of
ventilation as to interfere with proper sanitary conditions, a minimum
temperature of sixty degrees Fahrenheit (60°F) at six thirty o'clock (6:30)
A.M., sixty five degrees (65°) at seven thirty o'clock (7:30) A.M. and sixty
eight degrees (68°) at eight thirty o'clock (8:30) A.M. and thereafter until
ten thirty o'clock (10:30) P.M. averaged throughout the apartment. (1956 Code,
Sec. 20-1)
5-5-2: GENERAL REQUIREMENTS:
Every tenement house, hotel, motel, lodging house, rooming house or boarding
house shall have water furnished at one or more places so that the same may be
adequate and reasonably convenient for the use of the occupants thereof; it
shall be kept clean and free from any accumulation of dirt, filth, garbage or
other matter in or about the same. (1956 Code, Sec. 20-2)
5-5-3: UNFIT FOR HABITATION:
Any building or part thereof which, by reason of its unsanitary condition or of
its being infected with disease, is unfit for human habitation, or which from
any other cause is a source of sickness among the inhabitants of the village,
or which otherwise endangers the public health, is hereby declared to be a
public nuisance. Any such public nuisance may be abated according to law if the
owner thereof does not remove the conditions constituting the same a nuisance
within sixty (60) days after written notice from the board of health. (1956
Code, Sec. 20-3)
5-5-4: SCREENS REQUIRED:
It shall be the duty of every person owning or controlling any residence,
tenement house, lodging house, or other place where persons are housed or
domiciled or where foods or foodstuffs are kept, handled or prepared to equip
with and maintain on all doors, windows and other openings to the external air
of such buildings from April 15 to November 15 of each year suitable and
adequate screens and appliances, so attached or arranged as to prevent the
ingress of flies to the interior of said buildings. (1956 Code, Sec. 20-4)
5-5-5: PLACES OF EMPLOYMENT:
No owner, lessee, manager or superintendent of any store, factory workshop or
other place where persons are employed for wages shall cause or permit such
place or any room or part thereof to be overcrowded, or inadequate or faulty in
respect to light, ventilation, heat or cleanliness. All such places shall be
kept in a clean condition free from the effluvia of a sewer, drain, privy,
stable or other nuisance. (1956 Code, Sec. 20-5)
CHAPTER 6
GARBAGE AND REFUSE
SECTION:
5-6-1: Definitions
5-6-2: Scavenger Service
5-6-3: Collections
5-6-4: Receptacles
5-6-5: Service Charge
5-6-6: Violations
5-6-7: Penalty
5-6-8: Administration
5-6-1: DEFINITIONS:
For the purpose of this chapter the following words shall have the meanings
ascribed herein:
ASHES:              Residue from fires used for cooking and for heating
                    buildings.
                    Tree limbs cut into lengths no longer than three (3) feet
BUNDLED TREE LIMBS: long, four (4") inches in diameter and tied with string or
                    twine in bundles that one (1) person can reasonably lift
                    waist high without compromising safety.
BULK REFUSE:        Large refuse items such as chairs, couches, stoves, hot
                    water heaters, mattresses and appliances.
GARBAGE:            Wastes resulting from the handling, storage, preparation,
                    cooking and consumption of food of all kinds.
                    Such matters as plastic bread/storage bags, large storage
                    bins, plastic wrap, snack bags (chips, fruit snacks, etc.),
                    flex packaging (baby food pouches, fruit snack pouches,
                    etc.), CD/DVD packaging, bubble wrap, plastic silverware,
NON-RECYCLABLES:    motor oil containers, clothes, hangers, straws, self-stick
                    labels, used paper plates, tissue paper, gum/candy
                    wrappers, waxed paper, paper cups, paper towels, light
                    bulbs, mirrors, window glass, dishes/drinking glasses, foam
                    egg cartons, ice cream cartons, large scrap metal, aerosol
                    cans, diapers, wood, and yard waste.
PERSON:             Any individual, corporation, partnership, limited liability
                    company joint venture, association, or trust.
                    Such matters as aluminum, tin, metal cans, plastic bottles
                    and containers, glass bottles/jars, cartons, file folders,
                    office paper, envelopes junk mail, glossy paper, magazines,
RECYCLABLES:        cardboard boxes, paperboard boxes, newspapers, catalogs,
                    phone books, and paper bags. Recyclables exclude all non-
                    recyclables, unacceptable waste, and other matters
                    specially excluded or rejected by the applicable scavenger.
                    Such matters as ashes, metal ware, broken glass, crockery,
                    small quantities of dirt, sweepings, dead animals, boxes,
REFUSE:             small quantities of wood, tin cans, bottles, or litter of
                    similar kind, but excluding yard waste and unacceptable
                    waste.
                    Such matter as engine blocks, transmissions, axles, tires,
                    heavy metal parts, e-waste, hazardous waste, broken
UNACCEPTABLE WASTE: concrete, stone, clay, dirt, metal, swimming pools, refuse
                    resulting from building construction, carpeting, or
                    material which will cause damage to equipment or injury to
                    drivers.
                    Grass, shrubbery, cuttings, leaves, bundled tree limbs, or
YARD WASTE:         other waste from the care of lawns, shrubbery, weeds, vines
                    or trees. (Ord. 25-03, 6-16-2025)
 
5-6-2: SCAVENGER SERVICE:
   (A)   The village has designated a specific scavenger that shall have the
exclusive authority to collect and dispose of all garbage, refuse, recyclables,
and yard waste from all single-family and duplex dwellings in the village.
   (B)   The owner of land containing a commercial, industrial, or
institutional building, planned group dwelling, or multi-family dwelling within
the village shall contract with a licensed scavenger to provide for the
collection of garbage, refuse, recyclables, commercial waste, industrial waste,
and yard waste from the premises, as may be necessary and appropriate.
   (C)   No person shall engage in the business of collecting or disposing of
garbage, refuse, recyclables, commercial waste, industrial waste, or yard waste
in the village unless duly licensed as a scavenger in accordance with the
provisions of this code.
   (D)   No person, excepting duly licensed scavengers having an agreement with
the village to service single-family or duplex dwellings, or with an owner of
property to service a commercial, industrial, or institutional building,
planned group dwelling, or multi-family dwelling, shall access any receptacle,
or pick, acquire, remove, take out, or possess any item or material disposed of
or held in a receptacle, whether on private or public property, without the
consent of the owner of property that possesses that receptacle. (Ord. 25-03,
6-16-2025)
5-6-3: COLLECTIONS:
   (A)   Garbage, refuse, and yard waste shall be collected from single-family
and duplex dwellings on Monday between the hours of six o’clock (6:00) AM and
six o’clock (6:00) PM each week. Collections shall be one (1) day later than
the regularly scheduled collection day in the event a collection day falls on
or after any one of the following holidays: New Years Day, Memorial Day,
Independence Day, Labor Day, Thanksgiving Day, or Christmas Day. Yard waste
shall only be collected from April 1 through November 30. Recyclables shall be
collected every other week on the same day as collections for garbage and
refuse. There shall be no change in the day of collection except upon thirty
(30) days' prior written notification by the scavenger to the village and the
affected residential customers.
   (B)   Garbage, refuse, recyclables, commercial waste, industrial waste, and
yard waste shall be collected from land containing a commercial, industrial, or
institutional building, planned group dwelling, or multi-family dwelling at
least one (1) time per week. Smaller intervals between collection days shall be
scheduled by the owner of the property when necessary to prevent overflow,
excess accumulation, or to prevent a nuisance or health hazard. Arrangements
for yard waste collections need only be scheduled from April 1 through November
30, and only if the owner does not have a regular landscape service that hauls
away landscape waste weekly. (Ord. 25-03, 6-16-2025)
5-6-4: RECEPTACLES:
   (A)   For single-family and duplex dwellings, all garbage and refuse shall
be segregated from all other forms of waste, and wrapped and disposed of in the
ninety-five (95) gallon totes provided by the village's designated scavenger,
or in a metal or plastic garbage can having a capacity to hold not less than
twenty (20) gallons and not more than thirty-five (35) gallons (but in no event
weighing more than forty (40) pounds each), either of which shall have tight-
fitting covers (functional, free of holes and breaks, and which shall be kept
shut when the receptacle is not being loaded or unloaded) and adequate handles
to facilitate collections. Recyclables shall be segregated from all other forms
of waste and disposed of in the sixty-five (65) gallon totes provided by the
village's designated scavenger. Yard waste shall be segregated from all other
forms of waste and disposed of in brown paper yard waste bags (with a yard
waste sticker attached) or the ninety-five (95) gallon totes rented from the
village's designated scavenger. Totes, cans and bags containing garbage,
refuse, recyclables and yard waste shall be placed at the curb, at the street
or alley lot line, from which collections are made no earlier than twelve
o'clock (12:00) noon on the day before the scheduled collection. The cover of
each receptacle shall be closed and secured when placed at the lot line and
shall remain securely closed until collected. All receptacles shall be removed
from the curb by seven o'clock (7:00) P.M. on the day of collection.
   (B)   On land containing a commercial, industrial, or institutional
building, planned group dwelling, or multi-family dwelling there shall be
provided metal containers (i.e., dumpsters) of such size and number as is
necessary and appropriate for the segregation, storage, and collection of
garbage, refuse, recyclables, commercial waste, industrial waste, and yard
waste generated from the property until collection by the owner's duly licensed
scavenger. Additional and/or separate dumpsters (sufficiently identified) shall
be provided when necessary to segregate waste for storage, collection, and
disposal in accordance with applicable laws or the requirements of a specific
scavenger. Dumpsters shall be of sufficient capacity to prevent overflow and
shall have a tight-fitting metal or plastic cover that shall be functional,
free of holes and breaks, and which shall be kept shut when the dumpster is not
being loaded or unloaded. The dumpster and surrounding area shall be maintained
so that any spillage or excess waste is removed upon notice but no later than
eight o’clock (8:00) PM each day. In addition to the above, each dumpster
provided for a planned group or multi-family dwelling shall have a capacity of
not less than one-half (½) cubic yard per residential unit contributing waste
thereto. Such dumpster shall be enclosed by a fence on not less than three (3)
sides, and the open side shall face the dwelling on the property. The fence
shall be constructed of wood or PVC, shall be six (6') feet tall and be color
coordinated to match the dwelling on the property. (Ord. 25-03, 6-16-2025)
5-6-5: COLLECTION:
SERVICE CHARGE:
   (A)   Uniform garbage, refuse, and recyclable collection and disposition
fees are established for, assessed against, and payable by all owners,
occupants and users of single-family and duplex dwellings whether the service
is utilized each week or not. The fees per residential unit per month shall be
as follows:
 
Year 1 July 1,2023-June 30, 2024 $21.70 per unit per month
Year 2 July 1,2024-June 30, 2025 $22.57 per unit per month
Year 3 July 1,2025-June 30, 2026 $23.47 per unit per month
Year 4 July 1,2026-June 30, 2027 $24.41 per unit per month
Year 5 July 1,2027-June 30, 2028 $25.39 per unit per month
Year 6 July 1,2028-June 30, 2029 $26.41 per unit per month
Year 7 July 1,2029-June 30, 2030 $27.47 per unit per month
 
      The fees above include the collection and disposal of one bulk refuse
item per week per residential unit. The sum of all charges is marshaled and
designed to defray the expense of a systemic waste disposal scheme within the
village, thereby protecting the health, safety and welfare of the entire
community. Said fees shall only be applicable so long as the village is billing
and collecting fees from customers on a monthly basis. In the event the
village's designated scavenger bills and collects said fees from the customer
directly, the fees shall be subject to increase as set forth in the village's
scavenger agreement.
      (B)   The owner of each such premises, the occupant, or user of the
service, shall be jointly and severally liable to pay the fees for all waste
collection services for said premises. In the event an owner fails to honor
his/her joint obligation and responsibility for payment, the owner shall be
primarily responsible for all claims and charges, and all bills shall be
delivered directly to such owner of the premises until the premises is sold, or
for not less than one (1) year, before consideration may be given to reinstate
tenant billing.
      (C)   In the event fees for waste collection services are not paid within
thirty (30) days after the rendition of the bill for such service, a penalty of
ten percent (10%) of the amount of the bill shall be added thereto.
      (D)   The village is not responsible for providing or billing for the
collection or disposal of yard waste. Customers shall purchase yard waste
stickers or rent yard waste totes from the village's designated scavenger. The
requirements and fees associated with yard waste collection and disposal
(sticker/tote rental) shall be as established by the village's designated
scavenger.
      (E)   The village is not responsible for providing or billing for the
collection or disposal of excess bulk refuse, unacceptable wastes, or non-
recyclables. Customers shall arrange for the collection and disposal of such
items with the village's designated scavenger. The requirements and fees
associated with the collection and disposal of such items shall be as
established by the village's designated scavenger. (Ord. 25-03, 6-16-2025)
5-6-6: VIOLATIONS:
It shall be unlawful for any person, including any owner, occupant, or user of
real property to violate, fail to comply, or to suffer the violation or failure
to comply with any provision of this chapter. (Ord. 25-03, 6-16-2025)
5-6-7: PENALTY:
Any person found to have violated any provision of this chapter shall be fined
not less than one hundred dollars ($100.00) and not more than seven hundred
fifty dollars ($750.00) for each offense. Each day a violation occurs or is
permitted to continue constitutes a new and separate violation. (Ord. 25-03, 6-
16-2025)
5-6-8: ADMINISTRATION:
Violations of this chapter may be administered through the provisions of Title
1, Administration, Chapter 17, Administrative Adjudication, of the Village of
Manteno Municipal Code. Nothing in this section shall be interpreted to limit
the remedies or penalties available to Village of Manteno. (Ord. 25-03, 6-16-
2025)
 
CHAPTER 7
PUBLIC SEWERS AND DRAINS
SECTION:
5-7-1: Use Of Public Sewers Required
5-7-2: Private Sewage Disposal
5-7-3: Building Sewers And Connections
5-7-4: Use Of The Public Sewers
5-7-5: Protection Of Sewage Works From Damage
5-7-6: Powers And Authority Of Inspectors
5-7-7: Appendices
5-7-8: Penalties
5-7-1: USE OF PUBLIC SEWERS REQUIRED:
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to place, deposit or permit to be
deposited in any unsanitary manner on public or private property within the
village or in any area under the jurisdiction of said village, any human or
animal excrement, garbage or other objectionable waste.
   (B)   It shall be unlawful to discharge to any natural outlet within the
village, or in any area under the jurisdiction of said village, any sewage or
other polluted waters, except where suitable treatment has been provided in
accordance with subsequent provisions of this chapter.
   (C)   Except as hereinafter provided, it shall be unlawful to construct or
maintain any privy, privy vault, septic tank, cesspool or other facility
intended or used for the disposal of sewage.
   (D)   The owner of all houses, buildings or properties used for human
occupancy, employment, recreation or other purposes situated within the village
and abutting on any street, alley or right of way which therein now located or
may in the future be located any public sanitary sewer of the village, is
hereby required at his expense to install suitable toilet facilities therein,
and to connect such facilities directly with the proper public sewer in
accordance with the provisions of this chapter within ninety (90) days after
date of official notice to do so; provided, that said public sewer is within
one hundred feet (100') (30.5 m) of the property line. (Ord. 93-5, 7-26-1993)
5-7-2: PRIVATE SEWAGE DISPOSAL:
   (A)   Where a public sanitary (or combined) sewer is not available under the
provisions of subsection
5-7-1(D) of this chapter, the building sewer shall be connected to a private
sewage disposal system complying with the provisions of this section.
   (B)   Before commencement of construction of a private sewage disposal
system the owner shall first obtain a written permit signed by the
superintendent. The application for such permit shall be made on a form
furnished by the village, (see appendix 2 set out at length in section
5-7-7 of this chapter) which the applicant shall supplement by any plans,
specifications and other information as are deemed necessary by the
superintendent. A permit and inspection fee of two hundred dollars ($200.00)
shall be paid to the village at the time the application is filed.
   (C)   A permit for a private sewage disposal system shall not become
effective until the installation is completed to the satisfaction of the
superintendent. He shall be allowed to inspect the work at any stage of
construction and, in any event, the applicant for the permit shall notify the
superintendent when the work is ready for final inspection, and before any
underground portions are covered. The inspection shall be made within forty
eight (48) hours of the receipt of written notice by the superintendent.
   (D)   The type, capacities, location and layout of a private sewage disposal
system shall comply with all recommendations of the state private sewage
disposal licensing act and code 1  and with the state environmental protection
agency. No permit shall be issued for any private sewage disposal system
employing subsurface soil absorption facilities where the area of the lot is
less than one hundred sixty thousand (160,000) square feet (14,864 square
meters). No septic tank or cesspool shall be permitted to discharge to any
natural outlet.
   (E)   At such time as a public sewer becomes available to a property served
by a private sewage disposal system, as provided in subsection
5-7-1(D) of this chapter, a direct connection shall be made to the public sewer
in compliance with this chapter, and any septic tanks, cesspools and similar
private sewage disposal facilities shall be abandoned and filled with suitable
material.
   (F)   The owner shall operate and maintain the private sewage disposal
facilities in a sanitary manner at all times, and at no expense to the village.
   (G)   No statement contained in this section shall be construed to interfere
with any additional requirements that may be imposed by any other duly
authorized agency.
   (H)   When a public sewer becomes available, the building sewer shall be
connected to said sewer within sixty (60) days and the private sewage disposal
system shall be cleaned of sludge and filled with clean bank run gravel or
dirt. (Ord. 93-5, 7-26-1993)
 
Notes
1 1. 225 ILCS 225/1 et seq.
5-7-3: BUILDING SEWERS AND CONNECTIONS:
   (A)   Permit Required: No person shall uncover, make any connection with, or
opening into, use, alter or disturb: 1) any public sewer, or appurtenance
thereof, or 2) private sewer connections which affect village property without
first obtaining a written permit from the superintendent. As a condition of the
permit, the permit holder, at holder's expense, agrees to repair and restore to
its original condition, all village property altered in the course of the
permitted work. Whenever village property may be affected, the superintendent
may require that the performance of work under a permit be carried out under
the direction and supervision of the village. (Ord. 99-1, 6-7-1999)
   (B)   Compliance With Standards: All disposal by any person into the sewer
system is unlawful except those discharges in compliance with federal standards
promulgated pursuant to the federal act and more stringent state and local
standards. (Ord. 93-5, 7-26-1993)
   (C)   Permit Classifications: There shall be two (2) classes of building
sewer permits: 1) for residential and commercial service, and 2) for service to
establishments producing industrial wastes. In either case, the owner or his
agent shall make application on a special form furnished by the village 1 . The
permit application shall be supplemental by any plans, specifications or other
information considered pertinent in the judgment of the superintendent. A
permit and inspection fee of one hundred dollars ($100.00) for a residential or
commercial building sewer permit shall be paid to the village at the time the
application is filed. The industry, as a condition of permit authorization,
must provide information describing its wastewater constituents,
characteristics and type of activity. (Ord. 93-5, 7-26-1993; amd. Ord. 96-27,
11-11-1996)
   (D)   Reserve Capacity: A building sewer permit will only be issued and a
sewer connection shall only be allowed if it can be demonstrated that the
downstream sewerage facilities, including sewers, pump stations and wastewater
treatment facilities, have sufficient reserve capacity to adequately and
efficiently handle the additional anticipated waste load. (Ord. 93-5, 7-26-
1993)
   (E)   Costs Borne By Owner: The owner shall bear all costs and expenses
incident to the installation, connection and maintenance of the building sewer
as well as the service connection between the building and the sewer main. The
owner shall indemnify the village from any loss or damage that is directly or
indirectly be caused by the installation, connection, or maintenance of the
building sewer or service connection. The owner shall be responsible for
maintaining the service connection in good working order. (Ord. 99-1, 6-7-1999)
   (F)   Separate Sewers Required: A separate and independent building sewer
shall be provided for every building, except that where one building stands at
the rear of another on an interior lot and no private sewer is available or can
be constructed to the rear building through an adjoining alley, court, yard or
driveway, the building sewer from the front building may be extended to the
rear building and the whole considered as one building sewer.
   (G)   Old Sewers: Old building sewers may be used in connection with new
buildings only when they are found, on examination and test by the
superintendent, to meet all requirements of this chapter.
   (H)   Code Provisions: The size, slope, alignment, materials of construction
of a building sewer, and the methods to be used in excavating, placing of the
pipe, jointing, testing and backfilling the trench, shall all conform to the
requirements of the building and plumbing code 2  or other applicable rules and
regulations of the village. In the absence of code provisions or in
amplification thereof, the materials and procedures set forth in appropriate
specifications of the American Society of Testing Materials, "Water Pollution
Control Federation Manual Of Practice No. 9", and "Standard Specifications For
Water And Sewer Main Construction In Illinois" shall apply.
   (I)   Elevation: Whenever possible, the building sewer shall be brought to
the building at an elevation below the basement floor. In all buildings in
which any building drain is too low to permit gravity flow to the public sewer,
sanitary sewage carried by such building drain shall be lifted by a means which
is approved in accordance with subsection (B) of this section, and discharged
to the building sewer.
   (J)   Downspouts And Drains: No person shall make connection of roof
downspouts, exterior foundation drains, areaway drains, sump pumps or other
sources of surface runoff or ground water to a building sewer or building drain
which in turn is connected directly or indirectly to a public sanitary sewer.
(Ord. 93-5, 7-26-1993)
   (K)   Connections: The connection of the building sewer into the public
sewer shall conform to the requirements of the building and plumbing code, or
other applicable rules and regulations of the village, or the procedures set
forth in appropriate specifications of the American Society of Testing
Materials, "Water Pollution Control Federal Manual Of Practice No. 9", and
"Standard Specifications For Water And Sewer Main Construction In Illinois".
All such connections shall be made gastight and watertight. An exterior clean
out shall be installed for each such connection. Any deviation from the
prescribed procedures and materials must be approved by the superintendent
before installation. (Ord. 93-5, 7-26-1993; amd. Ord. 99-1, 6-7-1999)
   (L)   Inspection: The applicant for the building sewer permit shall notify
the superintendent when the building sewer is ready for inspection and
connection to the public sewer. The connection shall be made under the
supervision of the superintendent or his representatives.
   (M)   Barricades: All excavations for building sewer installation shall be
adequately guarded with barricades and lights so as to protect the public from
hazard. Streets, sidewalks, parkways and other public property disturbed in the
course of the work shall be restored in a manner satisfactory to the village.
(Ord. 93-5, 7-26-1993)
 
Notes
1 1. See appendix 2, section
  5-7-7 of this chapter.
2 1. See section
  8-1-13 of this code.
5-7-4: USE OF THE PUBLIC SEWERS:
   (A)   Discharge To Sanitary Sewer: No person shall discharge, or cause to be
discharged, any storm water, surface water, ground water, roof runoff,
subsurface drainage, uncontaminated cooling water or unpolluted industrial
process waters to any sanitary sewer.
   (B)   Combined Sewers: Storm water and all other unpolluted drainage shall
be discharged to such sewers as are specifically designated as combined sewers
or storm sewers, or to a natural outlet approved by the superintendent.
Industrial cooling water or unpolluted process waters may be discharged, on
approval of the superintendent, to a storm sewer or natural outlet.
   (C)   Prohibited Discharges: No person shall discharge or cause to be
discharged any of the following described waters or wastes to any public
sewers:
      1.   Any gasoline, benzenes, naphtha, fuel oil or other flammable or
explosive liquid, solid or gas.
      2.   Any waters or wastes containing toxic or poisonous solids, liquids
or gases in sufficient quantity, either singly or by interaction with other
wastes, to injure or interfere with any sewage treatment process, constitute a
hazard to humans or animals, create a public nuisance, or create any hazard in
the receiving waters of the sewage treatment plant.
      3.   Any waters or wastes having a pH lower than 5.5 or having any other
corrosive property capable of causing damage or hazard to structures, equipment
and personnel of the sewage works.
      4.   Solid or viscous substances in quantities or of such size capable of
causing obstructions to the flow in sewers, or other interference with the
proper operation of the sewage works such as, but not limited to, ashes,
cinders, sand, mud, straw, shavings, metal, glass, rags, feathers, tar,
plastics, wood, unground garbage, whole blood, paunch manure, hair and
fleshings, entrails and paper dishes, cups, mild containers, etc., either whole
or ground by garbage grinders.
   (D)   Harmful Wastes Prohibited: No person shall discharge or cause to be
discharged the following described substances, materials, waters or wastes if
it appears likely in the opinion of the superintendent that such wastes can
harm either the sewers sewage treatment process or equipment; have an adverse
effect on the receiving stream; or can otherwise endanger life, limb, public
property or constitute a nuisance. In forming his opinion as to the
acceptability of these wastes, the superintendent will give consideration to
such factors as the quantities of subject wastes in relation to flows and
velocities in the sewers, materials of construction of the sewers, nature of
the sewage treatment process, capacity of the sewage treatment plant, degree of
treatability of wastes in the sewage treatment plant and maximum limits
established by regulatory agencies. The substances prohibited are:
      1.   Any liquid or vapor having a temperature higher than one hundred
fifty degrees Fahrenheit (150°F) (65°C).
      2.   Any waters or wastes containing toxic or poisonous materials; or
oils, whether emulsified or not, in excess of one hundred milligrams per liter
(100 mg/l) or containing substances which may solidify or become viscous at
temperatures between thirty two (32) and one hundred fifty degrees Fahrenheit
(150°F) (0–65°C).
      3.   Any garbage that has not been properly shredded. The installation
and operation of any garbage grinder equipped with a motor of three-fourths (3/
4) horsepower (0.76 hp metric) or greater shall be subject to the review and
approval of the superintendent.
      4.   Any waters or wastes containing strong acid, iron pickling wastes,
or concentrated plating solutions whether neutralized or not.
      5.   Any waters or wastes containing iron, cadmium, chromium, copper,
manganese, nickel or similar objectionable or toxic substances; or wastes
exerting an excessive chlorine requirement, in such concentration that any such
material received in the composite sewage discharged into the village sanitary
sewers exceeds the limits established by the superintendent for such materials.
A tabulation of each chemical and its respective maximum concentration is
contained in appendix 3 set out at length in section
5-7-7 of this chapter. Individual instances whereby one or more chemicals
exceed the respective maximum limitation may upon request be reevaluated on a
case by case basis by the superintendent. It can be demonstrated to the
superintendent that no adverse impact will result, then the superintendent in
his sole judgment may waive the applicable limitation requirements.
      6.   Any waters or wastes containing phenols or other taste or odor
producing substances, in such concentrations exceeding limits which have been
established by the superintendent as necessary to meet the requirements of the
state, federal or other public agency of jurisdiction for such discharge to the
receiving stream. See appendix 3 set out at length in section
5-7-7 of this chapter for specific limitations.
      7.   Any radioactive wastes or isotopes of such half life or
concentration as may exceed limits established by the superintendent in
compliance with applicable state or federal regulations.
      8.   Any waters or wastes having a pH in excess of 9.5.
      9.   Any mercury or any of its compounds in excess of 0.0005 milligrams
per liter as Hg at any time except as permitted by the superintendent in
compliance with applicable state and federal regulations.
      10.   Any cyanide in excess of 0.025 milligrams per liter at any time
except as permitted by the superintendent in compliance with applicable state
and federal regulations.
      11.   Materials which exert or cause:
         (a)   Unusual concentrations of inert suspended solids (such as, but
not limited to, fuller's earth, lime slurries and lime residues) or of
dissolved solids (such as, but not limited to, sodium chloride and sodium
sulfate);
         (b)   Excessive discoloration (such as, but not limited to, dye and
wastes and vegetable tanning solutions);
         (c)   Unusual BOD, chemical oxygen demand, or chlorine requirements in
such quantities as to constitute a significant load on this sewage treatment
works;
         (d)   Unusual volume of flow or concentrations of wastes constituting
"slugs" as defined herein.
      12.   Waters or wastes containing substances which are not amenable to
treatment or reduction by the sewage treatment processes employed, or are
amenable to treatment only to such degree that the sewage treatment plant
effluent cannot meet the requirements of agencies having jurisdiction over
discharge to the receiving waters.
   (E)   Review By Superintendent: If any waters or wastes are discharged or
are proposed to be discharged to the public sewers, which waters contain the
substances or possess the characteristics enumerated in subsection (D) of this
section, and/or which are in violation of the standards for pretreatment
provided in chapter 1, EPA rules and regulations, subchapter D, water programs
part 128-pretreatment standards, federal register volume 38, no. 215, Thursday,
November 8, 1973, and any amendments thereto, and which in the judgment of the
superintendent may have a deleterious effect upon the sewage works, processes
equipment or receiving waters, or which otherwise create a hazard to life or
constitute a public nuisance, the superintendent may:
      1.   Reject the wastes;
      2.   Require pretreatment to an acceptable condition for discharge to the
public sewers;
      3.   Require control over the quantities and rates of discharge; and/or
      4.   Require payment to cover the added costs of handling and treating
the wastes not covered by existing taxes or sewer charges, under the provisions
of subsection (L) of this section.
If the superintendent permits the pretreatment or equalizations of waste flows,
the design and installation of the plants and equipment shall be subject to the
review and approval of the superintendent, and subject to the requirements of
all applicable codes, ordinances and laws.
   (F)   Grease, Oil And Sand Interceptors: Grease, oil and sand interceptors
shall be provided when, in the opinion of the superintendent they are necessary
for the proper handling of liquid wastes containing grease in excessive
amounts, or any flammable wastes, sand or other harmful ingredients; except
that such interceptors shall not be required for private living quarters or
dwelling units. All interceptors shall be of a type and capacity approved by
the superintendent, and shall be located as to be readily and easily accessible
for cleaning and inspection.
   (G)   Preliminary Treatment: Where preliminary treatment or flow equalizing
facilities are provided they shall be maintained continuously in satisfactory
and effective operation by the owner at his expense.
   (H)   Control Manhole: Each industry shall be required to install a control
manhole and, when required by the superintendent, the owner of any property
serviced by a building sewer carrying industrial wastes shall install a
suitable control manhole together with such necessary meters and other
appurtenances in the building sewer to facilitate observation, sampling and
measurement of the wastes. Such manhole, when required, shall be accessibly and
safely located, and shall be constructed in accordance with plans approved by
the superintendent. The manhole shall be installed by the owner at his expense,
and shall be maintained by him so as to be safe and accessible at all times.
   (I)   Laboratory Tests, Analyses:
      1.   The owner of any property serviced by a building sewer carrying
industrial wastes shall provide laboratory measurements, tests and analyses of
waters and wastes to illustrate compliance with this chapter and any special
conditions for discharge established by the village or regulatory agencies
having jurisdiction over the discharge.
      2.   The number, type and frequency of laboratory analyses to be
performed by the owner shall be as stipulated by the village, but no less than
once per year the industry must supply a complete analysis of the constituents
of the wastewater discharge to assure that compliance with the federal, state
and local standards are being met. The owner shall report the results of
measurements and laboratory analyses to the village at such times and in such
manner as prescribed by the village. The owner shall bear the expense of all
measurements, analyses and reporting required by the village. At such times as
deemed necessary, the village reserves the right to take measurements and
samples for analysis by an outside laboratory service.
   (J)   Sampling: All measurements, tests and analyses of the characteristics
of waters and wastes to which reference is made in this chapter shall be
determined in accordance with the latest edition of "Standards Methods for the
Examination of Water and Wastewater", published by the American Public Health
Association, and shall be determined at the control manhole provided, or upon
suitable samples taken at said control manhole. In the event that no special
manhole has been required, the control manhole shall be considered to be the
nearest downstream manhole in the public sewer to the point at which the
building sewer is connected. Sampling shall be carried out by customarily
accepted methods to reflect the effect of constituents upon the sewage works
and to determine the existence of hazards to life, limb and property. (The
particular analysis involved will determine whether a 24 hour composite of all
outfalls of a premises is appropriate or whether a grab sample or samples
should be taken. Normally, but not always, BOD and suspended solids analyses
are obtained from 24 hour composites of all outfalls, whereas pHs are
determined from periodic grab samples.)
   (K)   Special Agreements: No statement contained in this section shall be
construed as preventing any special agreement or arrangement between the
village and any industrial concern whereby an industrial waste of unusual
strength or characters may be accepted by the village for treatment, subject to
payment therefor, in accordance with section
5-7-1 of this chapter, by the industrial concern, provided such payments are in
accordance with federal and state guidelines for user charge system and
industrial cost recovery system.
   (L)   Occupancy Permits: The owner of any property serviced by a building
sewer carrying industrial wastes shall be required to obtain an initial
occupancy permit by January 1, 1992. Subsequent occupancy permits must be
obtained no less than every three (3) years thereafter. Failure to comply with
all reporting requirements as well as failure to comply with all discharge
limitations may result in the village superintendent's refusal to issue
occupancy permits. All owners of buildings having discharges of industrial
wastes will be subject to the penalty provisions of section
5-7-8 of this chapter whenever occupancy permits have not been issued for their
establishments. (Ord. 93-5, 7-26-1993)
5-7-5: PROTECTION OF SEWAGE WORKS FROM DAMAGE:
No unauthorized person shall maliciously, wilfully or negligently break,
damage, destroy or tamper with any structure, appurtenance or equipment which
is a part of the sewage works. Any person violating this provision shall be
subject to immediate arrest under charge of disorderly conduct. (Ord. 93-5, 7-
26-1993)
5-7-6: POWERS AND AUTHORITY OF INSPECTORS:
   (A)   The superintendent and other duly authorized employees of the village,
the Illinois environmental protection agency and the U.S. environmental
protection agency, bearing proper credentials and identification, shall be
permitted to enter all properties for the purposes of inspection, observation,
measurement, sampling and testing in accordance with the provisions of this
chapter. The superintendent or his representative shall have no authority to
inquire into any processes, including metallurgical, chemical, oil refining,
ceramic, paper or other industries beyond that point having a direct bearing on
the kind and source of discharge to the sewers or waterway or facilities for
waste treatment.
   (B)   While performing the necessary work on private properties referred to
in subsection (A) of this section, the superintendent or duly authorized
employees of the village, the Illinois environmental protection agency, and the
U.S. environmental protection agency shall observe all safety rules applicable
to the premises established by the company and the company shall be held
harmless for injury or death to the village employees and the village shall
indemnify the company against loss or damage to its property by village
employees and against liability claims and demands for personal injury or
property damage asserted against the company and growing out of the gauging and
sampling operation, except as such may be caused by negligence or failure of
the company to maintain safe conditions as required in subsection
5-7-4(I) of this chapter.
   (C)   The superintendent and other duly authorized employees of the village
bearing proper credentials and identification shall be permitted to enter all
private properties through which the village holds a duly negotiated easement
for the purposes of, but not limited to, inspection, observation, measurement,
sampling, repair and maintenance of any portion of the sewage works lying
within said easement. All entry and subsequent work, if any, on said easement,
shall be done in full accordance with the terms of the duly negotiated easement
pertaining to the private property involved. (Ord. 93-5, 7-26-1993)
5-7-7: APPENDICES:
   APPENDIX 2
   MANTENO WATER POLLUTION CONTROL CENTER
Industrial Wastewater Discharge Permit Application:
Facility Name:   
Mailing Address:   
SIC #:__________________________________
Authorized Representative: Name/Title:   
Telephone Number:   
Description of Business Activities:
A. Production Related:
      1.   Product(s) produced:   
      2.   Rate of production: (Daily, Monthly, Seasonal):   
      3.   Raw materials used and stored:   
      4.   Attach site plan
B. Operational Related:
      1.   Number of employees:_________________________
      2.   Operating hours:_________________________
      3.   Hours of wastewater discharge:_____________________
      4.   Water Use:
a) Source of water_________________________
b) Types of water use and consumption_______________
c) Volumes in each category (daily, monthly, seasonal fluctuation if
applicable)_________________________
      5.   Wastewater Data:
a) Volume of discharge (daily, monthly, seasonal fluctuations if
applicable)_________________________
b) Points of discharge (attach diagram)
c) Wastewater Characteristics: (in mg/l)
   BOD5   _______________   Cadmium   ____________________
   Suspended Solids   _______________   Chromium   ___________________
   Oil & Grease   _______________   Copper   ___________________
   Ammonia Nitrogen   ________________   Lead   ____________________ 
   Ph   _____________    Manganese   ___________________
         Nickel   ____________________
   Cyanide   _______________   Zinc   ___________________
Other pollutants as may be regulated by applicable Categorical Pretreatment
Regulations.
*Please indicate the source of the above analytical data, when the samples were
taken, and by whom.
   APPENDIX 3
   MAXIMUM CHEMICAL CONCENTRATION LIMITS
CONSTITUENT                 CONCENTRATION (mg/L)
Ammonia Un-ionized (as N)   0.1
Arsenic (Total)             1.0
Barium (Total)              5.0
Cadmium (Total)             0.05
Chromium (Total Hexavalent) 0.3
Chromium (Total Trivalent)  1.0
Copper (Total)              1.0
Cyanide (Total)             0.025
Fluoride (Total)            15.0
Iron (Total)                2.0
Iron (Dissolved)            0.5
Lead (Total)                1.0
Manganese (Total)           1.0
Mercury (Total)             0.0005
Nickel (Total)              1.0
Oil, Fats and Grease        100.0
Phenols                     0.3
Selenium                    1.0
Silver                      1.1
Zinc (Total)                1.0
Total Dissolved Solids      1,500.0
 
(Ord. 93-5, 7-26-1993)
5-7-8: PENALTIES:
   (A)   Any person found to be violating any provision of this chapter except
section
5-7-5 of this chapter, shall be served by the village with written notice
stating the nature of the violation and providing a reasonable time limit for
the satisfactory correction thereof. The offender shall within the period of
time stated in such notice, permanently cease all violations. The village may
revoke any permit for sewage disposal as a result of any violation of any
provision of this chapter. (Ord. 93-5, 7-26-1993)
   (B)   Any person who shall continue any violation beyond the time limit
provided for in subsection (A) of this section, shall be guilty of a
misdemeanor, and on conviction thereof shall be liable to a fine or penalty as
set forth in section
1-4-1 of this code. Each day in which any such violation shall continue shall
be deemed a separate offense. (Ord. 93-5, 7-26-1993; amd. Ord. 99-09, 8-2-1999)
   (C)   Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall
become liable to the village by reason of such violation. (Ord. 93-5, 7-26-
1993)
CHAPTER 8
WEEDS AND GRASS
SECTION:
5-8-1: Height; Nuisance Declared
5-8-2: Removal; Notice
5-8-3: Abatement
5-8-4: Penalty
5-8-1: HEIGHT; NUISANCE DECLARED:
It shall be unlawful for an owner/occupant of real property to permit any weed,
grass or plant, other than trees, bushes, flowers, or other ornamental plants,
to grow to a height exceeding eight inches (8") anywhere in the village. Any
such weed, grass or plant is hereby declared a nuisance. It shall be unlawful
for an owner/occupant of real property to permit weeds, grass, bushes or trees
to remain in a state declared to be a nuisance by the director of building and
zoning or any of his assigns. (Ord. 07-21, 9-3-2007)
5-8-2: REMOVAL; NOTICE:
The director of building and zoning shall serve notice, by personal service or
regular mail, upon an owner/occupant of real property, that the weeds, grass,
bushes or trees on the property constitute a nuisance under this chapter. The
notice shall specify that the identified nuisance be abated by the owner/
occupant within five (5) days after notice is mailed or delivered. (Ord. 14-21,
9-15-2014)
5-8-3: ABATEMENT:
If the owner/occupant fails to abate the nuisance within five (5) days the
village shall be authorized to enter the real property to abate the nuisance. A
record of the cost to abate the nuisance shall be kept by the director of
building and zoning. The owner/occupant shall be responsible for all costs
incurred by the village to abate the nuisance. The cost shall be a lien upon
the real estate affected; provided that within sixty (60) days after such cost
and expense is incurred by the village, or person performing the service by
authority of the village, in his or her name, files notice of lien in the
office of the recorder of Kankakee County. The notice shall consist of a sworn
statement setting out: a) a description of the real estate sufficient for the
identification thereof, b) the amount of money representing the cost incurred
or payable for the service, and c) the date or dates when such cost and expense
was incurred by the village. The cost incurred by the village shall not be a
lien on the real estate affected unless notice is personally served on, or sent
by certified mail to, the person whom was sent the tax bill for the general
taxes on the property for the last preceding year. The notice shall be
delivered or sent after the cutting, trimming or removal of weeds, grass,
trees, or bushes on the property. The notice shall state the substance of this
chapter and shall identify the property, by common description, and the
location of the nuisance abated by the village. (Ord. 11-03, 6-6-2011; amd.
Ord. 14-21, 9-15-2014)
5-8-4: PENALTY:
The penalty for the failure to abate a nuisance under this chapter shall be
punishable by a fine of not less than fifty dollars ($50.00) or more than seven
hundred fifty dollars ($750.00). Each day a nuisance is allowed to exist on the
property subsequent to the time at which the nuisance was required to be abated
shall constitute a separate offense. The hearing officer, in his/her
discretion, shall impose a fine against the owner/occupant by taking into
consideration the number of days the nuisance remained unabated or any prior
findings of liability for the failure to abate a nuisance under this chapter.
(Ord. 07-21, 9-3-2007)
CHAPTER 9
OPEN BURNING
SECTION:
5-9-1: Definitions
5-9-2: Prohibitions
5-9-3: Exemptions
5-9-4: Permits
5-9-5: Explosive Wastes
5-9-6: Penalty
5-9-1: DEFINITIONS:
AGRICULTURAL WASTES: Any refuse, except garbage and dead animals, generated on
a farm or ranch by crop and livestock production practices, including such
items as bags, cartons, dry bedding, structural materials and landscape wastes.
DOMICILE WASTE: Any refuse generated on single-family domiciliary property as a
result of domiciliary activities. The term includes landscape waste, but
excludes garbage and trade waste.
GARBAGE: Refuse resulting from the handling, processing, preparation, cooking
and consumption of food or food products.
LANDSCAPE WASTE: Any vegetable or plant refuse, except garbage. The term
includes trees, tree trimmings, branches, stumps, brush, weeds, leaves, grass,
shrubbery, yard trimmings and crop residues.
OPEN BURNING: The combustion of any matter in such a way that the products of
the combustion are emitted to the open air without originating in or passing
through equipment for which a permit could be issued under section 9(b) of the
act of the Illinois pollution control board.
REFUSE: Any discarded matter; or any matter which is to be reduced in volume,
or otherwise changed in chemical or physical properties, in order to facilitate
its discard, removal or disposal.
RESTRICTED AREAS: The area within the boundaries of any "municipality" as
defined in the Illinois municipal code, plus a zone extending one mile beyond
the boundaries of any such municipality having a population of one thousand
(1,000) or more according to the latest federal census.
TRADE WASTE: Any refuse resulting from the prosecution of any trade, business,
industry, commercial venture, utility or service activity, and any government
or institutional activity, whether or not for profit. The term includes
landscape waste but excludes agricultural waste. (1974 Code)
5-9-2: PROHIBITIONS:
   (A)   No person shall cause or allow open burning, except as provided in
sections
5-9-3 through
5-9-5 of this chapter.
   (B)   No person shall cause or allow the burning of any refuse in any
chamber or apparatus, unless such chamber or apparatus is designed for the
purpose of disposing of the class of refuse being burned. (1974 Code)
5-9-3: EXEMPTIONS:
The following activities are not in violation of section 9(c) of the
environmental protection act 1  or of this chapter unless they cause air
pollution as defined in the act of the environmental protection agency. Nothing
in this section shall exempt such activities from applicable local
restrictions.
   (A)   The open burning of agricultural waste, but only:
      1.   On the premises on which such waste is generated; and
      2.   In areas other than restricted areas; and
      3.   When atmospheric conditions will readily dissipate contaminants; and
      4.   If such burning does not create a visibility hazard on roadways,
railroad tracks or airfields; and
      5.   More than one thousand feet (1,000') from residential or other
populated areas; and
      6.   When it can be affirmatively demonstrated that no economically
reasonable alternative method of disposal is available. (1974 Code)
   (B)   The setting of fires to combat or limit existing fires, when
reasonably necessary in the judgment of the responsible government official.
   (C)   The burning of fuels for legitimate campfire, recreational and cooking
purposes, or in domestic fireplaces, in areas where such burning is consistent
with other laws, provided that no garbage shall be burned in such cases.
   (D)   The burning of waste gases, provided that in the case of refineries
all such flares shall be equipped with smokeless tips or comparable devices to
reduce pollution.
   (E)   Small open flames for heating tar, for welding, acetylene torches,
highway safety flares and the like. (1974 Code; amd. Ord. 98-09, 9-21-1998)
 
Notes
1 1. 415 ILCS 5/1.
5-9-4: PERMITS:
   (A)   The environmental protection agency may grant permits for open burning
in the following instances:
      1.   For instruction in methods of firefighting; or for testing of
equipment for extinguishing fires, of flares and signals, or of experimental
incinerators, or for research in control of fires;
      2.   For the destruction of vegetation on site under circumstances in
which its removal would necessitate significant environmental damage;
      3.   For research or management in prairie or forest ecology;
      4.   For the destruction of landscape wastes, provided that such burning
shall not occur:
         (a)   In restricted areas, unless burning is conducted with the aid of
an air curtain destructor or comparable device to reduce emissions
substantially; or
         (b)   Within one thousand feet (1,000') of any residential or other
populated area; or
         (c)   After July 1, 1972, except with the aid of an air curtain
destructor or comparable device to reduce contaminant emissions substantially.
      5.   For the destruction of oil sludges in petroleum production for
safety reasons where alternative means including product recovery are
impracticable; provided, that when emergency conditions require, such burning
may be done without a permit, and a report shall be filed with the agency
within ten (10) days thereafter, indicating the place and time of such burning,
the quantities burned, the meteorological conditions, and the reasons why
emergency burning was necessary.
   (B)   An application for a permit shall be in such form and shall contain
such information as shall be required in procedures adopted by the agency. Such
application shall contain, as a minimum, data and information sufficient to
inform the agency with respect to: the exact quantities and types of material
to be burned; the exact nature and exact quantities of air contaminant
emissions which will result; the exact frequency, including dates where
appropriate, when such burning will take place; the exact location of the
burning site, including a map showing distances to residences, populated areas,
roadways, airfields, etc.; the methods or actions which will be taken to reduce
the emission of air contaminants; the reasons why alternatives to open burning
are not available; and the reasons why such burning is necessary to the public
interest.
   (C)   No permit shall be granted unless the applicant proves to the
satisfaction of the agency that the open burning: is necessary to the public
interest; will be conducted in such a time, place and manner as to minimize the
emission of air contaminants; and will have no serious detrimental effect upon
adjacent properties or the occupants thereof.
   (D)   The agency may impose such conditions in the permit as may be
necessary to accomplish the purposes of the act or this chapter.
   (E)   No permit shall be valid for longer than one year. Applications for
renewal of a permit shall be submitted to the agency at least ninety (90) days
prior to the expiration of the prior permit, and shall conform to subsection
(B) of this section. The standards for issuance of renewal permits shall be as
set forth in subsection (C) of this section.
   (F)   Violation of any of the conditions of the permit shall be grounds for
revocation of the permit by the agency, as well as for other sanctions provided
in the act.
   (G)   The agency may revise any permit granted pursuant to this rule, or any
condition contained in any such permit. (1974 Code)
5-9-5: EXPLOSIVE WASTES:
Open burning of wastes creating a hazard of explosion, fire or other serious
harm, unless authorized by other provisions in this chapter shall be permitted
only upon application for and grant of a variance as provided by the act and
chapter 1 of rules and regulations of the Illinois pollution control board.
(1974 Code)
5-9-6: PENALTY:
Any person who violates this chapter is guilty of a petty offense and shall be
fined in accordance with section
1-4-1 of this code. (Ord. 99-09, 8-2-1999)
CHAPTER 10
SMOKING PROHIBITED
SECTION:
5-10-1: Smoking Prohibited In Village Hall
5-10-1: SMOKING PROHIBITED IN VILLAGE HALL:
   (A)   Smoking Prohibited: It shall be unlawful for any person to smoke or
carry any lighted cigarette, cigar or pipe in the village hall except in the
police garage area.
   (B)   Signs Required: Signs prohibiting smoking shall be posted in all
halls, corridors and places open to the public in such building with letters of
such size and color as to be clearly readable. (Ord. 93-7, 8-2-1993)
   (C)   Penalty: Any person who violates this section is guilty of a petty
offense and shall be fined in accordance with section
1-4-1 of this code. (Ord. 99-14, 8-16-1999)
CHAPTER 11
GARBAGE, DEBRIS, AND GRAFFITI
SECTION:
5-11-1:    Garbage and Debris; Nuisance Declared
5-11-2:    Graffiti; Nuisance Declared
5-11-3:    Removal; Notice
5-11-4:    Abatement
5-11-5:    Penalty
5-11-1: GARBAGE AND DEBRIS; NUISANCE DECLARED:
It shall be unlawful for an owner/occupant of real property to deposit,
maintain, permit, or suffer the presence of, any garbage, rubbish, yard waste,
or debris on private property outside of approved/designated receptacles or
past the next proximate applicable day designated for scavenger service for
removal of the same. The presence of any such garbage, rubbish, yard waste, or
debris is hereby declared a nuisance. (Ord. 22-18, 2-21-2023)
5-11-2: GRAFFITI; NUISANCE DECLARED:
It shall be unlawful for any owner/occupant of real property place, maintain,
permit, or suffer the presence of, any graffiti on any building, structure, or
other improvement upon private property. The presence of any such graffiti is
hereby declared a nuisance. (Ord. 22-18, 2-21-2023)
5-11-3: REMOVAL; NOTICE:
The director of building and zoning shall serve notice, by personal service or
regular mail, upon an owner/occupant of real property, that the garbage,
rubbish, yard waste, debris, or graffiti on the real property constitutes a
nuisance under this chapter. The notice shall specify that the identified
nuisance be abated by the owner/occupant within five (5) days after notice is
mailed or delivered. (Ord. 22-18, 2-21-2023)
5-11-4: ABATEMENT:
If the owner/occupant fails to abate the nuisance within five (5) days, the
village shall be authorized to enter the real property to abate the nuisance. A
record of the cost to abate the nuisance shall be kept by the director of
building and zoning. The owner/occupant shall be responsible for all costs
incurred by the village to abate the nuisance. The cost shall be a lien upon
the real estate affected; provided that within one (1) year after such cost and
expense is incurred by the village, or person performing the service by
authority of the village, in his or her name, files a notice of lien in the
office of the recorder of Kankakee County. The notice of lien shall consist of
a sworn statement setting out:
   (A)   A description of the real estate sufficient for the identification
thereof;
   (B)   The amount of money representing the cost incurred or payable for the
service to abate the nuisance; and
   (C)   The date or dates when such cost and expense was incurred by the
village.
The cost incurred by the village shall not be a lien on the real estate
affected unless a notice of such lien is personally served on, or sent by
certified mail to, the person whom was sent the tax bill for the general taxes
on the property for the last preceding year. The notice shall be delivered or
sent after the removal of the garbage, rubbish, yard waste, or debris is
completed. The notice shall state the substance of Section 11-20-15 of the
Illinois Municipal Code (65 ILCS 5/11-20-15), the substance of this chapter,
and shall identify the property, by common description, and the abatement/
removal activities undertaken. No lien may be recorded for the costs of abating
a nuisance to the extent such abatement represents the costs of removing
graffiti. (Ord. 22-18, 2-21-2023)
5-11-5: PENALTY:
The penalty for the failure to abate a nuisance under this chapter shall be
punishable by a fine of not less than fifty dollars ($50.00) or more than seven
hundred fifty dollars ($750.00). Each day a nuisance is allowed to exist on the
property subsequent to the time at which the nuisance was required to be abated
shall constitute a separate offense. The hearing officer, in his/her
discretion, shall impose a fine against the owner/occupant by taking into
consideration the number of days the nuisance remained unabated or any prior
findings of liability for the failure to abate a nuisance under this chapter.
(Ord. 22-18, 2-21-2023)
TITLE 6
PUBLIC WAYS AND PROPERTY
CHAPTER 1
STREETS, PUBLIC WAYS
SECTION:
6-1-1: Supervision
6-1-2: Private Use
6-1-3: Deposits; Obstructions
6-1-4: Altering
6-1-5: Street Signs
6-1-6: Assignment Of Numbers
6-1-1: SUPERVISION:
All public streets, alleys, sidewalks and other public ways shall be under the
supervision of the superintendent of public works. He shall have supervision
over all work thereon and he shall be charged with the enforcement of all code
provisions relating thereto. (1956 Code, Sec. 26-1)
6-1-2: PRIVATE USE:
No person shall use any street, sidewalk, alley or other public way or place as
place for the display of goods or merchandise for sale. (1956 Code, Sec. 26-2)
6-1-3: DEPOSITS; OBSTRUCTIONS:
   (A)   Deposits: It shall be unlawful to deposit on any street, alley,
sidewalk or other public way or place, any material which may be harmful to the
surface or pavement thereof, or any waste material, or any glass or other
articles or material which may do injury to any person, animal or property.
(1956 Code, Sec. 26-3)
   (B)   Obstructions: It shall be unlawful for any person to place any
obstruction of any kind on any public street, public way, public property or
village easement within the village. There will be no structures, fences,
trees, shrubs, landscaping, or vegetation allowed in any drainage easement that
would restrict the flow of water, unless otherwise approved in writing by the
village administrator with the consent of the village engineer. (Ord. 06-16, 6-
19-2006)
6-1-4: ALTERING:
It shall be unlawful for any person to alter in any manner, shape or form any
public street in the village without the previous written consent of the
superintendent of public works. (1956 Code, Sec. 24-5)
6-1-5: STREET SIGNS:
The names of all streets shall be placed on street corners. No person shall
injure or obstruct any such sign. (1956 Code, Sec. 24-1)
6-1-6: ASSIGNMENT OF NUMBERS:
The superintendent of public works shall assign or cause to be assigned to each
lot, part of a lot, residence, apartment or place of business a legal number in
accordance with such system as shall be set forth by the president and board of
trustees. (1956 Code, Sec. 24-2)
It is hereby made the duty of the owner, agent or person in possession of any
building in the village to number it in the prescribed manner. (1956 Code, Sec.
24-3)
CHAPTER 2
VILLAGE PARKS
SECTION:
6-2-1: Lease Vacant Lots (Rep. by Ord. 24-18, 2-3-2025)
6-2-2: Park Plan (Rep. by Ord. 24-18, 2-3-2025)
6-2-3: Equipment (Rep. by Ord. 24-18, 2-3-2025)
6-2-4: Park Hours
6-2-1: LEASE VACANT LOTS:
(Rep. by Ord. 24-18, 2-3-2025)
6-2-2: PARK PLAN:
(Rep. by Ord. 24-18, 2-3-2025)
6-2-3: EQUIPMENT:
(Rep. by Ord. 24-18, 2-3-2025)
6-2-4: PARK HOURS:
   (A)   All public parks and public playgrounds shall be closed between the
hours of twelve o’clock (12:00) A.M. and six o’clock (6:00) A.M.
   (B)   It shall be unlawful for any person to be in any public park or public
playground between the hours of twelve o’clock (12:00) A.M. and six o’clock (6:
00) A.M.
   (C)   Any person found in violation of the provisions of this section shall
be fined not less than one hundred dollars ($100.00) and not more than seven
hundred fifty dollars ($750.00) for each offense. Each day a violation
continues shall constitute a separate and distinct offense.
   (D)   Violations of this section may be administered in accordance with the
provisions of Title 1, Administrative, Chapter 17, Administrative Adjudication,
of the Municipal Code for the Village of Manteno. (Ord. 20-19, 11-2-2020)
CHAPTER 3
WATER REGULATIONS
SECTION:
6-3-1: Nonpotable Community Wells
6-3-2: Required Connection To Municipal Water And Sewer System; Wells
Prohibited
6-3-1: NONPOTABLE COMMUNITY WELLS:
   (A)   License And Fee: Any person, firm, corporation or any other entity,
which wishes to own or operate a well, which pumps water for a use other than
the supply of potable water to a single building or residential unit shall
procure a license from the village. The fee for that license shall be fifty
dollars ($50.00). The applicant shall state the location of the well, the depth
to which the well is expected to be drilled, or has been drilled, if the well
shaft has been drilled but the well is not yet operational, the name of the
entity that drilled the well, and the purpose for which the water is to be
used. Before issuing a license, the village may seek a written report from the
village engineer as to whether a well at this location or depth will interfere
with the potable water supply provided by the village to its citizens or
present other health and safety hazards. In the event that the construction of
the well will not automatically create health, safety or capacity concerns, a
permit shall be issued, and the well may be constructed and operated subject to
the regulations contained in subsection (B) of this section, or otherwise
contained in village ordinances. If the well has not been drilled, the
applicant shall provide to the village, within fifteen (15) working days after
completion, a statement as to the final depth of the completed well. An
application relating to the expansion of the well shall be filed and a new
permit issued under the same terms and conditions as set forth above, if the
well is to be expanded or deepened.
   (B)   Inspection And Equipment:
      1.   The owner or operator of the well shall not place it into operation
without offering the municipality a period of at least seven (7) working days
after a notice is given to inspect the completed well. If the well includes a
structure which would require a permit under the ordinances of the village,
such a permit shall be sought as well as any other required permit, such as an
electrical permit. If, during the inspection process, the village should find
that the well has not been built in accordance with the original application,
or in accordance with this section, the owner or operator shall not commence
the operation of the well until the facility shall so comply.
      2.   The owner or operator shall install, at the owner's or operator's
cost, equipment, as a part of the well, which will perform the following
functions:
         (a)   A flow meter showing the total gallons pumped by the well;
         (b)   An hour meter, which will record the gallons pumped per minute;
         (c)   A gauge or other device showing the water levels both during
static periods and during pumping.
   The owner or developer shall seek the authorization of the village to
install devices to perform these readings, but the village shall not
unreasonably refuse to approve the installation of equipment which will
accurately provide such information.
   The owner or operator of the well shall report on the information and
calibration provided by such monitoring devices on such a schedule as the
village shall require, but, in any case, not less frequently than every month.
   (C)   Suspension Of Well: In the event that the village president should
conclude that the continuing operation of the well is likely to imminently
endanger the public health or safety, or to diminish the supply of potable
water available within the village, he or she may order, on not less than six
(6) hours' notice, the temporary suspension of the operations of the well. Such
notice shall be delivered in writing to the person or entity known to be the
owner of the well or the person or entity with operational control of the well.
That owner or operator shall immediately suspend the use of the well. The
initial suspension may not be for a period of more than fourteen (14) days, and
during that period of time, the village president shall schedule a hearing to
determine whether the nature of the suspension may be modified from a complete
termination of operations to a lesser restriction or whether the termination
shall continue until the health, or safety hazard, or the capacity problem has
ceased. The village determines, as a matter of public policy, that the
protection of the municipal potable water system is superior to that of
nonpotable water uses until the danger to health, safety or capacity has ceased
or diminished.
   (D)   Penalty: Any person, firm, corporation or any other entity, which
violates any of the provisions of this section shall, upon conviction thereof,
be fined not less than five hundred dollars ($500.00) for each offense, nor
more than seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00) for each offense. Each day
during which a violation occurs shall be considered a separate offense. In
addition, the village may seek injunctive or other relief necessary to
implement the terms and conditions of this section. (Ord. 03-06, 6-16-2003;
amd. Ord. 07-13, 8-6-2007)
6-3-2: REQUIRED CONNECTION TO MUNICIPAL WATER AND SEWER SYSTEM; WELLS
PROHIBITED:
   (A)   Prior to annexation into the Village of any property, the property
owner must notify the Village of the number and location of every well and
septic system on the property.
   (B)   It shall be the duty of the owner, occupant, or party or parties in
possession of any house, structure, institutional or commercial establishment
or any other building of any character located on property abutting on the
municipal water or sewer system, to cause such house, structure, institutional
or commercial establishment or other building to be connected with the said
municipal water or sewer system within thirty six (36) months from the date
that water or sewerage facilities become available to such property.
   (C)   Any private water wells and private sewer or septic systems shall be
sealed in the manner required by law within ninety (90) days after connection
of the property served by such private well or sewer system to the municipal
water or sewer system.
   (D)   No new private water wells and no new septic systems shall be
permitted in the village for any purpose unless no municipal water supply or
sewer system is reasonably available.
   (E)   Any person found to be in violation of any provision of this section
shall be subject to a fine of not less than two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00)
nor more than seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00). Each violation, or day
said violation is permitted to continue, shall constitute a separate offense.
(Ord. 04-40, 3-14-2005; amd. Ord. 07-13, 8-6-2007; Ord. 24-18, 2-3-2025)
CHAPTER 4
SEWERAGE SYSTEM
(Rep. by Ord. 24-18, 2-3-2025)
CHAPTER 5
MUNICIPAL GOLF COURSE
(Rep. by Ord. 24-18, 2-3-2025)
CHAPTER 6
SEWER USE
SECTION:
6-6-1: General Provisions
6-6-2: Regulations
6-6-3: Fees
6-6-4: Permits And Administration
6-6-5: Administrative Enforcement Remedies
6-6-6: Penalties And Costs
6-6-7: City Of Kankakee's Utility Ordinance Application
6-6-1: GENERAL PROVISIONS:
   (A)   Purpose And Policy: This chapter sets forth uniform requirements for
direct and indirect contributors to the sanitary sewer system for the village
of Manteno, Illinois, and POTW which will enter or be discharged into the city
of Kankakee's sanitary sewer system, and enables the village of Manteno and
city to comply with applicable state and federal laws required by the clean
water act of 1977 (public law 95-217) and the general pretreatment regulations
(40 CFR part 403).
The objectives of this chapter are to:
      1.   Prevent the introduction of pollutants into the sanitary sewer
system, which will interfere with the operation of the sanitary system or POTW
or contaminate the resulting sludge.
      2.   Prevent the introduction of pollutants into the sanitary sewer
system or POTW, which will pass through the system, inadequately treated, into
receiving waters or the atmosphere or otherwise be incompatible with the
system.
      3.   Improve the opportunity to recycle and reclaim wastewater sludges
from the POTW.
      4.   Provide for equitable distribution of the operation and maintenance
costs incurred by KMU in implementing the industrial pretreatment program.
This chapter provides for the regulation of direct and indirect contributors to
the Kankakee sanitary sewer system and POTW through the issuance of permits to
certain nondomestic users and through enforcement of general requirements for
the other users, authorizes monitoring and enforcement activities, requires
user reporting, assumes that existing customers' capacity will not be
preempted, and provides for the setting of fees for the equitable distribution
of costs resulting from the program established herein.
This chapter shall apply to the users within the village of Manteno who are by
contract with the city, users of the Kankakee city sanitary sewers.
   (B)   Administration: Except as otherwise provided herein, the
superintendent shall administer, implement, and enforce the provisions of this
chapter. Any powers granted to or duties imposed upon the superintendent may be
delegated by the superintendent to other KMU personnel.
   (C)   Definitions: Unless the text specifically indicates otherwise, the
following terms and phrases, as used in this chapter shall have the meanings
hereinafter designated:
      ACT OR "THE ACT": The federal water pollution control act, also known as
the clean water act, as amended, 33 USC 1251 et seq.
      APPLICABLE PRETREATMENT STANDARD(S): For any specific pollutant(s), the
more stringent of the following standards:
         1.   POTW's prohibitive discharge standards.
         2.   POTW's specific limitations on discharge.
         3.   State pretreatment standards.
         4.   National categorical pretreatment standards.
      APPROVAL AUTHORITY: The director in an NPDES state with an approved state
pretreatment program and the appropriate regional administrator in a non-NPDES
state or an NPDES state without an approved state pretreatment program.
      APPROVED POTW PRETREATMENT PROGRAM: A program administered by a POTW that
meets the criteria established in 40 CFR part 403, and which has been approved
by a regional administrator or state director in accordance with section 403.11
or 40 CFR part 403.
      AUTHORIZED REPRESENTATIVE OF INDUSTRIAL USER: An authorized
representative of an industrial user may be:
         1.   A principal executive officer of at least the level of vice
president, if the industrial user is a corporation.
         2.   A general partner or proprietor if the industrial user is a
partnership or proprietorship, respectively.
         3.   A duly authorized representative of the individual designated
above if such representative is responsible for the overall operation of the
facilities from which the indirect discharge originates and only if the
authorization is made in writing to the utility by a person described above.
      BOD5 (5 DAY BIOCHEMICAL OXYGEN DEMAND): The quantity of oxygen utilized
in the biochemical oxidation of organic matter under standard laboratory
procedures in five (5) days at twenty degrees Celsius (20°C) expressed in terms
of weight and concentration (milligrams per liter (mg/l)) as prescribed in part
507 of standard methods.
      BASELINE REPORT: That report required by 40 CFR section 403.12(b)(1-7).
      BILLABLE BOD5: The amount of BOD5 in a user's wastewater discharged to
the utility in pounds of BOD5 calculated using the billable flow and
concentration of BOD5 in the wastewater as determined by the utility.
      BILLABLE FLOW: Either a user's water usage from all sources, or the
amount of wastewater discharged to the utility, as determined by the utility.
      BILLABLE SUSPENDED SOLIDS: The amount of suspended solids in a user's
wastewater discharged to the utility in pounds of suspended solids calculated
using the billable flow and concentration of suspended solids in the wastewater
as determined by the utility.
      BIOCHEMICAL OXYGEN DEMAND (BOD): The quantity of oxygen, expressed in
milligrams per liter, utilized in the biochemical oxidation of organic matter
under standard laboratory procedures as described in "standard methods" defined
in this subsection.
      BUILDING DRAIN: That part of the lowest horizontal piping of the drainage
system which receives the discharge from soil, waste, and other drainage pipes
within the walls of the building and conveys it to the building's sewer that
begins five feet (5') outside the inner face of the building wall.
      BUILDING SEWER: A sewer which is an extension of the building drain and
which conveys wastewater from the premises of a user to the utility system.
      CATEGORICAL INDUSTRY: An industrial user which is subject to a national
categorical pretreatment standard.
      CATEGORICAL STANDARDS OR CATEGORICAL PRETREATMENT STANDARDS: See
definition of National Categorical Pretreatment Standards Or Federal
Categorical Pretreatment Standards Or Categorical Standards.
      CHEMICAL OXYGEN DEMAND (COD): The quantity of oxygen utilized in the
chemical oxidation of organic matter under standard laboratory procedures
expressed in terms of weight and concentration (milligrams per liter (mg/l)) as
prescribed in part 508 of standard methods.
      CITY: The city of Kankakee.
      COMBINED SEWER: A sewer that is designated as a sanitary sewer and a
storm sewer.
      COMBINED WASTE STREAM FORMULA: The formula as found in 40 CFR section
403.6(e).
      COMMERCIAL USER: A user engaged in retail or wholesale trades or the
transaction of business involving the purchase or sale of goods or merchandise
or involving the provision of services combined with the purchase or sale of
goods or merchandise, whether for profit or not for profit. The commercial
users class shall also include entities such as fraternal organizations,
professional organizations, labor unions and recreational facilities other than
park districts, and those governmentally owned or tax supported.
      COMPATIBLE POLLUTANT: Biochemical oxygen demand (BOD), chemical oxygen
demand (COD), fats, oils, greases (FOG), suspended solids, pH, and fecal
coliform bacteria; plus any additional pollutants identified in the POTW's
NPDES permit, where the POTW treats such pollutants and, in fact, does treat
such pollutants to the degrees required by the POTW's NPDES permit.
      COMPOSITE SAMPLE: A composite sample shall consist of the combination of
three (3) or more grab samples collected within a twenty four (24) hour period,
with each grab sample being taken at not less than one hour intervals.
      CONTROL AUTHORITY:
         1.   The POTW if the POTW's submission for its pretreatment program
has been approved; or
         2.   The city of Kankakee if the city pretreatment program has been
approved.
      CONTROL MANHOLE: A structure located on a site from which industrial
wastes are discharged. Where feasible, the manhole shall have an interior drop.
The purpose of a "control manhole" is to provide access for the utility's
representative to sample and/or measure discharges.
      COOLING WATER: The water discharged from any use such as air
conditioning, cooling or refrigeration, or to which the only pollutant added is
heat.
      DIRECT DISCHARGE: The discharge of treated or untreated wastewater
directly to the waters of the state of Illinois.
      DIRECTOR: The director of the Illinois environmental protection agency.
      DOMESTIC USER: A user who discharges only domestic wastewater.
      DOMESTIC WASTEWATER: Wastewater having a normal strength of two hundred
milligrams per liter (200 mg/l) of BOD and two hundred fifty milligrams per
liter (250 mg/l) of suspended solids or less. Domestic wastewater shall be
interchangeable with sewage.
      ENFORCEMENT DIVISION DIRECTOR: One of the directors of the enforcement
divisions within the regional offices of the USEPA or this person's designated
representative. Now called water division director in USEPA region V.
      EXISTING SOURCE: Any source of discharge, the construction or operation
of which commenced prior to the publication by USEPA of proposed categorical
pretreatment standards, which will be applicable to such source if the standard
is thereafter promulgated in accordance with section 307 of the act.
      FATS, OILS, OR GREASE (FOG): The quantity of freon extractable matter
expressed in terms of weight and concentration (milligrams per liter (mg/l)) as
prescribed in part 503 of standard methods.
      FECAL COLIFORM: Any number of organisms common to the intestinal tract of
man and animals whose presence in sanitary sewage is an indicator of pollution.
      FLOW: A moving volume of wastewater.
      FLOW RATE: A moving volume of wastewater per a unit of time.
      GARBAGE: Solid wastes from the domestic and commercial preparation,
cooking, and dispensing of food; and from the commercial handling, storage, and
sale of produce.
      GENERAL PRETREATMENT REGULATIONS: 40 CFR part 403 entitled "general
pretreatment for existing and new sources", as amended.
      GOVERNMENTAL USER: A user involved in legislative, judicial,
administrative, and regulating activities of federal, state, and local
governments.
      GRAB SAMPLE: A sample which is taken from a waste stream on a onetime
basis with no regard to the flow in the waste stream and without consideration
of time.
      HOLDING TANK WASTE: Any waste from holding tanks such as vessels,
chemical toilets, campers, trailers, septic tanks, and vacuum pump tank trucks.
      ILLINOIS ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION AGENCY (IEPA): The Illinois
environmental protection agency, or where appropriate, the terms may also be
used as a designation for the director or other duly authorized official of
said agency. Further defined as that agency or agencies of the state, any
divisions thereof or successors thereto, authorized by present and subsequent
acts of the general assembly to regulate and control matters in respect to the
environment, and particularly in respect to wastewater discharge, management,
maintenance, and operations of the POTW.
      INCOMPATIBLE POLLUTANT: All pollutants other than compatible pollutants
as defined herein.
      INDIRECT DISCHARGE: The introduction of pollutants into a POTW from any
nondomestic source regulated under section 307(b), (c), or (d) of the act.
      INDUSTRIAL USER: Any nongovernmental, nonresidential user of a publicly
owned treatment works which is identified in the "Standard Industrial
Classification Manual", 1972, office of management and budget, as amended and
supplemented, under one of the following divisions:
         Division A - Agriculture, forestry and fishing
         Division B - Mining
         Division D - Manufacturing
         Division E - Transportation, communications, electric, gas and
sanitary services
         Division F - Services
      INDUSTRIAL WASTEWATER OR INDUSTRIAL WASTE: Any solid, liquid or gaseous
substance discharged, permitted to flow or escape from any industrial,
manufacturing, commercial or business establishment or process or from the
development, recovery or processing of any natural resource as distinct from
sanitary sewage.
      INSIGNIFICANT INDUSTRIAL USER: An industry which discharges only domestic
wastewater and does not have any reasonable chance to discharge a nondomestic
wastewater.
      INSTITUTIONAL USER: A user involved in social, religious, or educational
activities such as tax supported schools, libraries or park districts, private
or parochial schools and churches.
      INTERFERENCE: A discharge which, along or in conjunction with a discharge
or discharges from other sources, both:
         1.   Inhibits or disrupts the POTW, its treatment process or
operations, or its sludge processes, use or disposal; and
         2.   Causes a violation of any requirement of the POTW's NPDES permit
(including an increase in the magnitude or duration of a violation) or of the
prevention of sewage sludge use or disposal in compliance with the following
statutory provisions and regulations or permits issued thereunder (or more
stringent state or local regulations): section 405 of the clean water act, the
solid waste disposal act (SWDA) (including title II, more commonly referred to
as the resource conservation and recovery act (RCRA), and including state
regulations contained in any state sludge management plan prepared pursuant to
subtitle D of the SWDA, the clean air act, the toxic substances control act,
and the marine protection, research and sanctuaries act.
      KANKAKEE MUNICIPAL UTILITY (KMU): A nonregulated public utility of the
city of Kankakee.
      MEDICAL WASTE: Isolation wastes, infectious agents, human blood and blood
products, pathological wastes, sharps, body parts, contaminated bedding,
surgical wastes, potentially contaminated laboratory wastes, and dialysis
wastes.
      MILLIGRAMS PER LITER (mg/l): A unit of the concentration of water or
wastewater constituent. It is 0.001 gram of the constituent in one thousand
milliliters (1,000 ml) of water. It has replaced the unit formerly used, parts
per million (ppm), to which it is approximately equivalent in reporting the
results of water and wastewater analyses.
      NPDES PERMIT: A permit issued to a POTW pursuant to section 402 of the
act.
      NPDES STATE: A state (as defined in 40 CFR section 122.3) or interstate
water pollution control agency with an NPDES permit program approved pursuant
to section 402(b) of the act.
      NATIONAL CATEGORICAL PRETREATMENT STANDARDS OR FEDERAL CATEGORICAL
PRETREATMENT STANDARDS OR CATEGORICAL STANDARDS: Any regulation containing
pollutant discharge limits promulgated by the USEPA in accordance with section
307(b) and (c) of the act (33 USC 1347) which applies to a specific category of
industrial users.
      NATIONAL POLLUTION DISCHARGE ELIMINATION SYSTEM (NPDES) PERMIT: Any
permit or requirement issued by the Illinois environmental protection agency
(IEPA), or United States environmental protection agency (USEPA) pursuant to
the federal water pollution control act, as amended (33 USC 1251 et seq.), for
the purpose of controlling sewage, industrial wastes, or other wastes under the
authority of section 402 of the act.
      NATIONAL PRETREATMENT STANDARDS OR PRETREATMENT STANDARDS: Any regulation
containing pollutant discharge limits promulgated by the USEPA in accordance
with section 307(b) and (c) of the act (33 USC 1347) which applies to
industrial users. This term includes prohibitive discharge limits established
pursuant to 40 CFR part 403.5.
      NATIONAL PROHIBITIVE DISCHARGE STANDARD OR PROHIBITIVE DISCHARGE
STANDARD: Any regulation developed under the authority of section 307(b) of the
act and 40 CFR part 403.5.
      NATURAL OUTLET: Any outlet in a watercourse, pond, ditch, lake, or other
body of surface or ground water.
      NEW SOURCE: Any building, structure, facility, or installation from which
there is or may be a discharge of pollutants, the construction of which
commenced after the publication of proposed pretreatment standards under
section 307(c) of the act which will be applicable to such source if such
standards are thereafter promulgated in accordance with that section.
         1.   The building, structure, facility or installation is constructed
at a site at which no other source is located; or
         2.   The building, structure, facility or installation totally
replaces the process or production equipment that causes the discharge of
pollutants at an existing source; or
         3.   The production or wastewater generated processes of the building,
structure, facility or installation that are substantially independent of an
existing source at the same site. In determining whether these factors are
substantially independent such as the extent to which the new facility is
integrated with the existing plant and the extent to which the new facility is
engaged in the same general type of activity as the existing source, should be
considered.
      NONCONTACT COOLING WATER: Water used for cooling which does not come into
direct contact with any raw material, intermediate product, waste product, or
finished product.
      OPERATION AND MAINTENANCE: Activities required to assure the dependable
and economical function of the utility system.
         Maintenance: Preservation of the functional integrity and efficiency
of equipment and structures. This includes preventive maintenance, corrective
maintenance, and replacement as needed.
         Operation: Control of the unit processes and equipment which makes up
the utility system. This includes financial and personnel management records,
laboratory control, process control, safety and emergency operation planning.
      POTW: See definition of Publicly Owned Treatment Works (POTW).
      POTW TREATMENT PLANT: That portion of the POTW which is designed to
provide treatment (including recycling and reclamation) of municipal sewage and
industrial waste. For purposes of this chapter it is the Kankakee River
metropolitan agency.
      PASS-THROUGH: A discharge which exits the POTW into waters of the United
States in quantities or concentrations which, along or in conjunction with a
discharge or discharges from other sources, is a cause of a violation of any
requirement of the POTW's NPDES permit (including an increase in the magnitude
or duration of a violation).
      PERMITTED WASTEWATER HAULER VEHICLE: A vehicle used for hauling
wastewater and/or sludge which has been granted a permit by:
         1.   IEPA as a "special waste hauler" vehicle for all wastewater and/
or sludges other than septage; or
         2.   The Illinois department of public health (IDPH) as a "septage
hauler" vehicle for septage.
      PERSON: The state or any agency or institution thereof, any municipality,
governmental subdivision, public or private corporation, individual,
partnership, or other entity, including, but not limited to, associated,
commission or any interstate body, and including any officer or governing or
managing body of any municipality, governmental subdivision or public or
private corporation, or other entity.
      pH: The logarithm (base 10) of the reciprocal of the concentration of
hydrogen ions expressed in standard units.
      POLLUTANT: Any dredged spoil, solid waste, incinerator residue, sewage,
garbage, sewage sludge, munitions, chemical wastes, biological materials,
radioactive materials, heat, wrecked or discharged equipment, rock, sand,
cellar dirt and industrial, municipal, and agricultural waste discharged into
water.
      POLLUTION OR WATER POLLUTION: The manmade or man induced alteration of
the chemical, physical, biological, and radiological integrity of water.
      POPULATION EQUIVALENT (PE): 0.17 pound of five (5) day biochemical oxygen
demand as prescribed in "standard methods" as defined in this subsection.
      PRETREATMENT OR TREATMENT: The reduction of the amount of pollutants, the
elimination of pollutants, or the alteration of the nature of pollutant
properties in wastewater prior to or in lieu of discharging pollutants into a
POTW. The reduction or alteration may be obtained by physical, chemical or
biological processes, or process changes, or by other means, except as
prohibited by 40 CFR part 403.6(d). Appropriate pretreatment technology
includes control equipment, such as equalization tanks or facilities, for
protection against surges or slug loadings that might interfere with or
otherwise be incompatible with the POTW. However, where wastewater from a
regulated process is mixed in an equalization facility with unregulated
wastewater or with wastewater from another regulated process, the effluent from
the equalization facility must meet an adjusted pretreatment limit calculated
in accordance with 40 CFR part 403.6(e).
      PRETREATMENT REQUIREMENTS: Any substantive or procedural requirement
related to pretreatment, other than a national pretreatment standard imposed on
an industrial user.
      PRETREATMENT STANDARDS OR STANDARDS: Prohibited discharge standards,
categorical pretreatment standards and local limits.
      PROHIBITIVE DISCHARGE STANDARD: See definition of National Prohibitive
Discharge Standard Or Prohibitive Discharge Standard.
      PROPERLY SHREDDED GARBAGE: The wastes from the preparation, cooking and
dispensing of food that have been shredded to such a degree that all particles
will be carried freely under the flow conditions normally prevailing in public
sewers, with no particle greater than one half inch (1/2") in any dimension.
      PUBLIC SEWER: A sewer in which all owners of abutting properties have
equal rights, and is controlled by the village of Manteno or the city of
Kankakee.
      PUBLICLY OWNED TREATMENT WORKS (POTW): A treatment works as defined by
section 212 of the act (33 USC 1292), which is owned by a state or a
municipality. This definition includes any devices and systems used in the
storage, treatment, recycling and reclamation of municipal sewage, or
industrial wastes of a liquid nature. It also includes sewers, pipes, and other
conveyances only if they convey wastewater to a POTW. For the purpose of this
chapter, POTW shall also include any sewers that convey wastewaters to the POTW
from persons outside the city who are, by contract or agreement with KMU, users
of the Kankakee sanitary sewers. This term also means the municipality, as
defined in section 502(4) of the act, which has jurisdiction over the indirect
discharges to and the discharges from such a treatment works, which for this
chapter is the Kankakee River metropolitan agency.
      REGIONAL ADMINISTRATOR OR ADMINISTRATOR: The regional administrator of
USEPA region V.
      REPLACEMENT: Expenditures for obtaining and installing equipment,
accessories, or appurtenances which are necessary during the useful life of the
utility system to maintain the capacity and performance of which such works
were designated and constructed. The term "operation and maintenance" includes
replacement.
      RESIDENTIAL USER: A user who resides in dwelling units such as detached,
semi-detached and row houses, mobile homes, apartments, and permanent multi-
family dwellings.
      SANITARY SEWER: A sewer, which carries domestic and industrial
(nondomestic wastewater) and to which storm, surface and ground water are not
intentionally admitted.
      SEPTAGE: The contents of a septic tank that serve a residential structure
and to which only domestic wastewater is discharged.
      SEWAGE: A combination of the water carried wastes from residences,
businesses buildings, institutions, and industrial establishments, together
with such ground, surface and storm waters as may be present.
      SEWAGE TREATMENT PLAN: Any arrangement of devices and structures used for
treating sewage.
      SEWAGE WORKS: All facilities for collecting, pumping, treating, and
disposing of sewage.
      SEWER: A pipe or conduit for carrying sewage.
      SHALL: "Shall" is mandatory. "May" is permissive.
      SIGNIFICANT INDUSTRIAL USER OR SIGNIFICANT USER: Any industrial user
which discharges to the POTW will be classified as one of the following
categories:
      Categorical Significant User Category:
         1.   Class C-1 major user: Any industrial user which discharges to the
POTW and meets any of the following:
            (a)   Is subject to national categorical pretreatment standards.
            (b)   Discharges a nondomestic wastewater of twenty five thousand
(25,000) gpd or more.
            (c)   Contributes a wastewater which makes up five percent (5%) or
more of the average dry weather hydraulic, organic (BOD), or solids (TSS)
capacity of KMU.
            (d)   Has a reasonable potential, in the opinion of KMU's
superintendent, to discharge a wastewater which would adversely affect the POTW
(i.e., interference, sludge contamination, pass-through, or hazardous
materials).
         2.   Class C-2 minor user: Any industrial user which discharges to the
POTW and meets any of the following:
            (a)   Is subject to national categorical pretreatment standards.
            (b)   Discharges a nondomestic wastewater less than twenty five
thousand (25,000) gpd.
            (c)   Contributes a wastewater which makes up less than five
percent (5%) of the average dry weather hydraulic, organic (BOD), or solids
(TSS) capacity of KMU.
            (d)   Does not have a reasonable potential, in the opinion of KMU's
superintendent, to discharge a wastewater which would adversely affect the POTW
(i.e., interference, sludge contamination, pass- through, or hazardous
materials).
         3.   Class I-1 major user: Any industrial user which discharges to the
POTW and meets any of the following:
            (a)   Is not subject to national categorical pretreatment
standards.
            (b)   Discharges a nondomestic wastewater of twenty five thousand
(25,000) gpd or more.
            (c)   Contributes a wastewater which makes up five percent (5%) or
more of the average dry weather hydraulic, organic (BOD), or solids (TSS)
capacity of KMU.
            (d)   Has a reasonable potential, in the opinion of KMU's
superintendent, to discharge a wastewater, which would adversely affect the
POTW (i.e., interference, sludge contamination, pass- through, or hazardous
materials).
         4.   Class I-2 minor user: Any industrial user which discharges to the
POTW and meets any of the following:
            (a)   Is not subject to national categorical pretreatment
standards.
            (b)   Discharges a nondomestic wastewater of less than twenty five
thousand (25,000) gpd.
            (c)   Contributes a wastewater which makes up less than five
percent (5%) of the average dry weather hydraulic, organic (BOD) or solids
(TSS) capacity of KMU.
            (d)   Does not have a reasonable potential, in the opinion of KMU's
superintendent, to discharge a wastewater which would adversely affect the POTW
(i.e., interference, sludge contamination, pass- through or hazardous
materials).
      SIGNIFICANT NONCOMPLIANCE (SNC):
         1.   "Chronic violations of wastewater discharge limits", defined
herein as those in which sixty six percent (66%) or more of all of the
measurements taken during a six (6) month period exceed (by any magnitude) the
daily maximum limit or the average limit for the same pollutant parameter.
         2.   "Technical review criteria (TRC) violations", defined herein as
those in which thirty three percent (33%) or more of all of the measurements
for each pollutant parameter taken during a six (6) month period equal or
exceed the product of the daily maximum limit or the average limit multiplied
by the applicable TRC (TRC = 1.4 for BOD, TSS, fats, oil, and grease, and 1.2
for all other pollutants except pH).
         3.   Any other violation of a pretreatment effluent limit (daily
maximum or long term average) that the control authority determines has caused,
along or in combination with other discharges, interference or pass-through
(including endangering the health of POTW personnel or the general public).
         4.   Any discharge of a pollutant that has caused imminent
endangerment to human health, welfare or to the environment or has resulted in
the POTW's exercise of its emergency authority under subsection
6-6-5(F) of this chapter to halt or prevent such a discharge.
         5.   Failure to meet within ninety (90) days after the schedule date,
a compliance schedule milestone contained in a local control mechanism or
enforcement order for starting construction, completing construction, or
attaining final compliance.
         6.   Failure to provide, within thirty (30) days after the due date,
required reports such as baseline monitoring reports, ninety (90) day
compliance reports, periodic self-monitoring reports, and reports on compliance
with compliance schedules.
         7.   Failure to accurately report noncompliance.
         8.   Any other violation or group of violations which the control
authority determines will adversely affect the operation or implementation of
the local pretreatment program.
      SIGNIFICANT VIOLATION: A violation of this chapter which remains
uncorrected forty five (45) days after notification of such noncompliance; is
part of a pattern of noncompliance over a twelve (12) month period; involves a
failure to accurately report noncompliance; or results in KMU exercising its
emergency authority pursuant to section
6-6-5 of this chapter.
      SLUDGE: The solids separated from the liquids during the wastewater
treatment processes.
      SLUG OR SLUG LOAD: Any discharge of water or wastewater which meets any
of the following conditions:
         1.   Has a flow rate in excess of five (5) times the daily average.
         2.   Has pollutant concentration in excess of five (5) times the daily
average permitted value.
         3.   Has combination of flow and pollutant concentration which yields
a mass pollutant quantity in excess of five (5) times the daily average
permitted value.
         4.   Has any pollutant, including oxygen demanding pollutants (BOD,
etc.) released in a discharge at a flow rate and/or pollutant concentration
which will cause interference with the POTW.
      STANDARD INDUSTRIAL CLASSIFICATION (SIC): A classification pursuant to
the "Standard Industrial Classification Manual" issued by the executive office
of the president, office of management and budget.
      STANDARD METHODS: The analytical procedures set forth in the latest
edition, at the time of analysis, of "Standard Methods For The Examination Of
Water And Wastewater" prepared and published jointly by the American Public
Health Association, the American Water Works Association, and the Water
Pollution Control Federation; and in accordance with procedures established by
the administrator pursuant to section 304(h) of the act and contained in 40 CFR
part 136 and amendments thereto.
      STATE: State of Illinois.
      STORET: The national water quality data system of the U.S. environmental
protection agency (USEPA).
      STORM SEWER: A sewer designated to carry only storm waters, surface
runoff, street wash waters, and drainage.
      SUBMISSION: Any of the following:
         1.   A request by a POTW for approval of a pretreatment program to the
USEPA or a director.
         2.   A request by a POTW to the USEPA or a director for authority to
revise the discharge limits in categorical pretreatment standards to reflect
POTW's pollutant removals.
         3.   A request to the USEPA by an NPDES state for approval of its
state pretreatment program.
      SUPERINTENDENT: The superintendent of the Kankakee municipal utility is
designated by the city to supervise the operation of the publicly owned utility
system and is charged with certain duties and responsibilities by this chapter.
The term may also be used for his duly authorized representative.
      SURCHARGE: A charge in addition to the base user charge for the treatment
of BOD and suspended solids discharged to a sanitary sewer that is in excess of
two hundred milligrams per liter (200 mg/l) of BOD and two hundred fifty
milligrams per liter (250 mg/l) of suspended solids.
      T: As in cyanide-T means total.
      TOTAL DISSOLVED OR TOTAL FILTERABLE RESIDUE: Those solids capable of
passing through a standard glass fiber filter and dried to constant weight at
one hundred eighty degrees Celsius (180°C).
      TOTAL METALS: The sum of the concentration of the list of metals
contained in subsection
6-6-2(D)1 of this chapter.
      TOTAL SOLIDS: The sum of total suspended solids and total dissolved
solids.
      TOTAL SUSPENDED SOLIDS OR TOTAL NONFILTERABLE SOLIDS: The total suspended
matter, expressed in milligrams per liter, that floats on the surface of, or is
suspended in, water, wastewater, or other liquids, and which are retained on a
Reeve Angel type 934A glass filter disc and dried to constant weight at one
hundred three degrees Celsius (103°C) to one hundred five degrees Celsius
(105°C) as prescribed in "standard methods" as defined in this subsection.
      TOTAL TOXIC ORGANISMS: The summation of quantified values greater than
0.01 milligrams per liter for the toxic organics as specified in the applicable
regulations.
      TOXIC POLLUTANT: Any pollutant or combination of pollutants listed as
toxic in regulations promulgated by the administrator of the USEPA under the
provision of section 307(a) of the act or other acts.
      USEPA (UNITED STATES ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION AGENCY): The United States
environmental protection agency, or where appropriate, the term may also be
used as a designation for the administrator or other duly authorized official
of said agency.
      UNPOLLUTED WATER: Water of quality equal to or better than the IEPA
effluent criteria in effect, or water that would not cause a violation of the
receiving water quality standards and would not be benefited by discharge to
the sanitary sewers and wastewater treatment facility provided.
      UPSET: An exceptional incident in which there is unintentional and
temporary noncompliance with categorical pretreatment standards because of
factors beyond the reasonable control of the industrial user. An upset does not
include noncompliance to the extent caused by operational error, improperly
designed treatment facilities, inadequate treatment facilities, lack of
preventative maintenance, or careless or improper operation.
      USEFUL LIFE: The estimated period during which the collection system and/
or utility system will be operated and shall be thirty (30) years from the date
of startup of any wastewater facility.
      USER: Any person who contributes, causes, or permits the contribution of
wastewater into the sanitary sewers.
      USER CHARGE SYSTEM: The system of charges levied on the user to recover
the user's proportionate share of the costs of operation, maintenance, and
replacement for new and old wastewater collection/treatment facilities,
pursuant to sections 204(b)(1)(A) and 201(h)(2) of PL 95-217; and 40 CFR part
35, subpart 1 of the "Federal Register", as amended.
      UTILITY SYSTEM: Any devices and systems for the storage, treatment,
recycling, and reclamation of municipal sewage, or liquid industrial wastes
used to implement section 201 of the act. These include intercepting sewers,
outfall sewers, sewage collection systems, individual systems, pumping, power,
and other equipment and their appurtenances, extensions, improvements,
remodeling, additions, and alterations thereof.
      WASTEWATER: The combination of liquid and water carrying wastes from
residences, commercial buildings, industrial plants, and institutions including
polluted cooling water.
         Combined Wastewater: Wastewater that includes domestic wastewater,
industrial wastewater, infiltration, and inflow carried to the POTW treatment
facilities by a sewer.
         Domestic Wastewater: The combination of liquid and water carried
wastes discharged from a toilet or other sanitary plumbing facilities.
         Industrial Wastewater: A combination of liquid and water carried
waste, discharged from any industrial user including the wastewater from
pretreatment facilities and polluted cooling water.
      WASTEWATER DISCHARGE PERMIT OR SEWER USE PERMIT: The document or
documents issued to significant industrial users by the city in accordance with
this chapter.
      WASTEWATER HAULER OR SLUDGE HAULER: Any person engaged in transporting
wastewater or sludge as a commercial venture.
      WATER DIVISION DIRECTOR: See definition of Enforcement Division Director.
      WATERCOURSE: A channel in which a flow of water occurs, either
continuously or intermittently.
      WATERS OF THE STATE: All streams, lakes, ponds, marshes, watercourses,
waterways, wells, springs, reservoirs, aquifers, irrigation systems, drainage
systems, and all other bodies of accumulations of water, surface or
underground, natural or artificial, public or private, which are contained
within, flow through, or border upon the state or any portion thereof.
   (D)   Abbreviations: The following abbreviations shall have the designated
meanings:
BOD   Biochemical oxygen demand (may also mean the total biochemical oxygen
      demand)
BOD5  Five (5) day biochemical oxygen demand
CFR   Code of federal regulations (40 CFR part 403 is title 40 of the code of
      federal regulations part 403)
COD   Chemical oxygen demand
DAF   Daily average flow
DMF   Daily maximum flow
FOG   Fats, oils, and greases
gpd   Gallons per day
IEPA  Illinois environmental protection agency
IU    Industrial user
IWS   Industrial wastewater survey
KMU   The Kankakee municipal utility
l     Liter
mg    Milligrams
mg/l  Milligrams per liter
NPDES National pollutant discharge elimination system
POTW  Publicly owned treatment works
RCRA  Resource conservation and recovery act
SIC   Standard industrial classification
SWDA  Solid waste disposal act, 42 USC 6901 et seq.
TSS   Total suspended solids
TTO   Total toxic organics
USC   United States Code
USEPA United States environmental protection agency
 
(Ord. 06-70, 2-20-2007)
6-6-2: REGULATIONS:
   (A)   General Discharge Prohibitions:
      1.   No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged any storm water,
foundation drain water, ground water, roof runoff, surface drainage, cooling
waters, or any other unpolluted water into any sanitary sewer.
      2.   No user shall contribute or cause to be contributed, directly or
indirectly, any pollutant or wastewater which will interfere with the operation
or performance of the POTW or pass through the city's POTW. The following
general prohibitions shall apply to all such users of the sanitary sewers
whether or not the user is subject to national categorical pretreatment
standards or any other national, state, or local pretreatment standards or
requirements. A user may not contribute the following substances to the
sanitary sewers:
         (a)   Any liquids, solids or gases which by reason of their nature or
quantity are, or may be, sufficient either alone or by interaction with other
substances to cause fire or explosion or be hazardous to the POTW or sanitary
sewers or to the operation of the POTW or sanitary sewers.
            (1)   Pollutants which create a fire or explosive hazard in the
POTW or sanitary sewers, including, but not limited to, waste streams with a
closed up flashpoint of less than one hundred forty degrees Fahrenheit (140°F)
(60°C) using the test method specified in 40 CFR 261.21.
            (2)   Wastewater causing two (2) readings on an explosion hazard
meter at the point of discharge into the POTW or sanitary sewers, or at any
point in the POTW or sanitary sewers, of more than five percent (5%) or any
single reading over ten percent (10%) of the lower explosive limit (LEL) of the
meter.
         (b)   Solid or viscous substances which may cause obstruction to the
flow in a sewer or other interference with the operation of the POTW such as,
but not limited to: grease, garbage with particles greater than one-half inch
(1/2") in any dimension, animal guts or tissues, paunch manure, bones, hair,
hides or fleshing, entrails, whole marble dust, metal, glass, straw, shavings,
grass clippings, rags, spent grains, spent hops, wastepaper, wood, plastics,
tar, asphalt residues, residues from refining or processing of fuel or
lubricating oil, mud, or grass, grinding or polishing wastes or tumbling or
deburring stones.
         (c)   Any wastewater having a pH less than 5.0 or more than 12.5, or
otherwise causing corrosive structural damage or hazard to the sanitary sewers
or POTW equipment, and/or personnel of the POTW.
         (d)   Any wastewater containing incompatible pollutants in sufficient
quantity, either solely or by interaction with other pollutants, to injure or
interfere with any wastewater treatment process, constitute a hazard to humans
or animals, create an incompatible effect in the receiving waters of the POTW,
or to exceed the limitation set forth in a national categorical pretreatment
standard (with effective), or to exceed a limitation set forth in subsection
(D) of this section, or to create a public nuisance. An incompatible pollutant
shall include, but not be limited to, any pollutant identified pursuant to
section 307(a) of the act.
         (e)   Any noxious or malodorous liquids, gases, or solids which either
solely or by interaction with other wastewater are sufficient to create a
public nuisance or hazard to life or are sufficient to prevent entry into the
sewers for their maintenance and repair.
         (f)   In no case shall a substance discharged to the POTW cause the
POTW to be noncompliant with sludge use or disposal criteria, guidelines or
regulations developed under section 405 of the act; any criteria guidelines
affecting sludge use or disposal developed pursuant to the RCRA, SWDA, the
clean water act, the toxic substances control act, or state criteria applicable
to the sludge management method being used.
         (g)   Any substance that causes the POTW to violate its NPDES permit
or the receiving water quality standards.
         (h)   Wastewater which imparts color which cannot be removed by the
treatment process, such as, but not limited to, dye wastes and vegetable
tanning solutions, which consequently imparts color to the treatment plant's
effluent, thereby violating the POTW's NPDES permit.
         (i)   Any wastewater which solely or by interaction with other wastes
produces a residual temperature at the introduction into the POTW treatment
plant in excess of one hundred forty degrees Fahrenheit (140°F) (60°C). In any
case, an industrial user will limit the temperature of its discharge to a
maximum of one hundred forty nine degrees Fahrenheit (149°F) (65°C).
         (j)   Any pollutants, including compatible pollutants released at a
flow rate and/or pollutant concentration which a user knows or has reason to
know will cause interference to the POTW. In no case shall slug loads be
discharged.
         (k)   Any wastewater containing BOD, total solids, or suspended solids
of such character and quantity that unusual attention or expense is required to
handle such materials at the POTW; provided however, that a user may be
permitted by specific, written agreement with KMU, which agreement to discharge
such BOD or TSS may provide for special charges, payments or provisions for
treating and testing equipment.
         (l)   Any wastewaters containing excessive amounts of fat, wax, grease
or oils, whether emulsified or not; or containing substances which may solidify
or become discernibly viscous at temperatures between thirty two degrees
Fahrenheit (32°F) (0°C) and one hundred forty nine degrees Fahrenheit (149°F)
(65°C) unless specifically permitted otherwise.
            (1)   Petroleum oil, nonbiodegradable cutting oil or products of
mineral oil origin, in amounts that will cause interference or pass-through.
         (m)   Wastewater containing inert suspended solids (such as, but not
limited to, fuller earth, lime slurries, and lime residues) or dissolved solids
(such as, but not limited to, sodium chloride and sodium sulfate) in such
quantities that would cause interference to the sanitary sewers or POTW.
         (n)   Any wastewater containing any radioactive wastes or isotopes of
such half-life or concentration as may exceed limits established by state or
federal regulations.
         (o)   Any discharge that exceeds the standards established in 35
Illinois administrative code 307.
         (p)   Pollutants which result in the presence of toxic gases, vapors,
or fumes within the POTW in a quantity that may cause acute worker health and
safety problems.
         (q)   Trucked or hauled pollutants, except at discharge points
designated by the superintendent in accordance with the EPA regulations.
         (r)   Sludges, screenings, or other residues from the pretreatment of
industrial wastes.
         (s)   Medical wastes, except as specifically authorized by the
superintendent in a wastewater discharge permit.
         (t)   Wastewater causing, along or in conjunction with other sources,
the treatment plant's effluent to fail a toxicity test.
         (u)   Detergents, surface active agents, or other substances which may
cause excessive foaming in the POTW.
         (v)   Storm water, surface water, ground water, artesian well water,
roof runoff, subsurface drainage, swimming pool drainage, condensate, deionized
water, noncontact cooling water and unpolluted wastewater, unless specifically
authorized by the superintendent.
         (w)   Pollutants, including oxygen demanding pollutants (BOD, etc.)
released in a discharge at a flow and/or pollutant concentration which, either
solely or by interaction with other pollutants, causes interference with the
POTW.
   Pollutants, substances, or wastewater prohibited by this section shall not
be processed or stored in such a manner to risk discharge into the POTW.
      3.   When the superintendent determines that a user is contributing to
the POTW any of the above enumerated substances in such amounts as to interfere
with the operation of the POTW or pass through the POTW, the superintendent
shall:
         (a)   Advise the user of the impact of the contribution on the POTW.
         (b)   Develop effluent limitations for the user to correct the
interference with or pass through the POTW.
   (B)   Incorporation Of National Categorical Pretreatment Standards: Upon the
promulgation of the national categorical pretreatment standard (NCPS) for a
particular user, the said standard, if more stringent than the limitations
imposed under this chapter for sources in that category, shall, when effective,
immediately supersede the limitations and conditions imposed under this
chapter. The superintendent shall notify all known affected users of the
applicable reporting requirements under 40 CFR section 403.12.
   (C)   National Categorical Pretreatment Standards: The categorical
pretreatment standards found at 40 CFR chapter I, subchapter N, parts 405-471
are hereby incorporated.
      1.   Where a categorical pretreatment standard is expressed only in terms
of either the mass or the concentration of a pollutant in wastewater, the
superintendent may impose equivalent concentration or mass limits in accordance
with 40 CFR 403.6(c).
      2.   When wastewater subject to a categorical pretreatment standard is
mixed with wastewater not regulated by the same standard, the superintendent
shall impose an alternative limit using the combined wastewater formula in 40
CFR 403.6(e).
      3.   A user may obtain a variance from a categorical pretreatment
standard if the user can prove, pursuant to the procedural and substantive
provisions in 40 CFR 403.13, that factors relating to its discharge are
fundamentally different from the factors considered by USEPA when developing
the categorical pretreatment standard.
      4.   A user may obtain a net gross adjustment to a categorical standard
in accordance with 40 CFR 403.15.
   (D)   Specific Pollutant Limitations:
      1.   Discharges from each separate discharge of a user, as measured under
the provisions of this chapter, shall not contain in excess of the following
concentrations based upon a twenty four (24) hour composite sample. Multiple
industrial wastewater discharges from a permitted facility may be combined in a
flow weighted manner to determine compliance with the following limitations for
a twenty four (24) hour composite sample.
Milligrams Per Liter Constituent Storet Number
Milligrams Per Liter Constituent           Storet Number
0.131                Cadmium               01027
0.33                 Chromium (hexavalent) 01032
3.38                 Copper                01042
0.75                 Cyanide               00720
1.53                 Lead                  01051
0.0005               Mercury               71900
2.00                 Molybdenum            01062
0.83                 Nickel                01067
8.00                 Zinc                  01092
 
Compliance with the provisions of this subsection (D) shall be required no
later than three hundred sixty five (365) days following the effective date of
this chapter.
      2.   Concentrations apply at the point where the industrial waste is
discharged to the POTW. All concentrations for metallic substances are for
"total" metal unless indicated otherwise. At his discretion, the superintendent
may impose mass limitations in addition to or in place of the concentration
based above.
   (E)   Requirements: In any case, the most stringent requirement and
limitation of the following shall apply:
      1.   Federal discharge standards and national categorical pretreatment
standards as promulgated in federal legislation, rules and regulations
including, but not limited to, the act (PL 95-217), USEPA "general pretreatment
regulations for existing and new sources of pollution" (40 CFR part 403), and
categorical pretreatment regulations for various categories (40 CFR parts 410,
413, 414, 415, 419, 420, 421, 425, 429, 430, 433, 434, 439, 440, 444, 455, 463,
465, 466, 467, 468, 469, and 471).
      2.   State discharge standards as promulgated in state legislation,
rules, and regulations including, but not limited to, "title 35: environmental
protection, subtitle C: water pollution control board".
      3.   Discharge standards contained in this chapter.
   (F)   KMU's Right Of Revision: KMU reserves the right to establish by
ordinance or in wastewater discharge permits more stringent limitations or
requirements on discharges to the POTW if deemed necessary to comply with the
objectives presented in subsection
6-6-1(A) of this chapter. Upon revision of this by the city, such revisions
shall automatically be incorporated into this chapter and be applicable to
users within the village of Manteno.
   (G)   Dilution: No user shall increase the use of process water or in any
way attempt to dilute a discharge as a partial or complete substitute for
adequate treatment to achieve compliance with a discharge limitation unless
authorized by an applicable pretreatment standard or requirement. The
superintendent may impose mass limitations on users who are using dilution to
meet applicable pretreatment standards or requirements or in other cases when
the imposition of mass limitations is appropriate.
   (H)   Variances: Users seeking variances from subsection (D) of this section
may petition KMU for a variation from the standards in accordance with the
procedures set forth in subsection
6-6-5(L) of this chapter.
   (I)   Spill Containment:
      1.   Accidental Discharges: Each significant industrial user having the
ability to cause interference with the POTW or to violate the regulatory
provisions of this chapter shall provide protection from accidental discharge
of prohibited materials or other substances regulated by this chapter.
Facilities to prevent accidental discharge of prohibited materials shall be
provided and maintained at the user's own cost and expense. All significant
industrial users whose wastewater includes or could include compatible or
incompatible pollutants in amounts great enough to cause interference with the
POTW must have detailed plans on file with the utility showing facilities and
operating procedures to provide this protection. Plans shall be approved by the
utility before users shall complete such a plan. No user who commences
contribution to or could contribute such pollutants to the POTW after the
effective date of this chapter shall be permitted to introduce pollutants into
the system until accidental discharge facilities and procedures have been
approved by the utility and installed by the user.
Review and approval of such plans and operating procedures shall not relieve
the user from the responsibility to modify the user's facility as necessary to
meet the requirements of this chapter.
      2.   Immediate Notification: In the case of an accidental or deliberate
discharge of compatible or incompatible pollutants, which cause interference at
the POTW or violate requirements of this chapter, it shall be the
responsibility of the industrial user to immediately telephone and notify the
village of Manteno and KMU of the incident. The notification shall include name
of caller, location and time of discharge, type of wastewater, concentration,
volume, and corrective action taken.
      3.   Written Report: Within five (5) days following such an accidental or
deliberate discharge the industrial user shall submit to the superintendent a
detailed written report on forms to be provided by KMU, describing the cause of
the discharge and the measures to be taken by the user to prevent similar
future occurrences. Follow up reports may be required by KMU as needed. Such
report, or reports, shall not relieve the industrial user of any expense, loss,
damage or other liability which may be incurred as a result of damage to the
POTW, fish kills, or any other damage to person or property; nor shall such
report relieve the user of any fines, civil penalties, or other liability which
may be imposed by this chapter or otherwise. Failure to report accidental or
deliberate discharges may, in addition to any other remedies available to KMU,
result in the revocation of the discharger's wastewater discharge permit.
      4.   Production Control: The industrial user shall control production or
all discharges to the extent necessary to maintain compliance with all
applicable regulations upon reduction, loss, or failure of its treatment
facility until the facility is restored or an alternative method of treatment
is provided. This requirement applies in the situation where, among other
things, the primary source of power of the treatment facility is reduced, lost
or fails.
      5.   Notice To Employees: A notice in English and the language of common
use shall be permanently posted on the industrial user's bulletin board or
other prominent place advising employees whom to call in the event of a
discharge of a prohibitive material. Employers shall ensure that all employees
who are in a position to cause, discover, or observe such an accidental
discharge are advised of the emergency notification procedure.
      6.   Additional Remedies: In addition to the remedies available to the
utility set forth elsewhere in this chapter, if the utility is fined by the
IEPA or USEPA for violation of the POTW's NPDES permit or violation of water
quality standards as the result of an industrial spill or intentional slug
discharge of a compatible or incompatible pollutant, then the fine, including
all utility legal, sampling, analytical testing, and any other related costs
shall be charged to the responsible industry. Such charge shall be in addition
to, and not in lieu of, any other remedies the utility may have under this
chapter, statutes, regulations, at law or in equity.
      7.   Accidental Discharge/Slug Control Plans: At least once every two (2)
years, the superintendent shall evaluate whether each significant industrial
user needs an accidental discharge/slug control plan. The superintendent may
require any user to develop, submit for approval, and implement such a plan.
Alternatively, the superintendent may develop such a plan for every user. An
accidental discharge/slug control plan shall address, at a minimum, the
following:
         (a)   Description of discharge practices, including nonroutine batch
discharges;
         (b)   Description of stored chemicals;
         (c)   Procedures for immediately notifying the superintendent of any
accidental or slug discharge, as required by subsections (I)2 of this section
and
6-6-4(Q)5 of this chapter; and
         (d)   Procedures to prevent adverse impact from any accident or slug
discharge. Such procedures include, but are not limited to, inspection and
maintenance of storage areas, handling and transfer of materials, loading and
unloading operations, control of plant site runoff, worker training, building
of containment structures or equipment, measures for containing toxic organic
pollutants, including solvents, and/or measures and equipment for emergency
response.
      8.   Tenant Responsibility: Where an owner of property leases the
premises to any other person as a tenant under any rental or lease agreement,
if either the owner or the tenant is an industrial user, either or both may be
held responsible for compliance with the provisions of this chapter.
      9.   Hauled Wastewater:
         (a)   Septic tank waste may be accepted into the POTW only at a
designated receiving structure within the treatment plant area and at such
times as are established by the POTW. Such waste shall not violate this section
or any other requirements established by the city. The superintendent shall
require septic tank waste haulers to obtain waste hauler permits and to abide
by the POTW's waste hauler guidelines.
         (b)   The discharge of hauled industrial wastes requires prior
approval and a wastewater discharge permit. The superintendent shall require
generators of hauled industrial waste to obtain the wastewater discharge
permit. The superintendent may also prohibit the disposal of hauled industrial
waste. The discharge of hauled industrial waste is subject to all other
requirements of this chapter.
         (c)   Industrial waste haulers shall discharge loads only at locations
designated by the POTW. The POTW may collect samples of each hauled load to
ensure compliance with applicable standards. The superintendent may require the
industrial waste hauler/generator to provide a waste analysis of any load prior
to discharge.
         (d)   Industrial waste haulers must provide a waste tracking form (IL
uniform nonhazardous waste manifest) for every load. (Ord. 06-70, 2-20-2007)
6-6-3: FEES:
   (A)   Purpose: The purpose of charges and fees is to provide cost recovery
from the industrial users of the POTW for the implementation of the program
established in this chapter. The applicable charges or fees shall be set forth
in the schedule of charges and fees to be prepared annually by the
superintendent and approved by the city council. All significant industrial
users shall apply for a wastewater discharge permit.
   (B)   Schedule Of Charges And Fees:
      1.   Administrative Fees 1 : The city will charge the significant
industrial users of the POTW for administrative costs associated with
permitting, inspections, reporting and record keeping tasks as required by
regulation. These fees will be as follows:
         (a)   Categorical significant users:
            (1)   Class C-1 (greater than 25,000 gpd): One thousand dollars
($1,000.00) per year.
            (2)   Class C-2 (less than 25,000 gpd): Five hundred dollars
($500.00) per year.
         (b)   Noncategorical significant users:
            (1)   Class I-1 (greater than 25,000 gpd): Five hundred dollars
($500.00) per year.
            (2)   Class I-2 (less than 25,000 gpd): Two hundred fifty dollars
($250.00) per year.
         (c)   Manifested waste discharges: One thousand dollars ($1,000.00)
per year.
         (d)   Ground water remediation projects: As established by service
agreements with discharger.
These fees are payable in annual, quarterly or monthly installments.
      2.   Sampling Fees: The city will charge significant industrial users for
personnel and equipment use, repair and replacement costs associated with
sample collection for compliance monitoring as required by regulation. These
charges shall be as follows:
         (a)   Standard automatic sampler: One hundred fifty dollars ($150.00)
per day.
         (b)   Toxic sampler (automatic): Two hundred dollars ($200.00) per
day.
         (c)   Volatile organic chemical (VOC) sampling: Twenty five dollars
($25.00) per day.
         (d)   Sample pick up and handling: Twenty five dollars ($25.00) per
day (without automatic sample).
      3.   Laboratory Analysis Charge: KMU will assess significant industrial
users a laboratory analysis charge to recover utility's expense for analyzing
the industrial wastewater discharge samples for specific pollutants. The
laboratory analysis charge is fifteen dollars ($15.00) per metal per analysis
and thirty dollars ($30.00) per cyanide analysis. The metals subject to this
charge are those defined in subsection
6-6-2(D)1 of this chapter.
      4.   Additional Costs: Additional costs will be charged to industrial
users on a case by case basis for the following items:
         (a)   Fees for reviewing accidental discharge procedures and
construction;
         (b)   Fees for filing appeals;
         (c)   Fees for consistent removal (by the POTW) of pollutants
otherwise subject to categorical pretreatment standards;
         (d)   Other fees as KMU may deem necessary to carry out the
requirements contained herein.
These fees relate solely to the matters caused by this chapter and are separate
from and additional to all other fees chargeable by KMU. (Ord. 06-70, 2-20-
2007)
 
Notes
1 1. These administrative fees are doubled during periods when the subject user
  is in "significant noncompliance" status.
6-6-4: PERMITS AND ADMINISTRATION:
   (A)   Wastewater Discharges: It shall be unlawful for any significant
industrial user to discharge without an NPDES or KMU permit to any natural
outlet within the village of Manteno, or in any area under the jurisdiction of
the city of Kankakee, and/or to the POTW any wastewater except as authorized by
the superintendent in accordance with the provisions of this chapter.
   (B)   Wastewater Surveys: When requested by the superintendent a user must
submit information on the nature and characteristics of its wastewater within
thirty (30) days of the request. The superintendent is authorized to prepare a
form for this purpose and may periodically require users to update this
information. Failure to complete this survey shall be reasonable grounds for
terminating service to the industrial user and shall be considered a violation
of this chapter.
   (C)   Wastewater Discharge Permit Requirement:
      1.   No significant industrial user shall discharge wastewater into the
POTW without first obtaining a wastewater discharge permit from the
superintendent, except that a significant industrial user that has filed a
timely application pursuant to this chapter may continue to discharge for the
time period specified therein.
      2.   The superintendent may require other users to obtain wastewater
discharge permits as necessary to carry out the purposes of this chapter.
      3.   Any violation of the terms and conditions of a wastewater discharge
permit shall be deemed a violation of this chapter and subjects the wastewater
discharge permittee to the sanctions set out in sections
6-6-2 and
6-6-6 of this chapter. Obtaining a wastewater discharge permit does not relieve
a permittee of its obligation to comply with all federal and state pretreatment
standards or requirements or with any other requirements of federal, state and
local law.
      4.   The utility will be responsible for the administration of processing
wastewater discharge permits and applications.
   (D)   Wastewater Discharge Permitting; Existing Connections: Any user
required to obtain a wastewater discharge permit, who has not previously had
one, who was discharging wastewater into the POTW prior to the effective date
of this chapter and who wishes to continue such discharges in the future,
shall, within ninety (90) days after said date, apply to the superintendent for
a wastewater discharge permit in accordance with subsection (F) of this
section, and shall not cause or allow discharges to the POTW to continue after
ninety (90) days of the effective date of this chapter except in accordance
with a wastewater discharge permit issued by the superintendent.
   (E)   Wastewater Discharge Permitting; New Connections: Any user required to
obtain a wastewater discharge permit who proposed to begin or recommence
discharging to the POTW must obtain a permit prior to the beginning or
recommencing the discharge. An application for this wastewater discharge
permit, in accordance with subsection (F) of this section, must be filed ninety
(90) days prior to the date upon which any discharge will begin or recommence.
   (F)   Wastewater Discharge Permit Application Contents: In order to be
considered for a wastewater discharge permit, all industrial users required to
have a wastewater discharge permit must submit the information required by
subsection (C)2 of this section. The superintendent shall approve a form to be
used as a permit application. In addition, the following information may be
requested:
      1.   Description of activities, facilities, and plant processes on the
premises, including a list of all raw materials and chemicals used or stored at
the facility which are, or could accidentally or intentionally be, discharged
to the POTW.
      2.   Number and type of employees, hours of operation, and proposed or
actual hours of operation of the industrial user.
      3.   Each product produced by type, amount, process or processes, and
rate of production.
      4.   Type and amount of raw materials processed (average and maximum per
day).
      5.   The site plans, floor plans, mechanical and plumbing plans, and
details to show all sewers, floor drains, and appurtenances by size, location
and elevation, and all points of discharge.
      6.   Time and duration of the discharge.
      7.   Any other information as may be deemed necessary by the
superintendent to evaluate the wastewater discharge permit application.
Incomplete or inaccurate applications will not be processed and will be
returned to the industrial user for revision.
   (G)   Application Signatories And Certification: All wastewater discharge
permit applications and industrial user reports must contain the following
certification statement and be signed by an authorized representative of the
industrial user:
      I certify under penalty of law that this document and all attachments
were prepared under my direction or supervision in accordance with a system
designed to assure that qualified personnel properly gather and evaluate the
information submitted. Based on my inquiry of the person or persons who manage
the system, or those persons directly responsible for gathering the
information, the information submitted is to the best of my knowledge and
belief, true, accurate, and complete. I am aware that there are significant
penalties for submitting false information, including the possibility of fine
and imprisonment for knowing violations.
   (H)   Wastewater Discharge Permit Decisions: The superintendent will
evaluate the data furnished by the industrial user and may require additional
information. Within ninety (90) days of receipt of a complete wastewater
discharge permit application, the superintendent will determine whether or not
to issue a wastewater discharge permit. If no determination is made within this
time period, the application will be deemed denied. The superintendent may deny
any application for a wastewater discharge permit.
   (I)   Wastewater Discharge Permit Issuance Process: Wastewater discharge
permits shall include such conditions as are reasonably deemed necessary by the
superintendent to prevent pass-through or interference, protect the quality of
the water body receiving the POTW's effluent, protect worker health and safety,
facilitate sludge management and disposal, protect ambient air quality, and
protect against damage to the POTW.
      1.   Wastewater discharge permits must contain the following conditions:
         (a)   A statement that indicates wastewater discharge permit duration,
which in no event shall exceed five (5) years.
         (b)   A statement that the wastewater discharge permit is
nontransferable without prior notification to, and approval from the city, and
provisions for furnishing the new owner or operator with a copy of the existing
wastewater discharge permit.
         (c)   Effluent limits applicable to the user based on applicable
standards in federal, state and local law.
         (d)   Self-monitoring, sampling, reporting, notification, and record
keeping requirements. These requirements shall include an identification of
pollutants to be monitored, sampling location, sampling frequency, and sample
type based on federal, state, and local law.
         (e)   Statement of applicable, civil, criminal and administrative
penalties for violation of pretreatment standards and requirements, and any
applicable compliance schedule. Such schedule may not extend the time for
compliance beyond that required by applicable federal, state, or local law.
      2.   Wastewater discharge permits may contain, but need not be limited to
the following:
         (a)   Limits on the average and/or maximum rate of discharge, time of
discharge, and/or requirements for flow regulation and equalization.
         (b)   Limits on the instantaneous, daily and monthly average and/or
maximum concentration, mass, or other measure of identified wastewater
pollutants or properties.
         (c)   Requirements for the installation of pretreatment technology,
pollution control, or construction of appropriate containment devices,
designated to reduce, eliminate, or prevent the introduction of pollutants into
the POTW.
         (d)   Development and implementation of spill control plans or other
special conditions including management practices necessary to adequately
prevent accidental, unanticipated, or routine discharges.
         (e)   Development and implementation of waste minimization plans to
reduce the amount of pollutants discharged to the POTW.
         (f)   The unit charge or schedule of industrial user charges and fees
for the management of the wastewater discharged to the sanitary sewers.
         (g)   Requirements for installation and maintenance of inspection and
sampling facilities and equipment.
         (h)   A statement that compliance with the wastewater discharge permit
does not relieve the permittee of responsibility for compliance with all
applicable federal and state pretreatment standards, including those which
become effective during the term of the wastewater discharge permit.
         (i)   Other conditions as deemed appropriate by the superintendent to
ensure compliance with this chapter, and state and federal laws, rules, and
regulations.
   (J)   IEPA Permit Requirements: Nothing in this chapter shall exempt or in
any way relieve an industrial user from obtaining construction and operating
permits for pretreatment facilities from the IEPA pursuant to title 35:
environmental protection, subtitle C: water pollution, chapter 1: pollution
control board, part 309, subpart B of the state of Illinois rules and
regulations.
   (K)   Wastewater Discharge Permit Appeals: Any person including the
industrial user, may petition the city to reconsider the terms of a wastewater
discharge permit within sixty (60) days of its issuance.
      1.   Failure to submit a timely petition for review shall be deemed to be
a waiver of the administrative appeal.
      2.   In its petition, the appealing party must indicate the wastewater
discharge permit provisions objected to, the reasons for this objection, and
the alternative condition, if any, it seeks to place in the wastewater
discharge permit.
      3.   The effectiveness of the wastewater discharge permit shall not be
stayed pending the appeal.
      4.   If the city fails to act within sixty (60) days, a request for
reconsideration shall be deemed to be denied. Decisions not to reconsider a
wastewater discharge permit, not to issue a wastewater discharge permit, or not
to modify a wastewater discharge permit, shall be considered final
administrative action for purposes of judicial review.
      5.   Aggrieved parties seeking judicial review of the final
administrative wastewater discharge permit decision must do so by filing a
complaint with the appropriate court of proper jurisdiction and within the
appropriate statutes of limitations.
   (L)   Wastewater Discharge Permit Modification: The superintendent may
modify the wastewater discharge permit for good cause including, but not
limited to, the following:
      1.   To incorporate any new or revised federal, state or local
pretreatment standards or requirements.
      2.   To address significant alterations or additions to the industrial
user's operation, processes, or wastewater volume or character since the time
of wastewater discharge permit issuance.
      3.   A change in the POTW requires either a temporary or permanent
reduction or elimination of the authorized discharge.
      4.   Information indicating that the permitted discharge poses a threat
to the city's sanitary sewers, city's personnel, POTW or the receiving waters.
      5.   Violation of any terms or conditions of the wastewater discharge
permit.
      6.   Misrepresentations or failure to fully disclose all relevant facts
in the wastewater discharge permit application or in any required reporting.
      7.   Revision of or a grant of variance from categorical pretreatment
standards pursuant to 40 CFR 403.13.
      8.   To correct typographical or other errors in the wastewater discharge
permit.
The filing of a request by the permittee for a wastewater discharge permit
modification does not exempt any wastewater discharge permit condition.
   (M)   Wastewater Discharge Permit Transfer: Wastewater discharge permits may
be reassigned or transferred to a new owner and/or operator only if the
permittee gives at least thirty (30) days' advance notice to the superintendent
and the superintendent approves the wastewater discharge permit transfer. The
notice to the superintendent must include a written certification by the new
owner and/or operator which:
      1.   States that the new owner and/or operator has no immediate intent to
change the facility's operations and processes.
      2.   Identifies the specific date on which the transfer is to occur.
      3.   Acknowledges full responsibility for complying with the existing
wastewater discharge permit.
Failure to provide advance notice of a transfer renders the wastewater
discharge permit voidable on the date of the facility transfer.
   (N)   Change In Conditions: In the event the type, quality or volume of
wastewater from the property for which a discharge permit was previously
granted is expected to materially and substantially change as reasonably
determined by the permittee or KMU, the permittee shall give a thirty (30) day
notice in writing to KMU and shall make a new application to KMU prior to said
change, in the same manner and form as originally made, provided that
information previously submitted and unchanged need not be resubmitted by
permittee. No permittee shall materially and substantially change the type,
quality or volume of its wastewater beyond that allowed by its permit without
prior approval of KMU.
   (O)   Permits Duration: Permits shall be issued for a specified time period,
not to exceed five (5) years. The user shall apply for permit reissuance a
minimum of one hundred eighty (180) days prior to the expiration of the user's
existing permit. Within ninety (90) days of notification, the user shall apply,
on a form provided by the POTW, for reissuance of the permit. The terms and
conditions of the permit may be subject to modification by KMU during the term
of the permit as limitations or requirements identified in section
6-6-2 of this chapter are modified or as other just causes exist. The user
shall be informed of any proposed changes in his permit at least thirty (30)
days prior to the effective date of change. Any changes or new conditions in
the permit shall include a reasonable time schedule for compliance.
   (P)   Plans And Specifications: Detailed plans and specifications prepared
by an Illinois registered professional engineer of the pretreatment facility
proposed to be constructed shall be submitted to KMU for review and must be
acceptable to KMU before construction of the facility is commenced. The review
of such plans shall in no way relieve the user from the responsibility of
modifying its facility as necessary to comply with this chapter. Within a
reasonable time after the completion of the wastewater treatment facility, the
user shall furnish its operations and maintenance procedures to KMU for review.
   (Q)   Reporting Requirements For Permittee:
      1.   Baseline Monitoring Reports:
         (a)   Within either one hundred eighty (180) days after the effective
date of a categorical pretreatment standard, or the final administrative
decision on a category determination under 40 CFR 403.6(a)(4), whichever is
later, existing significant industrial users subject to such categorical
pretreatment standards, and currently discharging to or scheduled to discharge
to the POTW, shall be required to submit to KMU a report which contains the
information listed in subsection (Q)1(b) of this section. At least ninety (90)
days prior to commencement of their discharge, new sources, and sources that
become industrial users subsequent to the promulgation of an applicable
categorical standard, shall be required to submit to KMU a report which
contains the information listed in subsection (Q)1(b) of this section. A new
source shall also be required to report the method of pretreatment it intends
to use to meet applicable pretreatment standards. A new source shall also give
estimates of its anticipated flow and quantity of pollutants discharged.
         (b)   The industrial user shall submit the information required by
this section including:
            (1)   Identifying Information: The name and address of the facility
including the name of the operator and owners.
            (2)   Environmental Permits: A list of any environmental control
permits held by or for the facility.
            (3)   Description Of Operations: A brief description of the nature,
average rate of production, and standard industrial classifications of the
operation(s) carried out by such industrial user. This description should
include a schematic process diagram, which indicates points of discharge to the
POTW from the regulated processes.
            (4)   Flow Measurement: Information showing the measured average
daily and maximum daily flow, in gallons per day, to the POTW from regulated
process streams and other streams, as necessary, to allow use of the combined
waste stream formula set out in 40 CFR 403.6(e).
            (5)   Measurement Of Pollutants:
               A.   Identify the categorical pretreatment standards applicable
to each regulated process.
               B.   Submit the results of sampling and analysis identifying the
nature and concentration and/or mass, where required by the standard or by KMU,
or regulated pollutants in the discharge from each regulated process. Where
required, instantaneous daily maximum and long term average concentrations or
mass shall be reported. The sample shall be representative of daily operations
and shall be analyzed in accordance with procedures set out by KMU.
               C.   Sampling must be performed in accordance with procedures
set out by KMU.
            (6)   Certification: A statement reviewed by the industrial user's
authorized representative and certified by a qualified professional indicating
whether pretreatment standards are being met on a consistent basis, and, if
not, whether additional operation and maintenance (O&M) and/or additional
pretreatment is required to meet the pretreatment standards and requirements.
            (7)   Compliance Schedule: If additional pretreatment and/or O&M
will be required to meet the pretreatment standards; the shortest schedule by
which the industrial user will provide such additional pretreatment and/or O&M.
The completion date in this schedule shall be no later than the compliance date
established for the applicable pretreatment standard. A compliance schedule
pursuant to this schedule must meet the requirements set out in subsection (Q)9
of this section.
            (8)   Reports Signed And Certified: All baseline monitoring reports
must be signed and certified in accordance with subsection (G) of this section.
      2.   Reports On Compliance With Categorical Pretreatment Standard
Deadline: Within ninety (90) days following the date for final compliance with
applicable categorical pretreatment standards or, in the case of a new source,
within forty five (45) days following commencement of the introduction of
wastewater into the POTW, any user subject to pretreatment standards and
pretreatment requirements shall submit to the superintendent, on forms provided
by KMU, a report indicating the nature and concentration of all pollutants in
the discharge from the regulated process which are limited by pretreatment
standards and requirements and the average and maximum daily flow for these
process units in the user's facility which are limited by such pretreatment
standards and requirements. The report shall state whether the applicable
pretreatment standards and requirements are being met on a consistent basis
and, if not, what additional operation and maintenance and/or pretreatment is
necessary to bring the user into compliance with the applicable pretreatment
standards and pretreatment requirements. This statement shall be signed by an
authorized representative of the user, and certified to by a qualified
professional as defined in "general pretreatment regulations". All compliance
reports must be signed and certified in accordance with subsection (G) of this
section.
      3.   Periodic Compliance Reports:
         (a)   Any user subject to a pretreatment standard, after the
compliance date of such applicable pretreatment standards, or, in the case of a
new source, after commencement of the discharge into the POTW, shall submit to
the superintendent during the months of July and January, unless required more
frequently in the categorical pretreatment standard or by pollutants in the
effluent which are limited by such applicable pretreatment standards. In
addition, this report shall include a record of all measured or estimated
average and maximum daily flows for the reporting period. At the discretion of
the superintendent and in consideration of such factors as local high and low
flow rates, holidays, budget cycles, etc., the superintendent may agree to
alter the months during which the above reports are to be submitted.
            (1)   Exceptions: Exception to this reporting requirement would be
for any significant user who does not perform self-monitoring on their
discharge. Instead, KMU performs the service of monitoring their discharge at
least twice a year. A compliance report is only required if the significant
user is regulated by mass based limitations.
         (b)   The superintendent may impose mass limitations on users which
are using dilution to meet applicable pretreatment standards or pretreatment
requirements, or in other cases, where the imposition of mass limitations are
appropriate. In such cases, the report required by subsection (Q)3(a)(1) of
this section shall indicate the mass of pollutants regulated by pretreatment
standards in the effluent of the user. These reports shall contain the results
of sampling and analysis of the discharge, including the flow and the nature
and concentration, or production and mass where requested by the
superintendent, of pollutants contained therein which are limited by the
applicable categorical pretreatment standards. The frequency of monitoring
shall be prescribed in the applicable pretreatment standards. All analyses
shall be performed in accordance with the procedures established by the
administrator pursuant to section 304(h) of the act and contained in 40 CFR
part 136 and amendments thereto or with any other test procedures approved by
the superintendent. Sampling shall be performed in accordance with the
techniques approved by the superintendent. Where 40 CFR part 136 does not
include a sampling or analytical technique for the pollutant in question,
sampling and analysis shall be performed in accordance with the procedures set
forth in the EPA publication "Sampling And Analysis Procedures For Screening Of
Industrial Effluents For Priority Pollutants, April, 1977", analytical
procedures approved by the superintendent.
      4.   Late Filing Charge: Any user subject to the reporting requirements
set forth in the general pretreatment regulations 40 CFR 403 or its industrial
wastewater discharge permit as issued in accordance with subsection (I) of this
section must file their report within thirty (30) days after receipt of the
proper reporting form and sampling data from KMU. Extensions of this time
period may be granted by the superintendent upon written request by the user.
Failure to comply with this provision will result in a fine of one hundred
dollars ($100.00). Additional fines will be issued at thirty (30) day intervals
until the report is properly filed or a time extension is granted by the
superintendent. Repeated or continued failure to comply with this provision is
grounds for enforcement.
      5.   Report Of Potential Problems:
         (a)   In the case of any discharge including, but not limited to,
accidental discharges, discharges of a nonroutine, episodic nature, a
noncustomary batch discharge, or a slug load which may cause potential problems
for the POTW (including a violation of the prohibited discharge standards in
subsection
6-6-2(A) of this chapter), it is the responsibility of the industrial user to
immediately telephone and notify KMU of the incident. This notification shall
include the location of discharge, type of waste, concentration and volume, if
known, and corrective actions taken by the industrial user.
The following procedures shall be followed:
            (1)   Accidental discharges that contain pollutants that exceed the
permitted limit by ten (10) times shall be reported.
            (2)   Accidental discharges that may cause permanent damage to the
collection or treatment system shall be reported immediately. These discharges
include, but are not limited to, pollutants that may cause a fire or explosion
hazard in the collection system, pH of 2 or less or 12.5 or greater for longer
than ten (10) minutes, any pollutant that will increase the concentration in
the influent to the POTW enough to have a decrease in treatment efficiency.
            (3)   During normal business hours (7:00 A.M. to 4:00 P.M.), the
permittee shall notify KMU by telephone at 933-0446. At all times, KMU should
be notified by leaving a message with KMU's twenty four (24) hour dispatch at
933-0446 after four o'clock (4:00) P.M., Monday through Friday, or weekend and
holidays. The notification shall include the name of the person making the
call, the telephone number where said person can be reached, location of
discharge, date and time thereof, type of waste, including concentration, and
volume and corrective action taken.
            (4)   The party making the call shall be available by phone for a
minimum of fifteen (15) minutes after the notification is made. This is so that
a member of KMU may contact the industry representative for more information,
if necessary.
         (b)   Within five (5) days following such discharge, the industrial
user shall, unless waived by the superintendent, submit a detailed written
report describing the cause(s) of the discharge and the measure to be taken by
the industrial user to prevent similar future occurrences. Such notification
shall not relieve the industrial user of any expense, loss, damage, or other
liability which may be incurred as a result of damage to the POTW, natural
resources, or any other damage to person or property; nor shall such
notification relieve the industrial user of any fines, civil penalties, or
other liability which may be imposed by this chapter.
         (c)   Failure to notify KMU of potential problem discharges shall be
deemed a separate violation of this chapter.
         (d)   A notice shall be permanently posted on the industrial user's
bulletin board or other prominent place advising employees who to call in the
event of a discharge described in subsection (Q)5(a) of this section. Employers
shall ensure that all employees, who may cause or suffer such a discharge to
occur, are advised of the emergency notification procedure.
      6.   Reports From Nonsignificant Industrial Users: All industrial users
not subject to categorical pretreatment standards and not required to obtain a
wastewater discharge permit shall provide appropriate reports to KMU as the
superintendent may require.
      7.   Notice Of Violation/Repeat Sampling And Reporting: If sampling
performed by an industrial user indicates a violation, the industrial user must
notify the control authority within twenty four (24) hours of becoming aware of
the violation. The industrial user shall also repeat the sampling and analysis
and submit the results of the repeat analysis to KMU within thirty (30) days
after becoming aware of the violation. The industrial user is not required to
resample if KMU performs monitoring at the industrial user's at least once a
month, or if KMU performs sampling between the industrial user's initial
sampling and when the industrial user receives the results of this sampling.
      8.   Notification Of The Discharge Of Hazardous Waste:
         (a)   Any user who commences the discharge of hazardous waste shall
notify the POTW, the EPA regional waste management division director, and state
hazardous waste authorities, in writing, of any discharge into the POTW of a
substance which, if otherwise disposed of, would be a hazardous waste under 40
CFR part 261. Such notification must include the name of the hazardous waste as
set forth in 40 CFR part 261, the EPA hazardous waste number, the type of
discharge (continuous, batch, or other). If the user discharges more than one
hundred (100) kilograms of such waste per calendar month to the POTW, the
notification also shall contain the following information to the extent such
information is known and readily available to the user: An identification of
the hazardous constituents in the waste stream expected to be discharged during
the following twelve (12) months. All notifications must take place no later
than one hundred eighty (180) days after the discharge commences. Any
notification under this subsection (Q)8(a) need be submitted only once for each
hazardous waste discharged. However, notifications of changed conditions must
be submitted under subsection (Q)5 of this section. The notification
requirement in this subsection does not apply to pollutants already reported by
users subject to categorical pretreatment standards under the self-monitoring
requirements of subsections (Q)1, (Q)2 and (Q)3 of this section.
         (b)   Discharges are exempt from the requirements of subsection (Q)8
(a) of this section, during a calendar month in which they discharge no more
than fifteen (15) kilograms of hazardous wastes, unless the wastes are acute
hazardous wastes as specified in 40 CFR 261.30(d) and 261.33(e). Discharge of
more than fifteen (15) kilograms of nonacute hazardous wastes in a calendar
month, or of any quantity of acute hazardous wastes as specified in 40 CFR
261.30(d) and 261.33(e), requires a onetime notification. Subsequent months
during which the user discharges more than such quantities of any hazardous
waste do not require additional notification.
         (c)   In the case of any new regulations under section 3001 of the
RCRA identifying additional characteristics of hazardous waste or listing any
additional substance as a hazardous waste, the user must notify the
superintendent, the EPA regional waste management waste division director, the
state hazardous waste authorities of the discharge of such substance within
ninety (90) days of the effective date of such regulations.
         (d)   In the case of any notification made under this section, the
user shall certify that it has a program in place to reduce the volume and
toxicity of hazardous wastes generated to the degree it has determined to be
economically practical.
         (e)   This provision does not create a right to discharge any
substance not otherwise permitted to be discharged by this chapter, a permit
issued thereunder, or any applicable federal or state law.
      9.   Compliance Schedule Progress Report: The following condition shall
apply to the schedule required by this subsection (Q). The schedule shall
contain progress increments in the form of dates for the commencement and
completion of major events leading to the construction and operation of
additional pretreatment required for the user to meet the applicable
pretreatment standards (such events including hiring an engineer, completing
preliminary and final plans, executing contracts for major components,
commencing and completing construction, beginning and conducting route
operation). No increment referred to above shall exceed nine (9) months. The
industrial user shall submit a progress report to the superintendent no later
than fourteen (14) days following each date in the schedule and the final date
of compliance including, as a minimum, whether or not it complied with the
increment of progress, the reason for any delay, and if appropriate the steps
being taken by the industrial user to return to the established schedule. In no
event shall more than nine (9) months elapse between such progress reports to
the superintendent.
   (R)   Analytical Requirements: All pollutant analyses, including sampling
techniques, to be submitted as part of a wastewater discharge permit
application or report, shall be performed in accordance with the techniques
prescribed in 40 CFR part 136, unless otherwise specified in an applicable
categorical pretreatment standard. If 40 CFR part 136 does not contain sampling
or analytical techniques for the pollutant in question, sampling and analyses
must be performed in accordance with procedures approved by EPA.
      1.   Sample Collection:
         (a)   Except as indicated in subsection (R)1(b) of this section, the
user must collect wastewater samples using composite collection techniques. In
the event composite sampling is infeasible, the superintendent may authorize
the use of a minimum of four (4) grab samples where the user demonstrates that
this will provide a representative sample of the effluent discharged. In
addition, grab samples may be required to show compliance with instantaneous
discharge limits.
         (b)   Samples for oil and grease, temperature, pH, cyanide, phenol,
sulfides, and volatile organic compounds must be obtained using grab collection
techniques.
      2.   Timing: Written reports will be deemed to have been submitted on the
date postmarked. For reports which are not mailed, postage prepaid, into a mail
facility serviced by the United States postal service, the date of receipt of
the report shall govern.
      3.   Record Keeping: Users subject to the reporting requirements of this
chapter shall retain, and make available for inspection and copying, all
records of information obtained pursuant to any monitoring activities required
by this chapter and any additional records of information obtained pursuant to
monitoring activities undertaken by the user independent of such requirements.
Records shall include the date, exact place, method, and time of sampling, and
the name of the person(s) taking the samples; the dates analyses were
performed; who performed the analyses; the analytical techniques of methods
used; and the results of such analyses. These records shall remain available
for a period of at least three (3) years. This period shall be automatically
extended for the duration of any litigation concerning the user or the city or
where the user has been specifically notified of a longer retention period by
superintendent.
   (S)   Monitoring Facilities:
      1.   Provision And Location: KMU shall require to be provided and
operated at the user's own expense, monitoring facilities to allow inspection,
sampling and flow measurement of the building sewer and/or internal drainage
systems. Where required by KMU, additional control manholes or sampling
chambers shall be provided at the end of each industrial process within an
industrial user's facility suitable for the determination of compliance with
pretreatment standards. The monitoring facility should normally be situated on
the user's premises, but KMU may, when such a location would be impractical or
cause undue hardship on the user, allow the facility to be constructed in the
public street or sidewalk area and located so that it will not be obstructed by
landscaping, parked vehicles, or other activities of the user. However, before
a monitoring facility may be located in the public street or sidewalk area, the
user must seek and obtain permission from the village of Manteno.
      2.   Sampling Chamber:
         (a)   Whenever required by KMU, the owner of any property serviced by
a building sewer carrying nonresidential wastewater shall install a large
manhole or sampling chamber for each separate discharge in the building sewer
in accordance with plans and specifications approved by the superintendent,
installed and maintained at all times at user's expense, which shall have ample
room in each sampling chamber to permit KMU to take accurate composite samples
for analysis. The chamber shall be safely, easily and independently accessible
to authorized representatives of KMU.
         (b)   Each sampling chamber shall contain a flow measuring device
which is approved by KMU with a recording and totalizing register for
measurement of the liquid quantity; or at the discretion of KMU, the metered
water supply to the industrial plant may be used as the liquid quantity where
it is substantiated to the superintendent that the metered water supply and
waste quantities are approximately the same, or where a measurable adjustment
agreed to by KMU is made in the metered water supply to determine the liquid
waste quantity.
         (c)   When required, samples shall be taken every hour or half hour,
as determined by KMU and properly refrigerated and preserved in accordance with
"standard methods" as defined herein and shall be composed in proportion to the
flow for a representative twenty four (24) hour sample. Such sampling shall be
done as prescribed by KMU.
         (d)   The frequency for sampling, sampling chamber, metering device,
sampling methods and analyses of samples shall be subject, at any time, to
inspection and verification by KMU.
      3.   Monitoring Facilities: Each industrial user whose wastewater
discharge(s) has by sampling of wastewater or other means of inspection been
found to contain or have the potential to contain incompatible priority
pollutants in amounts or concentration which may cause interference with the
wastewater utility system process or operation, shall provide and maintain at
all times, a monitoring facility at each applicable building sewer discharge
which will allow for inspection, sampling and flow measurement of the discharge
to the POTW sewer line. Such monitoring facility shall be provided and
maintained by the user of each building sewer discharge, which contains or has
the potential to contain incompatible priority pollutants.
         (a)   The monitoring facilities shall be located on the industrial
user's premises, provided that if such location would be impractical or cause
undue hardship to the industrial user, KMU may allow the facility to be
constructed in a public street or sidewalk area with the expressed permission
of the village of Manteno. Said facility shall be located so that samples may
be taken safety and easily and shall not be obstructed by landscaping, parked
vehicles or other activities of the industrial user.
         (b)   Monitoring facilities located in public streets or sidewalks
shall not obstruct the flow of traffic. All monitoring facilities must meet all
local and KMU construction codes and must be approved by KMU and the village of
Manteno prior to construction.
         (c)   There shall be ample room in and near such monitoring facilities
to allow accurate sampling and monitoring equipment to be installed and to
prepare samples for analysis. Such facilities shall be accessible to authorized
representatives of KMU at all times upon presentation of suitable
identification provided that authorized representatives of KMU personnel shall
under exceptional circumstances have access upon presentation of suitable
identification at any time discharges are occurring.
         (d)   The entrance or manhole to such monitoring facilities shall be
secured by a breakaway key type locking device installed by KMU. KMU shall have
the only key to said locking device and have complete control of access to the
monitoring facility. When required during the weekday hours of seven o'clock
(7:00) A.M. to four o'clock (4:00) P.M. by an industrial user, KMU personnel
shall be available to open the monitoring facilities on ninety (90) minute
notice upon good cause shown. Alternative means of adequately securing such
monitoring facilities may be approved by the superintendent. This determination
shall be made when requested by the industrial user.
         (e)   The monitoring facilities shall contain the following equipment
installed in a permanently fixed position by the industrial user:
            (1)   A flow measuring device incorporated into the invert with
approval by KMU.
            (2)   A source of electrical power to the monitoring facilities of
sufficient voltage and amperage to operate all equipment in the sampling
chamber. An appropriate device shall be installed by user to indicate a power
failure and length of time of such failure. Such device shall be specified by
KMU and furnished by user.
         (f)   Automatic composite sampling devices provided by KMU shall be
installed and operated in the monitoring facility on a twenty four (24) hour
basis seven (7) days per week. Samples will be collected by KMU personnel five
(5) days per week and analyzed on a routine basis. KMU will provide a split of
each sample taken from said monitoring facility upon written request of the
industrial user.
      4.   Inspection And Sampling: KMU may inspect the facilities of any user
to ascertain compliance with this chapter. Persons or occupants of the premises
where a discharge source or treatment system is located or in which records are
kept shall allow KMU or its representative ready access upon presentation of
credentials at all reasonable times to all parts of the premises for the
purposes of inspection, sampling, examination and photocopying of records
required to be kept by this chapter or in the performance of any of their
duties.
   KMU, IEPA, USEPA shall have the right to set up on the user's property such
devices as are necessary to conduct sampling inspections, compliance monitoring
and/or metering operations. Where a user has security measures in force which
would require proper identification and clearance before entry into their
premises, the user shall make necessary arrangements with its security guards
so that upon presentation of suitable identification, personnel from KMU, IEPA,
USEPA, will be permitted to enter, without delay, for the purposes of
performing its specific responsibilities. Such arrangements shall be made by
users with their security guards within thirty (30) days of the passage of this
chapter.
   While performing the necessary work on private properties referred to in
this chapter, the duly authorized KMU personnel shall observe all safety rules
applicable to the premises established by the company, and the company shall be
held harmless for injury or death to KMU and KMU indemnify the user against
loss or damage to its property by KMU employees and against liability claims
and demands for personal injury or property damage asserted against the company
and growing out of the gauging and sampling operation, except as such may be
caused by negligence for failure of the company to maintain safe conditions.
   KMU and industrial users shall maintain records of all information resulting
from any monitoring activities required by this chapter and shall include:
         (a)   The date, exact place, method and time of sampling and the names
of the person or persons taking the samples;
         (b)   The dates analyses were performed;
         (c)   Who performed the analyses;
         (d)   The analytical techniques/methods used; and
         (e)   The results of such analyses.
   KMU and industrial users shall maintain such records for a minimum of three
(3) years. This period of retention shall be extended during the course of any
unresolved litigation regarding the discharge of pollutants by the industrial
user or operation of KMU's pretreatment program or when requested by the
regional administrator or the director of IEPA.
      5.   Right Of Entry; Inspection And Sampling: The superintendent shall
have the right to enter the premises of any user to determine whether the user
is complying with all requirements of this chapter and any wastewater discharge
permit or order issued hereunder. Users shall allow the superintendent ready
access to all parts of the premises for the purposes of inspection, sampling,
records examination and copying, and the performance of any additional duties.
         (a)   Where the user has security measures in force which require
proper identification and clearance before entry into its premises, the user
shall make necessary arrangements with its security guards so that, upon
presentation of suitable identification, the superintendent will be permitted
to enter without delay for the purposes of performing specific
responsibilities.
         (b)   The superintendent shall have the right to set up on the user's
property, or require installation of, such devices as necessary to conduct
sampling and/or metering of the user's operations.
         (c)   The superintendent may require the user to install monitoring
equipment as necessary. The facility's sampling and monitoring equipment shall
be maintained at all times in a safe and proper operating condition by the user
at its own expense. All devices used to measure wastewater flow and quality
shall be calibrated annually to ensure their accuracy.
         (d)   Any temporary or permanent obstructions to safe and easy access
to the facility to be inspected and/or sampled shall be promptly removed by the
user at the written or verbal request of the superintendent and shall not be
replaced. The costs of clearing such access shall be borne by the user.
         (e)   Unreasonable delays in allowing the superintendent access to the
user's premises shall be a violation of this chapter.
      6.   Search Warrants: If the superintendent has been refused access to a
building, structure, or property, or any part thereof, and is able to
demonstrate probable cause to believe that there may be a violation of this
chapter, or that there is a need to inspect and/or sample as part of a routine
inspection and sampling program of the city designed to verify compliance with
this chapter or any permit or order issued hereunder, or to protect the overall
public health, safety and welfare of the community, then the superintendent may
seek issuance of a search warrant from the Kankakee County court.
      7.   Pretreatment: Users shall provide necessary wastewater treatment as
required to comply with this chapter and shall achieve compliance with all
applicable pretreatment standards within the time limitations as specified by
regulations, statutes, and ordinances. Any facility required to pretreat
wastewater to a level acceptable to KMU shall be provided, operated and
maintained at the user's expense. Detailed plans showing the pretreatment
facilities and operating procedures shall be submitted to KMU for review, and
shall be acceptable to KMU and IEPA before construction of the facility. The
review of such plans and operating procedures will in no way relieve the user
from the responsibility of modifying the facility as necessary to produce an
effluent acceptable to KMU under the provisions of this chapter. The user shall
obtain all necessary construction and operating permits from IEPA. Such
pretreatment facilities shall be under the control and direction of an IEPA
certified industrial wastewater treatment plant operator. Within a reasonable
time after the completion of the pretreatment facility, the user shall furnish
its operations and maintenance procedures to KMU for review. Any subsequent
changes in the pretreatment facilities or method of operation shall be reported
to and be acceptable to KMU prior to the user's initiation of the changes.
   All records relating to compliance with categorical pretreatment standards
shall be made available to the approval authority upon request.
      8.   Confidential Information: Information and data relating to an
industrial user obtained from reports, surveys, questionnaires, permit
applications, permits and monitoring programs and from inspections shall be
available to the public or other governmental agencies without restriction
unless the user specifically requests and is able to demonstrate to the
satisfaction of the superintendent that the release of such information would
divulge information, processes or methods of production entitled to protection
as trade secrets of the user under applicable state law. Copies of information
from KMU files shall be provided to persons so requesting upon payment of a
copy fee established by KMU.
   When requested by the person furnishing a report, and until such time as the
information is determined not to be confidential by agreement between KMU and
the user, the portions of a report which might disclose trade secrets or secret
processes shall not be made available for inspection by the public, but shall
be made available upon written request to governmental agencies for uses
related to this chapter, the national pollutant discharge elimination system
(NPDES) permit, and the pretreatment programs, provided, however, that such
portions of a report shall be available for use by the state or any state
agency in judicial review or enforcement proceedings involving the person
furnishing the report. Information and data provided to KMU which is effluent
data shall be available to the public without restriction.
   Information accepted by KMU as confidential, shall not be transmitted to any
governmental agency by KMU until and unless a thirty (30) day notification is
given to the user.
   KMU shall implement measures to prevent the negligent release of
confidential information; however, neither KMU, the village of Manteno nor
their employees shall be held legally responsible for release of information if
they have acted in good faith.
      9.   Publication Of Users In Significant Noncompliance: The
superintendent shall publish annually, in the largest daily newspaper published
in the municipality where the POTW is located, a list of users which, during
the previous twelve (12) months, were in significant noncompliance with
applicable pretreatment standards and requirements. The term "significant
noncompliance" shall mean:
         (a)   "Chronic violations of wastewater discharge limits", defined
herein as those in which sixty six percent (66%) or more of wastewater
measurements taken during a six (6) month period exceed the daily maximum limit
or average limit for the same pollutant parameter by any amount;
         (b)   "Technical review criteria (TRC) violations", defined herein as
those in which thirty three percent (33%) or more of wastewater measurements
taken for each pollutant parameter during a six (6) month period equal or
exceed the product of the daily maximum limit or the average limit multiplied
by the applicable criteria (1.4 for BOD, TSS, fats, oils and grease, and 1.2
for all other pollutants except pH);
         (c)   Any other discharge violation that the superintendent believes
has caused, along or in combination with other discharges, interference or
pass-through, including endangering the health of POTW personnel or the general
public;
         (d)   Any discharge of pollutants that has caused imminent
endangerment to the public or to the environment, or has resulted in the
superintendent's exercise of its emergency authority to halt or prevent such a
discharge;
         (e)   Failure to meet, within ninety (90) days of the scheduled date,
a compliance schedule milestone contained in a wastewater discharge permit or
enforcement order for starting construction, completing construction, or
attaining final compliance;
         (f)   Failure to provide within thirty (30) days after the due date,
any required reports, including baseline monitoring reports, reports on
compliance with categorical pretreatment standard deadlines, periodic self-
monitoring reports, and reports on compliance with compliance schedules;
         (g)   Failure to accurately report noncompliance; or
         (h)   Any other violation(s) which the superintendent determines will
adversely affect the operation or implementation of the local pretreatment
program.
      10.   Sludges Generated: Sludges, floats, skimmings, etc., generated by
an industrial or commercial pretreatment system shall not be placed into the
POTW. Such sludges shall be contained, transported, and disposed of by haulers
in accordance with all federal, state, and local regulations.
   In special cases where such sludges may be compatible with the POTW
treatment system, the superintendent may accept, for a charge, a particular
sludge to be placed into the POTW in a particular method.
   Sludges shall only be delivered between seven o'clock (7:00) A.M. and three
thirty o'clock (3:30) P.M.
   A representative sample of each load of sludge shall be taken by POTW
personnel. The sample shall be split and a portion of it shall be given to the
industrial user if so requested, in writing. The sample shall be analyzed for
compatible pollutants in accordance with standard methods. The superintendent
may alter the frequency of sampling and the extent of the analysis if the
characteristics of sludge from a particular user are found to be consistent and
not variable.
   The POTW reserves the right to discontinue acceptance of sludges at any
time, for any duration, without notice. (Ord. 06-70, 2-20-2007)
6-6-5: ADMINISTRATIVE ENFORCEMENT REMEDIES:
The city of Kankakee shall be the entity with charge of enforcing this chapter
pursuant to its home rule powers and jurisdiction. The provisions of this
chapter are in repetition of those passed by the city of Kankakee, pursuant to
its home rule powers, in its utility ordinance. The provisions in the city's
utility ordinance are made applicable to users within the village of Manteno by
and through this chapter. Where any provision in this chapter is found to be
legislation not within the governmental powers or affairs of the village of
Manteno or preempted, the provisions of the city's utility ordinance shall be
applicable to users in the village of Manteno pursuant to its home rule powers
and jurisdiction.
   (A)   Notification Of Violation: When the superintendent finds that a user
has violated, or continues to violate, any provision of this chapter, a
wastewater discharge permit or order issued hereunder, or any other
pretreatment standard or requirement, the superintendent may serve upon that
user a written notice of violation. Within thirty (30) days of the receipt of
this notice, the user shall submit an explanation of the violation and a plan
for the satisfactory correction and prevention thereof, to include specific
required actions, to the superintendent. Submission of this plan in no way
relieves the user of liability for any violations occurring before or after
receipt of the notice of violation. Nothing in this section shall limit the
authority of the superintendent to take any action, including emergency actions
or any other enforcement action, without first issuing a notice of violation.
   (B)   Administrative Proceedings: Whenever the superintendent determines
that wastewater is being or has been discharged into the POTW, and when, in the
opinion of the superintendent, such discharge violates this chapter, the
superintendent shall by conference, conciliation or persuasion, make a
reasonable effort to eliminate or remedy such violation. If these efforts have
been unsuccessful, the superintendent shall use an administrative enforcement
remedy.
   (C)   Consent Orders: The superintendent may enter into consent orders,
assurances of voluntary compliance, or other similar documents establishing an
agreement with any user responsible for noncompliance. Such documents will
include specific action to be taken by the user to correct the noncompliance
within a time period specified by the document. Such document shall have the
same force and effect as the administrative orders issued pursuant to sections
of this chapter and shall be judicially enforceable.
   (D)   Show Cause Hearing:
      1.   Notice Of Hearing: The superintendent may request a show cause
hearing. The city through its city council may order any user who causes or
allows an unauthorized discharge to enter the POTW to show cause why the
proposed enforcement action should not be taken.
   The city council may itself order the hearing or may designate any of its
members or officers or employees to order the hearing. A notice shall be served
on the user specifying the time and place of a hearing to be held by the city
council or its designated person, the reasons why the action is to be taken,
the proposed enforcement action, and directing the user to show cause before
the city council or its designated person why the proposed enforcement action
should not be taken. The notice of hearing shall be served personally or be
mailed by registered or certified mail (return receipt requested) at least ten
(10) days before the hearing. The notice of the hearing may be served on any
agent or officer of a corporation. A show cause hearing shall not be a bar
against, or prerequisite for, taking any other action against the user.
      2.   Hearing Officials: The city council or its designated person may
itself conduct the hearing and take the evidence to:
         (a)   Issue, in the name of the city council, notices of hearing,
request the attendance and testimony of witnesses, and request the production
of evidence relevant to any matter involved in such hearings;
         (b)   Take the evidence;
         (c)   Transmit a report of the evidence and hearing, including
transcripts and other evidence, together with recommendations to the city
council for action thereon.
      3.   Transcripts: At any hearing held pursuant to this chapter, testimony
taken must be under oath and recorded stenographically. The transcript, so
recorded, will be made available to any member of the public or any party to
the hearing upon payment of the usual charges thereof.
      4.   Issuance Of Orders: After the city council or its designated person
has reviewed the evidence, it may issue an order to the user responsible for
the discharge directing either: a) that the discharge permit be revoked and the
service be disconnected or b) that following a specified time the permit shall
be revoked and sewer service discontinued unless adequate treatment facilities,
devices or other related appurtenances have been installed and operated
properly to comply with the discharge permit or c) direct the user to cease the
unauthorized discharge effective after a specified period of time or d) that
such other relief as deemed necessary by the POTW to abate the discharge be
granted. Further orders and directives as are necessary may be issued.
   (E)   Compliance Orders: When the superintendent finds that a user has
violated, or continues to violate, any provision of this chapter, a wastewater
discharge permit or order issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard
or requirement, the superintendent may issue an order to the user responsible
for the discharge directing that the user come into compliance within a
specified time. If the user does not come into compliance within the time
provided, sewer service may be discontinued unless adequate treatment
facilities, devices, or other related appurtenances are installed and properly
operated. Compliance orders also may contain other requirements to address the
noncompliance, including self-monitoring and management practices designed to
minimize the amount of pollutants discharged to the sewer. A compliance order
may not extend the deadline for compliance established for a pretreatment
standard or requirement, nor does a compliance order relieve the user of
liability for any violation, including any continuing violation. Issuance of a
compliance order shall not be a bar against, or a prerequisite for, taking any
other action against the user.
   (F)   Emergency Suspensions: The superintendent may immediately suspend a
user's discharge, after informal notice to the user, whenever such suspension
is necessary to stop an actual or threatened discharge which reasonably appears
to present or cause an imminent or substantial endangerment to the health or
welfare of persons. The superintendent may also immediately suspend a user's
discharge, after notice and opportunity to respond, that threatens to interfere
with the operation of the POTW, or which presents, or may present, an
endangerment to the environment.
      1.   Any user notified of a suspension of its discharge shall immediately
stop or eliminate its contribution. In the event a user fails to immediately
comply voluntarily with the suspension order, the superintendent may take such
steps as deemed necessary, including immediate severance of the sewer
connection, to prevent or minimize damage to the POTW, its receiving stream, or
endangerment to any individuals. The superintendent may allow the user to
recommence its discharge when the user has demonstrated to the satisfaction of
the superintendent that the period of endangerment has passed, unless the
termination proceedings in subsection (I) of this section are initiated against
the user.
      2.   A user that is responsible, in whole or in part, for any discharge
presenting imminent endangerment, shall submit a detailed written statement,
describing the causes of the harmful contribution and the measures taken to
prevent any future occurrence, to the superintendent prior to the date of any
show cause or termination hearing under subsection (D) or (I) of this section.
   (G)   Cease And Desist Orders: When the superintendent finds that a user has
violated, or continues to violate, any provision of this chapter, a wastewater
discharge permit or order issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard
requirement, or that the user's past violations are likely to reoccur, the
superintendent may issue an order to the user directing it to cease and desist
all such violations and directing the user to:
      1.   Immediately comply with all requirements; and
      2.   Take such appropriate remedial or preventive action as may be needed
to properly address a continuing or threatened violation, including halting
operations and/or terminating the discharge.
   Issuance of a cease and desist order shall not be a bar against, or a
prerequisite for, taking any other action against the user.
   (H)   Administrative Fines:
      1.   When the superintendent finds that a user has violated, or continues
to violate any provision of this chapter, a wastewater discharge permit or
order issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard or requirement, the
superintendent may fine such user in an amount not to exceed one thousand
dollars ($1,000.00) a day. Such fines shall be assessed on a per violation, per
day basis. In the case of monthly or other long term average discharge limits,
fines shall be assessed for each day during the period of violations.
      2.   Unpaid charges, fines, and penalties shall, after thirty (30)
calendar days, be assessed an additional penalty of ten percent (10%) of the
unpaid balance and interest shall accrue thereafter at a rate of ten percent
(10%) per month. A lien against the user's property will be sought for unpaid
charges, fines, and penalties.
      3.   Users desiring to dispute such fines must file a written request for
the superintendent to reconsider the fine along with full payment of the fine
amount within ten (10) days of being notified of the fine. Where a request has
merit, the superintendent may convene a hearing on the matter. In the event the
user's appeal is successful, the payment, together with any interest accruing
thereto, shall be returned to the user. The superintendent may add the costs of
preparing administrative enforcement actions, such as notices and orders, to
the fine.
      4.   Issuance of an administrative fine shall not be a bar against, or a
prerequisite for, taking any other action against the user.
   (I)   Revocation Of Wastewater Discharge Permit: Any user who violates this
chapter, or applicable state and federal regulations, or the following, is
subject to having his permit revoked in accordance with the procedures of this
section:
      1.   Failure of a user to factually report the wastewater constituents
and characteristics of its discharge as determined by the user's or KMU's
analysis;
      2.   Failure of the user to report significant changes in operations, or
wastewater constituents and characteristics;
      3.   Refusal of reasonable access to the user's premises by USEPA, IEPA,
or KMU's representatives for the purpose of inspection and monitoring;
      4.   Tampering with, disrupting, or destroying KMU equipment as
determined by KMU, by a preponderance of evidence which determination shall be
final;
      5.   Failure to report an accidental discharge of a pollutant in a
reportable quantity;
      6.   Failure to report an upset of the user's pretreatment facilities;
      7.   Violation of the conditions of its permit;
      8.   Misrepresentation or failure to fully disclose all relevant facts in
the wastewater discharge permit application;
      9.   Falsifying self-monitoring reports;
      10.   Failure to meet effluent limitations;
      11.   Failure to pay fines;
      12.   Failure to pay sewer charges;
      13.   Failure to meet compliance schedules; or
      14.   Failure to complete a wastewater survey, or any other required
report.
   (J)   Harmful Contributions: Notwithstanding any other section of this
chapter, KMU may immediately suspend the wastewater treatment service and/or a
wastewater discharge permit when such suspension is necessary, in the opinion
of KMU, in order to stop an actual or threatened discharge which reasonably
appears to present an imminent or substantial endangerment to the health or
welfare of persons, or which presents or may present an endangerment to the
environment or which threatens to interfere with the operation of the POTW or
causes the POTW to violate any condition of its NPDES permit.
   Any user notified of a suspension of the wastewater treatment service and/or
the wastewater discharge permit shall immediately stop or eliminate the
contribution. In the event of a failure of the user to comply voluntarily with
the suspension order, KMU shall take such steps as deemed necessary, including
immediate severance of the sewer connection, to prevent or minimize damage to
the POTW system or endangerment to any individual. KMU may reinstate the
wastewater discharge permit and/or the wastewater treatment service upon proof
of the elimination of the noncomplying discharge. A detailed written statement
submitted by the user describing the causes of the harmful contribution and the
measures taken to prevent any future occurrence shall be submitted to KMU
within fifteen (15) days of the date of the occurrence.
   (K)   Legal Action: Notwithstanding any other sections of this chapter, if
any user discharges sewage, industrial wastes or other wastes into the sanitary
sewers contrary to the provisions of this chapter, federal or state
pretreatment requirements, or any order of KMU, the corporation council may
commence an action for appropriate legal and/or equitable relief in the
Kankakee County circuit court.
   (L)   Variances:
      1.   Authority: To the extent consistent with the applicable provisions
of the act and the Illinois environmental protection act 1 , KMU may grant
individual variances beyond the limitations prescribed in subsection
6-6-2(D), "Specific Pollutant Limitations", of this chapter, provided that the
petitioner has demonstrated that the failure to receive a variance would work
an arbitrary or unreasonable hardship on the petitioner and provided further
that petitioner has demonstrated that it will be in compliance by the end of
the variance period granted. The burden of showing such arbitrary and
unreasonable hardship shall be on petitioner who shall, before such variance is
granted, show such arbitrary and unreasonable hardship to KMU by clear and
convincing proof. In no case shall KMU grant any variance whose terms might or
could cause "interference" or "pass-through" as such terms are defined in this
chapter.
      2.   Conditions And Duration: In granting a variance, KMU may impose such
conditions, exceptions, time limitations, duration and other limitations as the
policies of this chapter, the Illinois environmental protection act and the act
may require, including limitations that will assure that the petitioner will be
in compliance by the end of the variance period. Any variance granted by KMU
shall not exceed two (2) years and shall be granted upon the condition that the
person who receives such variance shall make such periodic progress twice for
up to two (2) years each time by affirmative action of KMU but only if
satisfactory progress has been shown. However, no petitioner shall receive any
variances, including any extension, exceeding a combined total of five (5)
years for any specific pollutant.
      3.   Petition And Hearing: Any person seeking a variance shall do so by
filing a petition for variance with the superintendent on forms provided by
KMU. Within twenty one (21) days of receipt of the petition, notice of the
petition shall be published in "The Daily Journal".
KMU shall specify information required to be submitted by the petitioner. To
enable KMU to rule on the petition for variance, the following information,
where applicable, shall be included in the petition:
         (a)   A clear and complete statement of the precise extent of relief
sought, including specific identification of the particular provisions of this
chapter from which the variance is sought;
         (b)   Data describing the nature and extent of the present failure to
meet the numerical standards or particular provisions from which the variance
is sought and a factual statement why compliance with this chapter was not or
cannot be achieved by the required compliance date;
         (c)   A detailed description of the existing and proposed equipment or
proposed method of control to be undertaken to achieve full compliance with
this chapter, including a time schedule for the implementation of all phases of
the control program from initiation of design to program completion and
estimated costs involved for each phase and the total cost to achieve
compliance;
         (d)   Past efforts to achieve compliance including costs incurred,
results achieved and permit status;
         (e)   A discussion of the availability of alternate methods of
compliance, the extent that such methods were studies, and the comparative
factors leading to the selection of the control program proposed to achieve
compliance;
         (f)   A concise factual statement of the reasons the petitioner
believes that compliance with the particular provisions of this chapter would
impose an arbitrary or unreasonable hardship; and
         (g)   Such other things as are required by KMU.
      4.   Time Limit For Action By KMU: The superintendent shall investigate
such petition, consider the views of persons who might be adversely affected by
the granting of a variance and make a report to KMU with a recommendation as to
the disposition of the petition. If KMU in its discretion concludes that a
hearing would be advisable or if KMU or any other person files a written
objection to the granting of such variance within fifteen (15) days from the
date of publication of the petition in "The Daily Journal", then a hearing
shall be held under the provisions of subsection (D) of this section. The
burden of proof shall be on the petitioner.
      5.   Violation: If the limits of a variance are exceeded or if any terms
of a variance are violated by the person granted a variance, a violation of
this chapter is deemed to have occurred, and the variance may be revoked on
thirty (30) days' notice.
   (M)   Appeal Procedures: In the event a user is dissatisfied with permit
conditions, enforcement procedures, or sampling procedures established or used
by KMU as it applies to his discharge to the sanitary sewer, except as such
dissatisfaction relates to proceeding under subsections (A) through (J) of this
section, that user shall seek relief through the use of the following
administrative procedures. The procedure outlined herein is voluntary, and
shall not act as a bar or condition precedent to KMU's use of any remedies
provided herein. So that problems or disputes may be resolved on the lowest
practicable level, the procedures outlined below shall be followed in order.
      1.   Initial Review Of Complaint: User shall contact KMU with its
complaint or questions, and shall be referred to the appropriate department for
initial screening; where the problem is routine in nature or requires only
explanation, no further action will be taken.
      2.   Manager's Review: Where a user is not satisfied with the response
given by the appropriate department, the complaint or question shall be reduced
to writing and referred to management personnel to be assigned by the
superintendent for review. The management personnel so designated shall review
the file and consult with the user in an effort to resolve the problem. If the
matter can be resolved to the user's satisfaction at this level, no further
action will be required.
      3.   Superintendent's Review: If the review and discussion between the
management personnel and the user do not resolve the matter, a report on the
complaint, together with the manager's recommendations, will be forwarded to
the superintendent for his consideration and decision. If the decision of the
superintendent resolves the matter, no further action will be required.
In the case of a user protesting a permit condition(s), the user must file a
petition for an appeal no later than ten (10) days after the date of issuance
of the permit. If the appeal is timely, an informal hearing with the
superintendent shall be scheduled. The user shall be given an opportunity to
present his case with evidence and/or expert opinion as to why the conditions
of his permit should be changed. The superintendent shall issue a written
decision on the appeal. If the superintendent's decision resolves the matter,
no further action will be required.
      4.   City Council's Review: If the findings and actions by the
superintendent do not satisfy the user, the entire file, together with
recommendations from the superintendent, shall be given to the city council,
which, after review of the file and recommendations of the superintendent,
shall meet with the user and review the complaint. Following the review of the
file and discussion with the user, the city council will make a final decision
on the matter.
In the case of a user protesting the superintendent's decision of an appeal of
a permit condition(s), the user must file a second petition for appeal no later
than ten (10) days after the date of receipt of the superintendent's written
decision. The city council will schedule a formal hearing after reviewing the
file and recommendations of the superintendent. The user shall be given an
opportunity to present his case with evidence and/or expert opinion as to why
the conditions of his permit should be changed. The city council shall issue a
formal decision which shall be published in the official minutes of the
hearing.
   (N)   Upsets:
      1.   As A Defense For Noncompliance: An upset shall constitute an
affirmative defense to an action brought for noncompliance with categorical
pretreatment standards if the industrial user who wishes to establish the
affirmative defense of upset shall demonstrate, through properly signed,
contemporaneous operating logs, or other relevant evidence that:
         (a)   An upset occurred and the industrial user can identify the
specific cause(s) of the upset;
         (b)   The facility was at the time being operated in a prudent and
workmanlike manner and in compliance with applicable operation and maintenance
procedures;
         (c)   The industrial user has submitted the following information to
KMU within twenty four (24) hours of becoming aware of the upset (if this
information is provided orally, a written submission must be provided within 5
days):
            (1)   A description of the indirect discharge and cause of
noncompliance;
            (2)   The period of noncompliance, including exact dates and times
or, if not corrected, the anticipated time the noncompliance is expected to
continue.
            (3)   Steps being taken or planned to reduce, eliminate and prevent
recurrence of the noncompliance.
      2.   Burden Of Proof: In any enforcement proceeding the industrial user
seeking to establish the occurrence of an upset shall have the burden of proof.
      3.   User Responsibility In Case Of Upset: The industrial user shall
control production of all discharges to the extent necessary to maintain
compliance with all applicable regulations upon reduction, loss, or failure of
its treatment facility until the facility is restored or an alternative method
of treatment is provided. This requirement applies in the situation where,
among other things, the primary source of power of the treatment facility is
reduced, lost or fails. (Ord. 06-70, 2-20-2007)
 
Notes
1 1. 425 ILCS 5/1 et seq.
6-6-6: PENALTIES AND COSTS:
   (A)   Civil Penalties: Any user who is found to have violated an order of
the city council or who has failed to comply with any provision of this chapter
or the city of Kankakee's utility ordinance, and orders, rules, regulations and
permits issued here or there under, shall be fined by the city of Kankakee in
an amount not to exceed one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) for each violation in
accordance with the terms and provisions of 65 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/1-
2-1 et seq. Each day on which a violation shall occur or continue shall be
deemed a separate and distinct offense and a separate offense shall be deemed
to have occurred for each constituent listed in subsections
6-6-2(A) and (D) of this chapter found to exceed the limits established in
those subsections during any such day. In addition to the penalties provided
herein, KMU may recover reasonable attorney fees, court costs, court reporter
fees and other expenses of litigation by appropriate suit at law against the
person found to have violated this chapter or the orders, rules, regulations,
and permits issued hereunder. In default of payment of such forfeiture and
costs, said violator shall be imprisoned for a period not to exceed six (6)
months.
   (B)   Injunctive Relief: In addition to the fine levied upon conviction of a
violator, the city council may, where the circumstances of the particular case
so dictate, direct the corporation council to seek injunctive relief to
prohibit the user from discharging into the sanitary sewer system, to restrain
violations of this chapter or to provide such affirmative relief as may be
appropriate.
   (C)   Costs Of Damage: Any user violating any of the provisions of this
chapter or who has a discharge which causes a deposit, obstruction, damage or
other impairment to the sanitary sewers shall become liable to KMU for any
expense, loss, or damage caused by the violation or discharge. KMU may add to
the user's charges and fees the cost assessed for any cleaning, repair, or
replacement work caused by the violation or discharge. Any refusal to pay the
assessed costs shall constitute a violation of this chapter.
   (D)   Revocation Of Sewer Service:
      1.   Conditions For Revocation: Any user who violates this chapter, its
permit, the Illinois environmental protection act or the federal act, or
regulations promulgated under either act, or any of the following, is subject
to having its permit revoked in accordance with the procedures of this section:
         (a)   Failure of a user to factually report the wastewater
constituents and characteristics of its discharge as determined by the user's
or KMU's analysis;
         (b)   Failure of the user to report significant changes in process
activity or wastewater constituents and characteristics;
         (c)   Refusal of reasonable access to the user's premises by KMU
representatives for the purpose of inspection or monitoring; or
         (d)   Tampering with, disrupting, or destroying KMU equipment;
         (e)   Failure to report an accidental discharge of a pollutant;
         (f)   Failure to report an upset of user's treatment facilities;
         (g)   Violations of conditions of the permit;
         (h)   Misrepresentation or failure to fully disclose all relevant
facts in the wastewater discharge permit application;
         (i)   Falsifying self-monitoring reports;
         (j)   Failure to meet effluent limitations;
         (k)   Failure to pay fines;
         (l)   Failure to pay sewer charges;
         (m)   Failure to meet compliance schedules;
         (n)   Failure to complete a wastewater survey, or any other required
reports.
      2.   Procedures For Revocation:
         (a)   The superintendent may order any user who causes or allows any
action, which is subject to revocation under subsection (D)1 of this section to
show cause before the city council why its permit should not be revoked. A
notice shall be served on the user specifying the time and place of a hearing
to be held by the city council regarding the violation, the reasons why the
action is to be taken, the proposed action, and directing the user to show
cause before the city council why its permit should not be revoked. The notice
of the hearing shall be served personally or by registered or certified mail,
return receipt requested, at least ten (10) days before the hearing. Service
may be made on any agent or officer of a corporation.
         (b)   The city council may itself conduct the hearing and take the
evidence, or may designate any of its members or its attorney to:
            (1)   Issue in the name of the city council notices of hearings
requesting the attendance and testimony of witnesses and the production of
evidence relevant to any matter involved in such hearing;
            (2)   Take the evidence;
            (3)   Transmit a report of the evidence and hearing, including
transcripts and other evidence together with recommendations to the city
council for action thereon.
         (c)   At any hearing held pursuant to this chapter, testimony taken
must be under oath and recorded stenographically. The transcript, so recorded,
will be made available to any member of the public or any party to the hearing
upon payment of the usual copying charges therefor.
         (d)   After the city council has reviewed the evidence, it may issue
an order to the user responsible for the discharge directing either:
            (1)   That the discharge permit be revoked and the service be
disconnected;
            (2)   That following a specified time the permit shall be revoked
and sewer service discontinued unless adequate treatment facilities, devices or
other related appurtenances have been installed and operated properly to comply
with the discharge permit;
            (3)   Direct the user to cease the unauthorized discharge effective
after a specified period of time;
            (4)   That such other relief as deemed necessary by the city
council to abate the discharge be granted. Further orders and directives as are
necessary may be issued.
         (e)   Following an order of revocation, the user shall cease
discharging to the city. Failure to do so shall be evidence of continuing harm
to the sanitary sewers and provide grounds for the granting of injunctive
relief or temporary restraining orders.
   (E)   Other Remedies: The remedies hereinabove provided shall not be
exclusive and the city may seek whatever other remedies are authorized by
statute, at law or in equity against any person violating the provisions of
this chapter. (Ord. 06-70, 2-20-2007)
6-6-7: CITY OF KANKAKEE'S UTILITY ORDINANCE APPLICATION:
   (A)   Nothing in this chapter shall relieve a user in the village of
Manteno, whose discharge will enter the city of Kankakee sanitary sewer system,
from abiding by the city of Kankakee's utility ordinance, general pretreatment
regulations. It is understood that the city of Kankakee may amend its utility
ordinance from time to time, which text may or may not appear in this chapter.
User is advised to review and abide by the city of Kankakee's utility ordinance
before taking any action which may cause it to come under the auspices of or be
in violation of this chapter or that ordinance.
   (B)   Any future additions or deletions to the Kankakee utility ordinance
are hereby adopted, incorporated and applicable to users within the village of
Manteno at the time and manner so specified, as adopted by the city council of
the city of Kankakee.
   (C)   If any section, paragraph, clause or provision of this chapter shall
be held invalid, the invalidity thereof shall not affect any of the other
provisions of this chapter.
   (D)   The applicability of this chapter shall be limited to those users
whose discharges will enter the sanitary sewer system for the city of Kankakee.
   (E)   All ordinances or parts of ordinances in conflict with the provisions
of this chapter are hereby repealed insofar as they conflict herewith. (Ord.
06-70, 2-20-2007)
CHAPTER 7
CONSTRUCTION OF FACILITIES IN THE RIGHTS-OF-WAY
SECTION:
6-7-1: Purpose And Scope
6-7-2: Definitions
6-7-3: Annual Registration Required
6-7-4: Permit Required; Application Requirements
6-7-5: Application Fees
6-7-6: Action On Permit Applications
6-7-7: Effect Of Permit
6-7-8: Revised Permit Drawings
6-7-9: Collocation Of Wireless Facilities
6-7-10: Insurance
6-7-11: Indemnification
6-7-12: Security
6-7-13: Permit Suspension And Revocation
6-7-14: Change Of Ownership Or Owner's Identity Or Legal Status
6-7-15: General Construction Standards
6-7-16: Traffic Control
6-7-17: Location Of Facilities
6-7-18: Construction Methods And Materials
6-7-19: Vegetation Control
6-7-20: Removal, Relocation, Or Modifications Of Facilities
6-7-21: Cleanup And Restoration
6-7-22: Maintenance And Emergency Maintenance
6-7-23: Variances
6-7-24: Dispute Resolution For Wireless Facilities
6-7-25: Penalties
6-7-26: Enforcement
6-7-1: PURPOSE AND SCOPE:
   (A)   Purpose: The purpose of this chapter is to establish policies and
procedures for constructing facilities in rights-of-way within the Village’s
jurisdiction, which will provide public benefit consistent with the
preservation of the integrity, safe usage, and visual qualities of the Village
rights-of-way and the Village as a whole while balancing the Village’s desire
to modernize and futureproof critical infrastructure which must be built in
and/or exist in the Village’s rights-of-way for the Village to continue to
prosper and be a place its residents want to live.
   (B)   Intent: In enacting this chapter, the Village intends to exercise its
authority over the rights-of-way in the Village and, in particular, the use of
the public ways and property by utilities and wireless providers, by
establishing uniform standards to address issues presented by utility and
wireless facilities, including without limitation:
      1.   Prevent interference with the use of streets, sidewalks, alleys,
parkways and other public ways and places;
      2.   Prevent the creation of visual and physical obstructions and other
conditions that are hazardous to vehicular and pedestrian traffic;
      3.   Prevent interference with the facilities and operations of the
Village’s utilities and of other utilities or wireless facilities lawfully
located in rights-of-way or public property;
      4.   Protect against environmental damage, including damage to trees,
from the installation of utility and wireless facilities;
      5.   Protect against increased stormwater run-off due to structures and
materials that increase impermeable surfaces;
      6.   Preserve the character of the neighborhoods in which facilities are
installed;
      7.   Preserve open space, particularly the tree-lined parkways that
characterize the Village’s residential neighborhoods;
      8.   Prevent visual blight from the proliferation of facilities in the
rights-of-way through limiting any components of new systems to being
constructed below ground unless added to an existing utility pole (excluding
decorative light poles); and
      9.   Assure the continued safe use and enjoyment of private properties
adjacent to facilities’ locations.
   (C)   Facilities Subject To This Chapter: This chapter applies to all
facilities on, over, above, along, upon, under, across, or within the rights-
of-way within the jurisdiction of the Village. A facility lawfully established
prior to the effective date of this chapter may continue to be maintained,
repaired and operated by the utility or wireless provider as presently
constructed and located, except as may be otherwise provided in any applicable
franchise, license or similar agreement.
   (D)   Franchises, Licenses, Or Similar Agreements: The Village, in its
discretion and as limited by law, may require utilities or wireless providers
to enter into a franchise, license or similar agreement for the privilege of
locating their facilities on, over, above, along, upon, under, across, or
within the Village rights-of-way. Utilities or wireless providers that are not
required by law to enter into such an agreement may request that the Village
enter into such an agreement. In such an agreement, the Village may provide for
terms and conditions inconsistent with this chapter.
   (E)   Effect Of Franchises, Licenses, Or Similar Agreements:
      1.   Utilities Other Than Telecommunications Providers: In the event that
a utility other than a telecommunications provider has a franchise, license or
similar agreement with the Village, such franchise, license or similar
agreement shall govern and control during the term of such agreement and any
lawful renewal or extension thereof.
      2.   Telecommunications Providers: In the event of any conflict with, or
inconsistency between, the provisions of this chapter and the provisions of any
franchise, license or similar agreement between the Village and any
telecommunications provider, the provisions of such franchise, license or
similar agreement shall govern and control during the term of such agreement
and any lawful renewal or extension thereof.
      3.   Wireless Providers: Existing agreements between the Village and
wireless providers that relate to the collocation of small wireless facilities
in the right-of-way, including the collocation of small wireless facilities on
Village utility poles, that are in effect on June 1, 2018, remain in effect for
all small wireless facilities collocated on the Village’s utility poles
pursuant to applications submitted to the Village before June 1, 2018, subject
to applicable termination provisions contained therein. Agreements entered into
after June 1, 2018, shall comply with this chapter.
      A wireless provider that has an existing agreement with the Village on
the effective date of the Small Wireless Facilities Deployment Act, PA 100-
0585, may accept the rates, fees and terms that the Village has currently
adopted for the collocation of small wireless facilities or the installation of
new utility poles for the collocation of small wireless facilities that are the
subject of an application submitted two (2) or more years after the effective
date of the Act by notifying the Village that it opts to accept such rates,
fees and terms. The existing agreement remains in effect, subject to applicable
termination provisions, for the small wireless facilities the wireless provider
has collocated on the Village’s utility poles pursuant to applications
submitted to the Village before the wireless provider provides such notice and
exercises its option under this paragraph.
   (F)   Conflicts With Other Chapters: This chapter supersedes all chapters or
parts of chapters adopted prior hereto that are in conflict herewith, to the
extent of such conflict.
   (G)   Conflicts With State And Federal Laws: In the event that applicable
Federal or State laws or regulations conflict with the requirements of this
chapter, the utility or wireless provider shall comply with the requirements of
this chapter to the maximum extent possible without violating Federal or State
laws or regulations.
   (H)   Sound Engineering Judgment: The Village shall use sound engineering
judgment when administering this chapter and may vary the standards,
conditions, and requirements expressed in this chapter when the Village so
determines. Nothing herein shall be construed to limit the ability of the
Village to regulate its rights-of-way for the protection of the public health,
safety and welfare. (Ord. 18-09, 8-6-2018; amd. Ord. 24-09, 8-19-2024)
6-7-2: DEFINITIONS:
As used in this chapter and unless the context clearly requires otherwise, the
words and terms listed shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this
section, unless the context in which they are used shall indicate otherwise.
When not inconsistent with the context, words used in the present tense include
the future, words in the singular number include the plural number, and words
in the plural number include the singular number. The words “shall” and “will”
are mandatory and “may” is permissive. Words not defined shall be given their
common and ordinary meaning. Any term not defined in this section shall have
the meaning ascribed to it in 92 Ill. Adm. Code section 530.30, as amended,
unless the context clearly requires otherwise.
AASHTO:         American Association of State Highway and Transportation Officials.
ANSI:           American National Standards Institute.
ASTM:           American Society for Testing and Materials.
ANTENNA:        Communications equipment that transmits or receives electromagnetic radio
                frequency signals used in the provision of wireless services.
APPLICABLE      Building, Fire, Electrical, Plumbing or Mechanical Codes adopted by a recognized
CODES:          national code organization or local amendments to those codes, including the
                National Electric Safety Code.
APPLICANT:      A person applying for a permit under this chapter.
                A request submitted by an applicant to the Village for a permit to install a
APPLICATION:    utility or a wireless facility, or a request by a wireless provider to install a
                new utility pole for collocation purposes.
BACKFILL:       The methods or materials for replacing excavated material in a trench or pit.
BORE OR BORING: To excavate an underground cylindrical cavity for the insertion of a pipe or
                electrical conductor.
CABLE OPERATOR: That term as defined in 47 USC section 522(5).
CABLE SERVICE:  That term as defined in 47 USC section 522(6).
CABLE SYSTEM:   That term as defined in 47 USC section 522(7).
CARRIER PIPE:   The pipe enclosing the liquid, gas or slurry to be transported.
CASING:         A structural protective enclosure for transmittal devices such as: carrier pipes,
                electrical conductors, and fiber optic devices.
                The total roadside border area, starting at the edge of the pavement, available
                for safe use by errant vehicles. This area may consist of a shoulder, a
CLEAR ZONE:     recoverable slope, a non- recoverable slope, and a clear run-out area. The desired
                width is dependent upon the traffic volumes and speeds, and on the roadside
                geometry. Distances are specified in the AASHTO Roadside Design Guide.
COATING:        Protective wrapping or mastic cover applied to buried pipe for protection against
                external corrosion.
CODE:           The Manteno Municipal Code.
COLLOCATE OR    To install, mount, maintain, modify, operate or replace wireless facilities on or
COLLOCATION:    adjacent to a wireless support structure or utility pole.
COMMUNICATIONS  Cable service, as defined in 47 USC 522(6); information service, as defined in 47
SERVICE:        USC 153(24); mobile service, as defined in 47 USC 153(53); or wireless service
                other than mobile service.
COMMUNICATIONS  A cable operator, as defined in 47 USC 522(5); a provider of information service,
SERVICE         as defined in 47 USC 153(24); a telecommunications carrier, as defined in 47 USC
PROVIDER:       153(51); or a wireless provider.
CONDUCTOR:      Wire carrying electrical current.
CONDUIT:        Casing or encasement for wires or cables.
CONSTRUCTION OR The installation, repair, maintenance, placement, alteration, enlargement,
CONSTRUCT:      demolition, modification or abandonment in place of facilities.
CORPORATE       The Mayor and Board of Trustees of the Village.
AUTHORITIES:
COVER:          The depth of earth or backfill over buried utility pipe or conductor.
CROSSING        A facility that crosses one or more right-of- way lines of a right-of-way.
FACILITY:
                Any work that obstructs the right-of- way or causes a material adverse effect on
                the use of the right- of-way for its intended use. Such work may include, without
DISRUPT THE     limitation, the following: excavating or other cutting; placement (whether
RIGHT-OF-WAY:   temporary or permanent) of materials, equipment, devices, or structures; damage to
                vegetation; and compaction or loosening of the soil, and shall not include the
                parking of vehicles or equipment in a manner that does not materially obstruct the
                flow of traffic on a highway.
                Any immediate maintenance to the facility required for the safety of the public
EMERGENCY:      using or in the vicinity of the right- of-way or immediate maintenance required
                for the health and safety of the general public served by the utility or wireless
                provider.
ENCASEMENT:     Provision of a protective casing.
ENGINEER:       The Village Engineer, or designee.
EQUIPMENT:      Materials, tools, implements, supplies, and/or other items used to facilitate
                construction of facilities.
EXCAVATION:     The making of a hole or cavity by removing material, or laying bare by digging.
EXTRA HEAVY     Pipe meeting ASTM standards for this pipe designation.
PIPE:
FCC:            Federal Communications Commission of the United States.
                All structures, devices, objects, and materials (including, but not limited to,
                track and rails, wires, ducts, fiber optic cable, antennas, vaults, boxes,
                equipment enclosures, cabinets, pedestals, poles, conduits, grates, covers, pipes,
FACILITY:       cables, and appurtenances thereto) located on, over, above, along, upon, under,
                across, or within rights-of-way under this chapter. For purposes of this chapter,
                the term “facility” shall not include any facility owned or operated by the
                Village.
FEE:            A one-time charge.
FREESTANDING    A facility that is not a crossing facility or a parallel facility, such as an
FACILITY:       antenna, transformer, pump, or meter station.
FRONTAGE ROAD:  A roadway, usually parallel, providing access to land adjacent to the highway
                where it is precluded by control of access to a highway.
                Any substance or material which, due to its quantity, form, concentration,
                location, or other characteristics, is determined by the Superintendent of Public
                Works to pose an unreasonable and imminent risk to the life, health or safety of
HAZARDOUS       persons or property or to the ecological balance of the environment, including,
MATERIALS:      but not limited to explosives, radioactive materials, petroleum or petroleum
                products or gases, poisons, etiology (biological) agents, flammables, corrosives
                or any substance determined to be hazardous or toxic under any Federal or State
                law, statute or regulation.
                A specific type of right-of-way used for vehicular traffic including rural or
                urban roads or streets. “Highway” includes all highway land and improvements,
HIGHWAY:        including roadways, ditches and embankments, bridges, drainage structures, signs,
                guardrails, protective structures and appurtenances necessary or convenient for
                vehicle traffic.
HIGHWAY CODE:   The Illinois Highway Code, 605 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/1-101 et seq., as
                amended from time to time.
                A building, property, or site or group of buildings, properties or sites that are
                either: a) listed in the National Register of Historic Places or formally
                determined eligible for listing by the Keeper of the National Register, the
                individual who has been delegated the authority by the Federal agency to list
HISTORIC        properties and determine their eligibility for the National Register, in
DISTRICT OR     accordance with section VI.D.1.a.i. through section VI.D.1.a.v of the Nationwide
HISTORIC        Programmatic Agreement, codified at 47 CFR part 1, appendix C; or b) designated as
LANDMARK:       a locally landmarked building, property, site, or historic district by an
                ordinance adopted by the Village pursuant to a preservation program that meets the
                requirements of the Certified Local Government Program of the Illinois State
                Historic Preservation Office or where such certification of the preservation
                program by the Illinois State Historic Preservation Office is pending.
                A person or entity that has received authorization to offer or provide cable or
HOLDER:         video service from the ICC pursuant to the Illinois Cable and Video Competition
                Law, 220 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/21-401 et seq.
ICC:            Illinois Commerce Commission.
IDOT:           Illinois Department of Transportation.
JULIE:          Joint Utility Locating Information for Excavators utility notification program.
JACKING:        Pushing a pipe horizontally under a roadway by mechanical means with or without
                boring.
JETTING:        Pushing a pipe through the earth using water under pressure to create a cavity
                ahead of the pipe.
JOINT USE:      The use of pole lines, trenches or other facilities by two (2) or more utilities.
LAW:            A Federal or State Statute, common law, code, rule, regulation, order or local
                ordinance or resolution.
MAJOR           The intersection of two (2) or more major arterial highways.
INTERSECTION:
MICRO WIRELESS  A small wireless facility that is not larger in dimension that twenty four inches
FACILITY:       (24") in length, fifteen inches (15") in width and twelve inches (12") in height
                and that has an exterior antenna, if any, no longer than eleven inches (11").
MUNICIPAL       A utility pole owned or operated by the Village in public rights-of-way.
UTILITY POLE:
OCCUPANCY:      The presence of facilities on, over or under right-of- way.
PARALLEL        A facility that is generally parallel or longitudinal to the centerline of a
FACILITY:       right-of-way.
PARKWAY:        Any portion of the right-of-way not improved by street or sidewalk.
PAVEMENT CUT:   The removal of an area of pavement for access to a facility or for the
                construction of a facility.
PERMIT:         A written authorization required by the Village to perform an action or initiate,
                continue or complete a project.
PERMITTEE:      That entity to which a permit has been issued under this chapter.
PERSON:         An individual, corporation, limited liability company, partnership, association,
                trust or other entity or organization.
PETROLEUM       Pipelines carrying crude or refined liquid petroleum products including, but not
PRODUCTS        limited to, gasoline, distillates, propane, butane, or coal-slurry.
PIPELINES:
PRACTICABLE:    That which is performable, feasible or possible, rather than that which is simply
                convenient.
PRESSURE:       The internal force acting radially against the walls of a carrier pipe expressed
                in pounds per square inch gauge (psig).
PROMPT:         That which is done within a period of time specified by the Village. If no time
                period is specified, the period shall be thirty (30) days.
PUBLIC ENTITY:  A legal entity that constitutes or is part of the government, whether at local,
                State or Federal level.
                The functional division of the Federal government, the State, a unit of local
PUBLIC SAFETY   government or a special purpose district located in whole or in part within this
AGENCY:         State, that provides or has authority to provide firefighting, police, ambulance,
                medical or other emergency services to respond to and manage emergency incidents.
RATE:           A recurring charge.
RESTORATION:    The repair of a right-of-way, highway, roadway, or other area disrupted by the
                construction of a facility.
                Any street, alley, other land or waterway, dedicated or commonly used for
                pedestrian or vehicular traffic or other similar purposes, including utility
                easements, in which the Village has the right and authority to authorize, regulate
RIGHT-OF-WAY OR or permit the location of facilities other than those of the Village. “Right-of-
RIGHTS-OF-WAY:  way” or “rights-of-way” shall not include any real or personal Village property
                that is not specifically described in the previous sentence and shall not include
                Village buildings, fixtures and other structures or improvements, regardless of
                whether they are situated in the right-of-way.
ROADWAY:        That part of the highway that includes the pavement and shoulders.
                The transmitting, supplying, or furnishing of telecommunications and all services
SALE OF TELE-   rendered in connection therewith for a consideration, other than between a parent
COMMUNICATIONS  corporation and its wholly owned subsidiaries or between wholly owned
AT RETAIL:      subsidiaries, when the gross charge made by one such corporation to another such
                corporation is not greater than the gross charge paid to the retailer for their
                use or consumption and not for sale.
SECURITY FUND:  That amount of security required pursuant to section
                6-7-12 of this chapter.
                A width of roadway, adjacent to the pavement, providing lateral support to the
SHOULDER:       pavement edge and providing an area for emergency vehicular stops and storage of
                snow removed from the pavement.
                A wireless facility that meets both of the following qualifications: a) each
                antenna is located inside an enclosure of no more than six (6) cubic feet in
                volume or, in the case of an antenna that has exposed elements, the antenna and
                all of its exposed elements could fit within an imaginary enclosure of no more
SMALL WIRELESS  than six (6) cubic feet; and b) all other wireless equipment attached directly to
FACILITY:       a utility pole associated with the facility is cumulatively no more than twenty
                five (25) cubic feet in volume. The following types of associated ancillary
                equipment are not included in the calculation of equipment volume: electric meter,
                concealment elements, telecommunications demarcation box, ground-based enclosures,
                grounding equipment, power transfer switch, cut-off switch, and vertical cable
                runs for the connection of power and other services.
SOUND           A decision consistent with generally accepted engineering principles, practices
ENGINEERING     and experience.
JUDGMENT:
SUPERINTENDENT
OF PUBLIC       The Superintendent of Public Works of the Village, or designee.
WORKS:
                This term includes, but is not limited to, messages or information transmitted
                through use of local, toll and wide area telephone service, channel services,
                telegraph services, teletypewriter service, computer exchange service, private
                line services, mobile radio services, stationary two-way radio, paging service and
                any other form of mobile or portable one-way or two-way communications, and any
                other transmission of messages or information by electronic or similar means,
                between or among points by wire, cable, fiber optics, laser, microwave, radio,
                satellite, or similar facilities. “Private line” means a dedicated non-traffic
                sensitive service for a single customer that entitles the customer to exclusive or
                priority use of a communications channel, or a group of such channels, from one or
TELE-           more specified locations to one or more other specified locations.
COMMUNICATIONS: “Telecommunications” shall not include value added services in which computer
                processing applications are used to act on the form, content, code and protocol of
                the information for purposes other than transmission. “Telecommunications” shall
                not include purchase of telecommunications by a telecommunications service
                provider for use as a component part of the service provided by such provider to
                the ultimate retail consumer who originates or terminates the end-to-end
                communications. “Telecommunications” shall not include the provision of cable
                services through a cable system as defined in the Cable Communications Act of 1984
                (47 USC section 521 and following), as now or hereafter amended, or cable or other
                programming services subject to an open video system fee payable to the Village
                through an open video system as defined in the Rules of the Federal Communications
                Commission (47 CFR section 76.1500 and following), as now or hereafter amended.
TELE-           Any person that installs, owns, operates or controls facilities in the right-of-
COMMUNICATIONS  way used or designed to be used to transmit telecommunications in any form.
PROVIDER:
TELE-           Includes every person engaged in making sales of telecommunications at retail as
COMMUNICATIONS  defined herein.
RETAILER:
TRENCH:         A relatively narrow open excavation for the installation of an underground
                facility.
                The individual or entity owning or operating any facility as defined in this
UTILITY:        chapter, except that, for purposes of this chapter, utility shall not include
                wireless providers applying for a permit to collocate, or already collocating, a
                small wireless facility in the Village’s right-of-way.
                A pole or similar structure that is used in whole or in part by a communications
UTILITY POLE:   service provider or for electric distribution, lighting, traffic control or a
                similar function.
VENT:           A pipe to allow the dissipation into the atmosphere of gases or vapors from an
                underground casing.
VIDEO SERVICE:  That term as defined in section 21-201(v) of the Illinois Cable and Video
                Competition Law of 2007, 220 Illinois Compiled Statutes 21-201(v), as amended.
VILLAGE:        Village of Manteno.
WATER LINES:    Pipelines carrying raw or potable water.
WET BORING:     Boring using water under pressure at the cutting auger to soften the earth and to
                provide a sluice for the excavated material.
                Equipment at a fixed location that enables wireless communications between user
                equipment and a communications network, including: a) equipment associated with
                wireless communications; and b) radio transceivers, antennas, coaxial or fiber-
                optic cable, regular and backup power supplies, and comparable equipment,
WIRELESS        regardless of technological configuration. Wireless facility includes small
FACILITY:       wireless facilities. Wireless facility does not include: a) the structure or
                improvements on, under or within which the equipment is collocated; or b) wireline
                backhaul facilities, coaxial or fiber optic cable that is between wireless support
                structure or utility poles or coaxial, or fiber optic cable that is otherwise not
                immediately adjacent to or directly associated with an antenna.
                Any person authorized to provide telecommunications service in the State that
WIRELESS        builds or installs wireless communication transmission equipment, wireless
INFRASTRUCTURE  facilities, wireless support structures or utility and poles and that is not a
PROVIDER:       wireless services provider but is acting as an agent or a contractor for a
                wireless services provider for the application submitted to the Village.
WIRELESS        A wireless infrastructure provider or a wireless services provider seeking to
PROVIDER:       collocate, or already collocating, a small wireless facility in the right-of-way.
                Any services provided to the general public, including a particular class of
WIRELESS        customers, and made available on a nondiscriminatory basis using licensed or
SERVICES:       unlicensed spectrum, whether at a fixed location or mobile, provided using
                wireless facilities.
WIRELESS
SERVICES        A person who provides wireless services.
PROVIDER:
WIRELESS        A freestanding structure, such as a monopole; tower, either guyed or self-
SUPPORT         supporting; billboard; or other existing or proposed structure designed to support
STRUCTURE:      or capable of supporting wireless facilities. Wireless support structure does not
                include a utility pole. (Ord. 18-09, 8-6-2018; amd. Ord. 24-09, 8-19-2024)
 
6-7-3: ANNUAL REGISTRATION REQUIRED:
Every utility or wireless provider that occupies a right-of-way within the
Village shall register on January 1 of each year with the Superintendent of
Public Works, providing the utility’s or wireless provider’s name, address and
regular business telephone and telecopy numbers, the name of one or more
contact persons who can act on behalf of the utility or wireless provider in
connection with emergencies involving the utility’s or wireless provider’s
facilities in the right-of-way and a 24-hour telephone number for each such
person, and evidence of insurance as required in section
6-7-10 of this chapter, in the form of a certificate of insurance.
A wireless provider shall pay to the Village an annual recurring rate to
collocate a small wireless facility on a Village utility pole located in a
right-of-way that equals: a) two hundred seventy dollars ($270.00) per year or
b) the actual, direct and reasonable costs related to the wireless provider’s
use of space on the Village utility pole. If the Village has not billed the
wireless provider actual and direct costs, the fee shall be two hundred seventy
dollars ($270.00) payable on the first day after the first annual anniversary
of the issuance of the permit or notice of intent to collocate, and on each
annual anniversary date thereafter. (Ord. 18-09, 8-6-2018; amd. Ord. 24-09, 8-
19-2024)
6-7-4: PERMIT REQUIRED; APPLICATION REQUIREMENTS:
   (A)   Permit Required: No person shall construct any facility on, over,
above, along, upon, under, across, or within any Village right-of-way which: 1)
changes the location of the facility, 2) adds a new facility, 3) disrupts the
right-of-way, or 4) materially increases the amount of area or space occupied
by the facility on, over, above, along, under, across or within the right-of-
way, without first filing an application with the Superintendent of Public
Works and obtaining a permit from the Village therefor, except as otherwise
provided in this chapter. No permit shall be required for installation and
maintenance of service connections to customers’ premises where there will be
no disruption of the right-of-way.
   (B)   Permit Application: All applications for permits pursuant to this
chapter shall be filed on a form provided by the Village and shall be filed in
such number of duplicate copies as the Village may designate. The applicant may
designate those portions of its application materials that it reasonably
believes contain proprietary or confidential information as “proprietary” or
“confidential” by clearly marking each page of such materials accordingly.
   (C)   Minimum General Application Requirements: The application shall be
made by the utility, wireless provider or duly authorized representative and
shall contain, at a minimum, the following:
      1.   The utility’s or wireless provider’s name and address and telephone
and telecopy numbers;
      2.   The applicant’s name and address, if different than the utility or
wireless provider, its telephone, telecopy numbers, e-mail address, and its
interest in the work;
      3.   The names, addresses and telephone and telecopy numbers and e-mail
addresses of all professional consultants, if any, advising the applicant with
respect to the application;
      4.   A general description of the proposed work and the purposes and
intent of the facility and the uses to which the facility will be put. The
scope and detail of such description shall be appropriate to the nature and
character of the work to be performed, with special emphasis on those matters
likely to be affected or impacted by the work proposed;
      5.   Evidence that the utility or wireless provider has placed on file
with the Village:
         (a)   A written traffic control plan demonstrating the protective
measures and devices that will be employed consistent with the Illinois Manual
On Uniform Traffic Control Devices, to prevent injury or damage to persons or
property and to minimize disruptions to efficient pedestrian and vehicular
traffic; and
         (b)   An emergency contingency plan which shall specify the nature of
potential emergencies, including, without limitation, construction and
hazardous materials emergencies, and the intended response by the applicant.
The intended response shall include notification to the Village and shall
promote protection of the safety and convenience of the public. Compliance with
ICC regulations for emergency contingency plans constitutes compliance with
this section unless the Village finds that additional information or assurances
are needed;
      6.   Drawings, plans and specifications showing the work proposed,
including the certification of an engineer that such drawings, plans, and
specifications comply with applicable codes, rules, and regulations;
      7.   Evidence of insurance as required in section
6-7-10 of this chapter;
      8.   Evidence of posting of the Security Fund as required in section
6-7-12 of this chapter;
      9.   The applicable application fee, as described in section
6-7-5 of this chapter;
      10.   Any request for a variance from one or more provisions of this
chapter (see section
6-7-23 of this chapter); and
      11.   Such additional information as may be reasonably required by the
Village.
   (D)   Supplemental Application Requirements For Specific Types Of Utilities
Or Wireless Providers: In addition to the requirements of subsection (C) of
this section, the permit application shall include the following items, as
applicable to the specific utility or wireless provider that is the subject of
the permit application:
      1.   In the case of the installation of a new electric power,
communications, telecommunications, cable television service, video service or
natural gas distribution system, evidence that any “Certificate of Public
Convenience and Necessity” or other regulatory authorization that the applicant
is required by law to obtain, or that the applicant has elected to obtain, has
been issued by the ICC or other jurisdictional authority;
      2.   In the case of natural gas systems, state the proposed pipe size,
design, construction class, and operating pressures;
      3.   In the case of water lines, indicate that all requirements of the
Illinois Environmental Protection Agency, Division of Public Water Supplies,
have been satisfied;
      4.   In the case of sewer line installations, indicate that the land and
water pollution requirements of the Illinois Environmental Protection Agency,
Division of Water Pollution Control and the Metropolitan Water Reclamation
District have been satisfied; or
      5.   In the case of petroleum products pipelines, state the type or types
of petroleum products, pipe size, maximum working pressure, and the design
standard to be followed.
   (E)   Consolidated Applications For Small Cell Wireless Facilities: An
applicant seeking to collocate small wireless facilities within the
jurisdiction of the Village shall be allowed, at the applicant’s discretion, to
file a consolidated application and receive a single permit for the collocation
of up to twenty-five (25) small wireless facilities if the collocations each
involve substantially the same type of small wireless facility and
substantially the same type of structure. If an application includes multiple
small wireless facilities, the Village may remove small wireless facility
collocations from the application and treat separately small wireless facility
collocations for which incomplete information has been provided or that do not
qualify for consolidated treatment or that are denied. The Village may issue
separate permits for each collocation that is approved in a consolidated
application.
   (F)   Applicant’s Duty To Update Information: Throughout the entire permit
application review period and the construction period authorized by the permit,
any amendments to information contained in a permit application shall be
submitted by the utility or wireless provider in writing to the Village within
thirty (30) days after the change necessitating the amendment. In addition, any
agency who has obtained a permit and built facilities within the Village’s ROW
must provide the Village Engineer with as-built documentation in a GIS format
(shapefile) showing the actual locations of their facilities, including
information on the depth if underground or attachment heights if aerial. These
assets should then be formatted into the Village’s GIS platform as a layer for
future reference when processing subsequent permit applications in the years
that follow. To protect the confidentiality of the provider, any FOIAs
requesting shapefiles will aggregate all available network data from all
providers and will not disclose provider identifying information to ensure
anonymity.
   (G)   Consolidated Applications For Wireline (Fiber Optic) Facilities: An
applicant seeking to collocate wireline (fiber optic) facilities within the
jurisdiction of the Village shall be allowed, at the applicant’s discretion, to
file a consolidated application and receive a single permit for the collocation
of up to twenty-five (25) wireline facilities if the collocations each involve
substantially the same type of wireline facility and substantially the same
type of structure. If an application includes multiple wireline facilities, the
Village may remove wireline facility collocations from the application and
treat separately wireline facility collocations for which incomplete
information has been provided or that do not qualify for consolidated treatment
or that are denied. The Village may issue separate permits for each collocation
that is approved in a consolidated application. Regardless of the volume of
wireline facilities, the applicant must show that the proposed plans are
approved by an engineer and comply with the Village’s requirements as outlined
herein. (Ord. 18-09, 8-6-2018; amd. Ord. 24-09, 8-19-2024)
6-7-5: APPLICATION FEES:
   (A)   Utility Facility Application Fees: For utility facilities, unless
otherwise provided by franchise, license, or similar agreement, all
applications for permits pursuant to this chapter shall be accompanied by a fee
in the amount of one thousand dollars ($1,000.00). No application fee is
required to be paid by any electricity utility that is paying the Municipal
electricity infrastructure maintenance fee pursuant to the Electricity
Infrastructure Maintenance Fee Act 1. If the Village determines that costs
exceed permit fees, permit fees could be changed to recover all costs (if this
occurs, the Village will post new fee schedules that will apply to all
applicants and will notify applicants of the cost increases).
      1.   Permit Applicants will be required to pay a ten thousand dollars
($10,000.00) deposit to ensure areas that were under construction are restored
to proper conditions. The deposit will be returned when the project is
completed and all areas worked on have been verified for suitable restoration.
   (B)   Small Wireless Facility Application Fees: The following fee schedule
shall apply to applications to install wireless facilities:
      1.   Applicants shall pay an application fee of (a) five hundred fifty
dollars ($500.00) for an application to collocate a single small wireless
facility on an existing utility pole or wireless support structure, with an
additional one hundred dollars ($100.00) for each small wireless facility
beyond five (5) and (b) two hundred seventy dollars ($270.00) per small
wireless facility per year for all recurring fees, including any possible ROW
access fee or fee for attachment to municipally-owned structures in the ROW,
and (c) one thousand dollars ($1,000) for non-recurring fees for a new pole.
The Village desires to offer permit applicants the ability to amend
applications when appropriate (as opposed to requiring new applications for
permit edits). At the Village’s discretion, when appropriate, the Village will
consider when an amendment can be made rather than requiring a new application.
      2.   The Village will not impose fees on wireless service providers for:
         (a)   Routine maintenance;
         (b)   The replacement of wireless facilities with wireless facilities
that are substantially similar, the same size, or smaller if the wireless
provider notifies the Village at least ten (10) days prior to the planned
replacement and includes equipment specifications for the replacement of
equipment consistent with section
6-7-9 of this chapter; or
         (c)   The installation, placement, maintenance, operation or
replacement of micro wireless facilities suspended on cables that are strung
between existing utility poles in compliance with applicable Safety Codes.
   (C)   Required Application Fee: Notwithstanding any contrary provision of
State law or local ordinance, applications pursuant to this chapter shall be
accompanied by the required application fee. Application fees shall be
nonrefundable. (Ord. 18-09, 8-6-2018; amd. Ord. 24-09, 8-19-2024)
6-7-6: ACTION ON PERMIT APPLICATIONS:
   (A)   Village Review Of Utility Permit Applications: Completed permit
applications for utility facilities which contain all required documentation,
shall be examined by the Superintendent of Public Works within a reasonable
time after filing. If the application does not conform to the requirements of
applicable ordinances, codes, laws, rules, and regulations, the Superintendent
of Public Works shall reject such application in writing, stating the reasons
therefor. If the Superintendent of Public Works is satisfied that the proposed
work conforms to the requirements of this chapter and applicable ordinances,
codes, laws, rules, and regulations, the Superintendent of Public Works shall
issue a permit therefor as soon as practicable. In all instances, it shall be
the duty of the applicant to demonstrate, to the satisfaction of the
Superintendent of Public Works that the construction proposed under the
application shall be in full compliance with the requirements of this chapter.
   (B)   Additional Village Review Of Applications Of Telecommunications
Retailers:
      1.   Pursuant to section 4 of the Telephone Company Act 1 , a
telecommunications retailer shall notify the Village that it intends to
commence work governed by this chapter for facilities for the provision of
telecommunications services. Such notice shall consist of plans,
specifications, and other documentation sufficient to demonstrate the purpose
and intent of the facilities, and shall be provided by the telecommunications
retailer to the Village not less than ten (10) days prior to the commencement
of work requiring no excavation and not less than thirty (30) days prior to the
commencement of work requiring excavation. The Superintendent of Public Works
shall specify the portion of the right-of-way upon which the facility may be
placed, used and constructed.
      2.   In the event that the Superintendent of Public Works fails to
provide such specification of location to the telecommunications retailer
within either: a) ten (10) days after service of notice to the Village by the
telecommunications retailer in the case of work not involving excavation for
new construction or b) twenty five (25) days after service of notice by the
telecommunications retailer in the case of work involving excavation for new
construction, the telecommunications retailer may commence work without
obtaining a permit under this chapter.
   (C)   Should the telecommunications retailer commence work without obtaining
a permit under this chapter, they must first follow standard procedure for
locating existing utilities before beginning any underground construction, up
to and including potholing (small diameter vacuum excavation) to determine
precise depth and location of existing buried facilities. The
telecommunications retailer should then provide the Village with as-built
documentation for the Village’s records
      1.   Upon the provision of such specification by the Village, where a
permit is required for work pursuant to section
6-7-4 of this chapter the telecommunications retailer shall submit to the
Village an application for a permit and any and all plans, specifications and
documentation available regarding the facility to be constructed. Such
application shall be subject to the requirements of subsection (A) of this
section.
   (D)   Additional Village Review Of Applications Of Holders Of State
Authorization Under The Cable And Video Competition Law Of 2007: Applications
by a utility that is a holder of a State-issued authorization under the Cable
and Video Competition Law of 2007 shall be deemed granted forty five (45) days
after submission to the Village, unless otherwise acted upon by the Village,
provided the holder has complied with applicable Village codes, ordinances, and
regulations.
   (E)   Processing Wireless Facility Applications: The Village shall process
applications for wireless facilities as follows:
      1.   Prioritization: The first completed application shall have priority
over applications received by different wireless facility applicants for
collocation on the same utility pole or wireless support structure.
      2.   Application Completion: Within thirty (30) days after receiving an
application, the Village shall determine whether the application is complete
and notify the applicant. If an application is incomplete, the Village must
specifically identify the missing information. An application shall be deemed
complete if the Village fails to provide notification to the applicant within
thirty (30) days after all documents, information and fees specifically
enumerated in the Village’s permit application form are submitted by the
applicant to the Village. Processing deadlines are tolled from the time the
Village sends the notice of incompleteness to the time the applicant provides
the missing information.
      3.   Existing Poles Or Structures (including Collocation of Wireless
Facilities): An application to collocate a small wireless facility on an
existing utility pole or wireless support structure, or replacement of an
existing utility pole or wireless support structure shall be processed on a
nondiscriminatory basis and shall be deemed approved if the Village fails to
approve or deny the application within sixty (60) days after the submission of
a completed application. However, if an applicant intends to proceed with the
permitted activity on a deemed approved basis, the applicant shall notify the
Village in writing of its intention to invoke the deemed approved remedy no
sooner than seventy five (75) days after the submission of a completed
application. The permit shall be deemed approved on the latter of the 90th day
after submission of the complete application or the 10th day after the receipt
of the deemed approved notice by the Village. The receipt of the deemed
approved notice shall not preclude the Village’s denial of the permit request
within the time limits as provided under this section. An Application to
collocate facilities other than a small wireless facility on an existing
utility pole or wireless support structure, or replacement thereof shall be
processed on a nondiscriminatory basis and shall be deemed approved if the
Village fails to approve or deny the application within ninety (90) days. The
other stipulations of this paragraph apply respectively and at the Village’s
discretion.
      4.   New Utility Poles or Structures (Including Construction of New
Wireless Facilities): An application to collocate a small wireless facility
that includes the installation of a new utility pole shall be processed on a
nondiscriminatory basis and deemed approved if the Village fails to approve or
deny the application within ninety (90) days after the submission of a
completed application. However, if an applicant intends to proceed with the
permitted activity on a deemed approved basis, the applicant shall notify the
Village in writing of its intention to invoke the deemed approved remedy no
sooner than one hundred five (105) days after the submission of a completed
application. The permit shall be deemed approved on the latter of the 120th day
after submission of the complete application or the 10th day after the receipt
of the deemed approved notice by the Village. The receipt of the deemed
approved notice shall not preclude the Village’s denial of the permit request
within the time limits as provided under this section. An Application to
construct wireless facilities other than a small wireless facility on an
existing utility pole or wireless support structure, or replacement thereof
shall be processed on a nondiscriminatory basis and shall be deemed approved if
the Village fails to approve or deny the application within one hundred fifty
(150) days. The other stipulations of this paragraph apply respectively and at
the Village’s discretion.
      5.   Application Denied: The Village shall deny an application which does
not meet the requirements of this chapter. If the Village determines that
applicable codes, ordinances or regulations that concern public safety, or the
requirements of section
6-7-9 of this chapter, require that the utility pole or wireless support
structure be replaced before the requested collocation, approval shall be
conditioned on the replacement of the utility pole or wireless support
structure at the cost of the provider.
      The Village shall document the basis for a denial, including the specific
code provisions or application conditions on which the denial is based, and
send the documentation to the applicant on or before the day the Village denies
an application. The applicant may cure the deficiencies identified by the
Village and resubmit the revised application once within thirty (30) days after
notice of denial is sent to the applicant without paying an additional
application fee. The Village shall approve or deny the revised application
within thirty (30) days after the applicant resubmits the application or it is
deemed approved. Failure to resubmit the revised application within thirty (30)
days of denial shall require the applicant to submit a new application with
applicable fees, and result in recommencement of the Village’s review period.
      The applicant must notify the Village in writing of its intention to
proceed with the permitted activity on a deemed approved basis, which may be
submitted with the revised application. Any review of a revised application
shall be limited to the deficiencies cited in the denial, except in cases in
which the cure requires the review of a new location, new or different
structure to be collocated upon, new antennas, or other wireless equipment
associated with the small wireless facility.
      6.   No part of any system can be installed on any pole owned by the
Village of Manteno. Siting and design of infrastructure on other poles in the
Village will be required to be reviewed by the Village for safety and
aesthetics.
      7.   Tolling: The time period for applications may be further tolled by:
         (a)   An express written agreement by both the applicant and the
Village; or
         (b)   A local, State or Federal disaster declaration or similar
emergency that causes the delay. (Ord. 18-09, 8-6-2018; amd. Ord. 24-09, 8-19-
2024)
6-7-7: EFFECT OF PERMIT:
   (A)   Authority Granted; No Property Right Or Other Interest Created: A
permit from the Village authorizes a permittee to undertake only certain
activities in accordance with this chapter on Village rights-of-way, and does
not create a property right or grant authority to the permittee to impinge upon
the rights of others who may have an interest in the rights-of-way.
   (B)   Duration Of Utility Facility Permits: No permit issued to a utility
under this chapter shall be valid for a period longer than six (6) months
unless construction is actually begun within that period and is thereafter
diligently pursued to completion.
   (C)   Duration Of Small Wireless Facility Permits: For permits to collocate
small wireless facilities, the collocation must be complete within one hundred
eighty (180) days after the issuance of the permit, unless the Village and the
wireless provider agree to extend the period or a delay is caused by make-ready
work for a Municipal utility pole or by the lack of commercial power or
backhaul availability at the site, provided the wireless provider has made a
timely request within sixty (60) days after the issuance of the permit for
commercial power or backhaul services, and the additional time to complete
installation does not exceed three hundred sixty (360) days after issuance of
the permit. Otherwise, the permit shall be void unless the Village grants an
extension in writing to the applicant.
      Wireless facility permits which meet the collocation requirements of the
preceding paragraph shall be for a period of not less than five (5) years, and
the permit shall be renewed for equivalent durations unless the Village makes a
finding that the small wireless facilities or the new or modified utility pole
do not comply with the applicable Village codes or any provision, condition or
requirement contained in this chapter.
   (D)   Preconstruction Meeting Required: No construction shall begin pursuant
to a permit issued under this chapter prior to attendance by the permittee and
all major contractors and subcontractors who will perform any work under the
permit at a preconstruction meeting. The preconstruction meeting shall be held
at a date, time and place designated by the Village with the Director of Public
Works and the Village Engineer, plus Village representatives in attendance who
the Village deems necessary. The meeting shall be for the purpose of reviewing
the work under the permit, and reviewing special considerations necessary in
the areas where work will occur, including, without limitation, presence or
absence of other facilities in the area and their locations, procedures to
avoid disruption of other facilities, use of rights-of-way by the public during
construction, and access and egress by adjacent property owners.
   (E)   Compliance With All Laws Required: The issuance of a permit by the
Village does not excuse the permittee from complying with other requirements of
the Village and applicable statutes, laws, ordinances, rules, and regulations.
(Ord. 18-09, 8-6-2018; amd. Ord. 24-09, 8-19-2024)
6-7-8: REVISED PERMIT DRAWINGS:
In the event that the actual locations of any facilities deviate in any
material respect from the locations identified in the plans, drawings and
specifications submitted with the permit application, the permittee shall
submit a revised set of drawings or plans to the Village within ninety (90)
days after the completion of the permitted work. The revised drawings or plans
shall specifically identify where the locations of the actual facilities
deviate from the locations approved in the permit. If any deviation from the
permit also deviates from the requirements of this chapter, it shall be treated
as a request for variance in accordance with section
6-7-23 of this chapter. If the Village denies the request for a variance, then
the permittee shall either remove the facility from the right-of-way or modify
the facility so that it conforms to the permit and submit revised drawings or
plans therefor.
   (A)   Whether the actual locations of any facilities deviate in any material
respect from the locations identified in the plans, this documentation should
be provided to the Village not just in the form of revised drawings, but in a
shapefile or other GIS format ingestible by the Village’s GIS department/team,
and physical assets (particularly for underground construction) should be
precisely geolocated using engineering grade GPS equipment. (Ord. 18-09, 8-6-
2018; amd. Ord. 24-09, 8-19-2024)
6-7-9: COLLOCATION OF WIRELESS FACILITIES:
The following requirements and conditions shall apply only to collocation of
wireless facilities, as defined by this chapter:
   (A)   Permitted Use: No wireless facilities will be allowed on Village owned
poles. Installations on other infrastructure will follow the following
guidelines.
   (B)   Public Safety Space Reservation: The Village reserves space on
Municipal utility poles for future public safety uses, for the Village’s
electric utility uses, or both.
   (C)   Installation And Maintenance: The wireless provider shall install,
maintain, repair and modify its small wireless facilities in a safe condition
and in good repair and in compliance with the requirements and conditions of
this chapter. The wireless provider shall ensure that its employees, agents or
contractors that perform work in connection with its small wireless facilities
are adequately trained and skilled in accordance with all applicable industry
and governmental standards and regulations.
   (D)   Make-Ready Requirements: No wireless facilities will be allowed on
Village owned poles.
   (E)   No Interference With Public Safety Communication Frequencies: The
wireless provider’s operation of the small wireless facilities shall not
interfere with the frequencies used by a public safety agency for public safety
communications. A wireless provider shall install small wireless facilities of
the type and frequency that will not cause unacceptable interference with a
public safety agency’s communications equipment. Unacceptable interference will
be determined by and measured in accordance with industry standards and the
FCC’s regulations addressing unacceptable interference to public safety
spectrum or any other spectrum licensed by a public safety agency. If a small
wireless facility causes such interference, and the wireless provider has been
given written notice of the interference by the public safety agency, the
wireless provider, at its own expense, shall remedy the interference in a
manner consistent with the abatement and resolution procedures for interference
with public safety spectrum established by the FCC including 47 CFR 22.970
through 47 CFR 22.973 and 47 CFR 90.672 through 47 CFR 90.675. The Village may
terminate a permit for a small wireless facility based on such interference if
the wireless provider is not in compliance with the Code of Federal
Regulations. Failure to remedy the interference as required herein shall
constitute a public nuisance.
   (F)   Electric Distribution Or Transmission Systems: Wireless facilities
will not interfere with electric distribution or transmission systems in any
way.
   (G)   Public Safety: The wireless provider shall comply with all applicable
codes and local code provisions or regulations that concern public safety.
   (H)   Design Standards: The wireless provider shall comply with written
design standards that provide reasonable stealth, concealment and aesthetic
requirements that are set forth in any Village ordinance, written policy
adopted by the Village, a comprehensive plan or other written design plan that
applies to other occupiers of the rights-of-way, including on a historic
landmark or in a historic district. Installation on decorative poles itself is
strictly prohibited within the Village and is not permissible to providers.
   (I)   Alternate Placements: Except as provided in this section, a wireless
provider shall not be required to collocate small wireless facilities on any
specific utility pole, or category of utility poles, or be required to
collocate multiple antenna systems on a single utility pole. However, with
respect to an application for the collocation of a small wireless facility
associated with a new utility pole, the Village may propose that the small
wireless facility be collocated on an existing utility pole or existing
wireless support structure within one hundred feet (100') of the proposed
collocation, which the applicant shall accept if it has the right to use the
alternate structure on reasonable terms and conditions, and the alternate
location and structure does not impose technical limits or additional material
costs as determined by the applicant.
      If the applicant refuses a collocation proposed by the Village, the
applicant shall provide written certification describing the property rights,
technical limits or material cost reasons the alternate location does not
satisfy the criteria in this paragraph.
   (J)   Height Limitations: The maximum height of a small wireless facility
shall be no more than ten feet (10') above the utility pole or wireless support
structure on which the small wireless facility is collocated.
      New or replacement utility poles or wireless support structures on which
small wireless facilities are collocated may not exceed the higher of:
      1.   Ten feet (10') in height above the tallest existing utility pole,
other than a utility pole supporting only wireless facilities, that is in place
on the date the application is submitted to the Village, that is located within
three hundred feet (300') of the new or replacement utility pole or wireless
support structure and that is in the same right-of-way within the
jurisdictional boundary of the Village, provided the Village may designate
which intersecting right-of-way within three hundred feet (300') of the
proposed utility pole or wireless support structures shall control the height
limitation for such facility; or
      2.   Forty-five feet (45') above ground level.
   (K)   Height Exceptions Or Variances: If an applicant proposes a height for
a new or replacement pole in excess of the above height limitations on which
the small wireless facility has proposed for collocation, the applicant shall
apply for a variance in conformance with procedures, terms and conditions set
forth in section
6-7-23 of this chapter.
   (L)   Contractual Design Requirements: The wireless provider shall comply
with requirements that are imposed by a contract between the Village and a
private property owner that concern design or construction standards applicable
to utility poles and ground- mounted equipment located in the right-of-way.
(Ord. 18-09, 8-6-2018; amd. Ord. 24-09, 8-19-2024)
6-7-10: INSURANCE:
   (A)   Required Coverages And Limits For Utilities: Unless otherwise provided
by franchise, license, or similar agreement, each utility occupying rights-of-
way or constructing any facility in the right-of-way shall secure and maintain
the following liability insurance policies insuring the utility as named
insured and naming the Village, and its elected and appointed officers,
officials, agents, and employees as additional insureds on the policies listed
in subsections (A)1 and (A)2 of this section:
      1.   Commercial general liability insurance, including premises-
operations, explosion, collapse, and underground hazard (commonly referred to
as “X”, “C”, and “U” coverages) and products- completed operations coverage
with limits not less than:
         (a)   Five million dollars ($5,000,000.00) for bodily injury or death
to each person;
         (b)   Five million dollars ($5,000,000.00) for property damage
resulting from any one accident; and
         (c)   Five million dollars ($5,000,000.00) for all other types of
liability;
      2.   Automobile liability for owned, non-owned and hired vehicles with a
combined single limit of one million dollars ($1,000,000.00) for personal
injury and property damage for each accident;
      3.   Workers’ compensation with statutory limits; and
      4.   Employer’s liability insurance with limits of not less than one
million dollars ($1,000,000.00) per employee and per accident.
      If the utility is not providing such insurance to protect the contractors
and subcontractors performing the work, then such contractors and
subcontractors shall comply with this section.
   (B)   Required Coverages And Limits For Wireless Providers: Wireless
providers shall carry, at the wireless provider’s own cost and expense, the
following insurance:
      1.   Property insurance for its property’s replacement cost against all
risks;
      2.   Workers’ compensation insurance, as required by law; or
      3.   Commercial general liability insurance with respect to its
activities on the Village right-of-way to afford minimum protection limits as
described in subsection (A)1. of this section.
      The wireless provider shall include the Village as an additional insured
on the commercial general liability policy and provide certification and
documentation of inclusion of the Village in a commercial general liability
policy prior to the collocation of any small wireless facility.
   (C)   Excess Or Umbrella Policies: The coverages required by this section
may be in any combination of primary, excess, and umbrella policies. Any excess
or umbrella policy must provide excess coverage over underlying insurance on a
following-form basis such that when any loss covered by the primary policy
exceeds the limits under the primary policy, the excess or umbrella policy
becomes effective to cover such loss.
   (D)   Copies Required: The utility or wireless provider shall provide copies
of any of the policies required by this section to the Village within ten (10)
days following receipt of a written request therefor from the Village.
   (E)   Maintenance And Renewal Of Required Coverages:
      1.   The insurance policies required by this section shall contain the
following endorsement:
         It is hereby understood and agreed that this policy may not be
canceled nor the intention not to renew be stated until thirty (30) days after
receipt by the Village, by registered mail or certified mail, return receipt
requested, of a written notice addressed to the Village President of such
intent to cancel or not to renew.
      2.   Within ten (10) days after receipt by the Village of said notice,
and in no event later than ten (10) days prior to said cancellation, the
utility or wireless provider shall obtain and furnish to the Village evidence
of replacement insurance policies meeting the requirements of this section.
   (F)   Self-Insurance: A utility or wireless provider may self- insure all or
a portion of the insurance coverage and limit requirements required under this
section. A utility or wireless provider that self-insures is not required, to
the extent of such self-insurance, to comply with the requirement for the
naming of additional insureds under this section. A utility or wireless
provider that elects to self-insure shall provide to the Village evidence
sufficient to demonstrate its financial ability to self- insure the insurance
coverage and limit requirements required under subsections (A) and (B) of this
section, such as evidence that the utility or wireless provider is a “private
self-insurer” under the Workers’ Compensation Act.
   (G)   Effect Of Insurance And Self-Insurance On Utility’s Or Wireless
Provider’s Liability: The legal liability of the utility or wireless provider
to the Village and any person for any of the matters that are the subject of
the insurance policies or self-insurance required by this section shall not be
limited by such insurance policies or self-insurance or by the recovery of any
amounts thereunder.
   (H)   Insurance Companies: All insurance provided pursuant to this section
shall be effected under valid and enforceable policies, issued by insurers
legally able to conduct business with the licensee in the State of Illinois.
(Ord. 18-09, 8-6-2018; amd. Ord. 24-09, 8-19-2024)
6-7-11: INDEMNIFICATION:
By occupying or constructing facilities in the right-of-way, a utility or
wireless provider shall be deemed to agree to defend, indemnify and hold the
Village and its elected and appointed officials and officers, employees, agents
and representatives harmless from and against any and all injuries, claims,
demands, judgments, damages, losses and expenses, including reasonable
attorney’s fees and costs of suit or defense, arising out of, resulting from or
alleged to arise out of or result from the negligent, careless or wrongful
acts, omissions, failures to act or misconduct of the utility or wireless
provider or their affiliates, officers, employees, agents, contractors or
subcontractors in the construction of facilities or occupancy of the rights-of-
way, and in providing or offering service over the facilities, whether such
acts or omissions are authorized, allowed or prohibited by this chapter or by a
franchise, license, or similar agreement; provided, however, that the utility’s
or wireless provider’s indemnity obligations hereunder shall not apply to any
injuries, claims, demands, judgments, damages, losses or expenses arising out
of or resulting from the negligence, misconduct or breach of this chapter by
the Village, its officials, officers, employees, agents or representatives.
(Ord. 18-09, 8-6-2018; amd. Ord. 24-09, 8-19-2024)
6-7-12: SECURITY:
   (A)   Purpose: The permittee shall establish a Security Fund in a form and
in an amount as set forth in this section. The Security Fund shall be
continuously maintained in accordance with this section at the permittee’s sole
cost and expense until the completion of the work authorized under the permit.
The Security Fund shall serve as security for:
      1.   The faithful performance by the permittee of all the requirements of
this chapter;
      2.   Documented permit costs that are greater than permit fees, including
permit review and inspections by third party vendors (if and when needed);
      3.   Any expenditure, damage, or loss incurred by the Village occasioned
by the permittee’s failure to comply with any codes, rules, regulations,
orders, permits and other directives of the Village issued pursuant to this
chapter; and
      4.   The payment by permittee of all liens and all damages, claims,
costs, or expenses that the Village may pay or incur by reason of any action or
nonperformance by permittee in violation of this chapter including, without
limitation, any damage to public property or restoration work the permittee is
required by this chapter to perform that the Village must perform itself or
have completed as a consequence solely of the permittee’s failure to perform or
complete, and all other payments due the Village from the permittee pursuant to
this chapter or any other applicable law.
   (B)   Form: The permittee shall provide the Security Fund to the Village in
the form, at the permittee’s election, of cash, a surety bond in a form
acceptable to the Village, or an unconditional letter of credit in a form
acceptable to the Village. Any surety bond or letter of credit provided
pursuant to this subsection shall, at a minimum:
      1.   Provide that it will not be canceled without prior notice to the
Village and the permittee;
      2.   Not require the consent of the permittee prior to the collection by
the Village of any amounts covered by it; and
      3.   Provide a location convenient to the Village and within the State of
Illinois at which it can be drawn.
   (C)   Amount: The dollar amount of the Security Fund shall be sufficient to
provide for the reasonably estimated cost to restore the right-of-way to at
least as good a condition as that existing prior to the construction under the
permit, as determined by the Superintendent of Public Works, and may also
include reasonable, directly related costs that the Village estimates are
likely to be incurred if the permittee fails to perform such restoration. Where
the construction of facilities proposed under the permit will be performed in
phases in multiple locations in the Village, with each phase consisting of
construction of facilities in one location or a related group of locations, and
where construction in another phase will not be undertaken prior to substantial
completion of restoration in the previous phase or phases, the Superintendent
of Public Works may, in the exercise of sound discretion, allow the permittee
to post a single amount of security which shall be applicable to each phase of
the construction under the permit. The amount of the Security Fund for phased
construction shall be equal to the greatest amount that would have been
required under the provisions of this subsection (C) for any single phase. It
may be necessary for the Village to hire a third-party vendor. If that is the
case, the anticipated cost for that service is an estimated $2/linear foot (LF)
for each review. If applicable, the applicant will be liable for any cost
exceeding this estimate. The amount withdrawn from the Security Fund will be
the actual of the cost incurred.
   (D)   Withdrawals: The Village, upon fourteen (14) days’ advance written
notice clearly stating the reason for, and its intention to exercise withdrawal
rights under this subsection, may withdraw an amount from the Security Fund,
provided that the permittee has not reimbursed the Village for such amount
within the fourteen (14) day notice period. Withdrawals may be made if the
permittee:
      1.   Fails to make any payment required to be made by the permittee
hereunder;
      2.   Fails to pay any liens relating to the facilities that are due and
unpaid;
      3.   Fails to reimburse the Village for any damages, claims, costs or
expenses which the Village has been compelled to pay or incur by reason of any
action or nonperformance by the permittee; or
      4.   Fails to comply with any provision of this chapter that the Village
determines can be remedied by an expenditure of an amount in the Security Fund.
   (E)   Replenishment: Within fourteen (14) days after receipt of written
notice from the Village that any amount has been withdrawn from the Security
Fund, the permittee shall restore the Security Fund to the amount specified in
subsection (C) of this section.
   (F)   Interest: The permittee may request that any and all interest accrued
on the amount in the Security Fund be returned to the permittee by the Village,
upon written request for said withdrawal to the Village, provided that any such
withdrawal does not reduce the Security Fund below the minimum balance required
in subsection (C) of this section.
   (G)   Closing And Return Of Security Fund: Upon completion of the work
authorized under the permit, the permittee shall be entitled to the return of
the Security Fund, or such portion thereof as remains on deposit, within a
reasonable time after account is taken for all offsets necessary to compensate
the Village for failure by the permittee to comply with any provisions of this
chapter or other applicable law. In the event of any revocation of the permit,
the Security Fund, and any and all accrued interest therein, shall become the
property of the Village to the extent necessary to cover any reasonable costs,
loss or damage incurred by the Village as a result of said revocation, provided
that any amounts in excess of said costs, loss or damage shall be refunded to
the permittee.
   (H)   Rights Not Limited: The rights reserved to the Village with respect to
the Security Fund are in addition to all other rights of the Village, whether
reserved by this chapter or otherwise authorized by law, and no action,
proceeding or exercise of right with respect to said Security Fund shall affect
any other right the Village may have. Notwithstanding the foregoing, the
Village shall not be entitled to a double monetary recovery with respect to any
of its rights which may be infringed or otherwise violated. (Ord. 18-09, 8-6-
2018; amd. Ord. 24-09, 8-19-2024)
6-7-13: PERMIT SUSPENSION AND REVOCATION:
   (A)   Village Right To Revoke Permit: The Village may revoke or suspend a
permit issued pursuant to this chapter for one or more of the following
reasons:
      1.   Fraudulent, false, misrepresenting, or materially incomplete
statements in the permit application;
      2.   Non-compliance with this chapter;
      3.   Permittee’s physical presence or presence of permittee’s facilities
on, over, above, along, upon, under, across, or within the rights-of-way
presents a direct or imminent threat to the public health, safety, or welfare;
or
      4.   Permittee’s failure to construct the facilities substantially in
accordance with the permit and approved plans.
   (B)   Notice Of Revocation Or Suspension: The Village shall send written
notice of its intent to revoke or suspend a permit issued pursuant to this
chapter stating the reason or reasons for the revocation or suspension and the
alternatives available to permittee under this section.
   (C)   Permittee Alternatives Upon Receipt Of Notice Of Revocation Or
Suspension:
      1.   Upon receipt of a written notice of revocation or suspension from
the Village, the permittee shall have the following options:
         (a)   Immediately provide the Village with evidence that no cause
exists for the revocation or suspension;
         (b)   Immediately correct, to the satisfaction of the Village, the
deficiencies stated in the written notice, providing written proof of such
correction to the Village within five (5) working days after receipt of the
written notice of revocation; or
         (c)   Immediately remove the facilities located on, over, above,
along, upon, under, across, or within the rights-of-way and restore the rights-
of-way to the satisfaction of the Village providing written proof of such
removal to the Village within ten (10) days after receipt of the written notice
of revocation.
      2.   The Village may, in its discretion, for good cause shown, extend the
time periods provided in this subsection.
   (D)   Stop Work Order: In addition to the issuance of a notice of revocation
or suspension, the Village may issue a stop work order immediately upon
discovery of any of the reasons for revocation set forth within subsection (A)
of this section.
   (E)   Failure Or Refusal Of The Permittee To Comply: If the permittee fails
to comply with the provisions of subsection (C) of this section, the Village or
its designee may, at the option of the Village:
      1.   Correct the deficiencies;
      2.   Upon not less than twenty (20) days’ notice to the permittee, remove
the subject facilities or equipment; or
      3.   After not less than thirty (30) days’ notice to the permittee of
failure to cure the non-compliance, deem them abandoned and property of the
Village.
   The permittee shall be liable in all events to the Village for all costs of
removal. (Ord. 18-09, 8-6-2018; amd. Ord. 24-09, 8-19-2024)
6-7-14: CHANGE OF OWNERSHIP OR OWNER'S IDENTITY OR LEGAL STATUS:
   (A)   Notification Of Change: A utility or wireless provider shall notify
the Village no less than thirty (30) days prior to the transfer of ownership of
any facility in the right-of-way or change in identity of the utility or
wireless provider. The new owner shall have all the obligations and privileges
enjoyed by the former owner under the permit, if any, and applicable laws,
ordinances, rules and regulations, including this chapter, with respect to the
work and facilities in the right-of-way.
   (B)   Amended Permit: A new owner shall request that any current permit be
amended to show current ownership. If the new owner fails to have a new or
amended permit issued in its name, the new owner shall be presumed to have
accepted, and agreed to be bound by, the terms and conditions of the permit if
the new owner uses the facility or allows it to remain on the Village’s right-
of- way.
   (C)   Insurance And Bonding: All required insurance coverage or bonding must
be changed to reflect the name of the new owner upon transfer. (Ord. 18-09, 8-
6-2018; amd. Ord. 24-09, 8-19-2024)
6-7-15: GENERAL CONSTRUCTION STANDARDS:
   (A)   Standards And Principles: All construction in the right-of- way shall
be consistent with applicable ordinances, codes, laws, rules and regulations,
and commonly recognized and accepted traffic control and construction
principles, sound engineering judgment and, where applicable, the principles
and standards set forth in the following IDOT publications, as amended from
time to time:
      1.   “Standard Specifications for Road and Bridge Construction”;
      2.   “Supplemental Specifications and Recurring Special Provisions”;
      3.   “Highway Design Manual”;
      4.   “Highway Standards Manual”;
      5.   “Standard Specifications for Traffic Control Items”;
      6.   “Illinois Manual On Uniform Traffic Control Devices” (92 Ill. Adm.
Code section 545);
      7.   “Flagger’s Handbook”; and
      8.   “Work Site Protection Manual for Daylight Maintenance Operations”.
   (B)   Interpretation Of Municipal Standards And Principles: If a discrepancy
exists between or among differing principles and standards required by this
chapter, the Superintendent of Public Works shall determine, in the exercise of
sound engineering judgment, which principles apply and such decision shall be
final. If requested, the Superintendent of Public Works shall state which
standard or principle will apply to the construction, maintenance, or operation
of a facility in the future. (Ord. 18-09, 8-6-2018; amd. Ord. 24-09, 8-19-2024)
6-7-16: TRAFFIC CONTROL:
   (A)   Minimum Requirements: The Village’s minimum requirements for traffic
protection are contained in the “Illinois Manual On Uniform Traffic Control
Devices” and this Code.
   (B)   Warning Signs, Protective Devices, And Flaggers: The utility or
wireless provider is responsible for providing and installing warning signs,
protective devices and flaggers, when necessary, meeting applicable Federal,
State, and local requirements for protection of the public and the utility’s or
wireless provider’s workers when performing any work on the rights-of-way.
   (C)   Interference With Traffic: All work shall be phased so that there is
minimum interference with pedestrian and vehicular traffic.
   (D)   Notice When Access Is Blocked: At least forty eight (48) hours prior
to beginning work that will partially or completely block access to any
residence, business or institution, the utility or wireless provider shall
notify the resident, business or institution of the approximate beginning time
and duration of such work; provided, however, that in cases involving emergency
repairs pursuant to section
6-7-22 of this chapter, the utility or wireless provider shall provide such
notice as is practicable under the circumstances.
   (E)   Compliance: The utility or wireless provider shall take immediate
action to correct any deficiencies in traffic protection requirements that are
brought to the utility’s or wireless provider’s attention by the Village. (Ord.
18-09, 8-6-2018; amd. Ord. 24-09, 8-19-2024)
6-7-17: LOCATION OF FACILITIES:
   (A)   General Requirements: In addition to location requirements applicable
to specific types of facilities, all facilities, regardless of type, shall be
subject to the general location requirements of this subsection.
      1.   No Interference With Village Facilities: No facilities shall be
placed in any location if the Superintendent of Public Works determines that
the proposed location will require the relocation or displacement of any of the
Village’s utility facilities or will otherwise interfere with the operation or
maintenance of any of the Village’s utility facilities.
      2.   Minimum Interference And Impact: The proposed location shall cause
only the minimum possible interference with the use of the right-of-way and
shall cause only the minimum possible impact upon, and interference with the
rights and reasonable convenience of property owners who adjoin said right-of-
way.
      3.   No Interference With Travel: No facility shall be placed in any
location that interferes with the usual travel on such right- of-way.
      4.   No Limitations On Visibility: No facility shall be placed in any
location so as to limit visibility of or by users of the right-of-way.
   (B)   Size Of Facilities: For utility facilities only, the proposed
installation shall use the smallest suitable vaults, boxes, equipment
enclosures, power pedestals, and/or cabinets then in use by the facility owner,
regardless of location, for the particular application. Wireless facilities
shall comply with size limitations described in section of this chapter.
   (C)   Parallel Facilities Located Within Highways:
      1.   Overhead Parallel Facilities: An overhead parallel facility may be
located within the right-of-way lines of a highway only if:
         (a)   Lines are located as near as practicable to the right-of-way
line and as nearly parallel to the right-of-way line as reasonable pole
alignment will permit;
         (b)   Where pavement is curbed, poles are as remote as practicable
from the curb with a minimum distance of two feet (2') (0.6 m) behind the face
of the curb, where available;
         (c)   Where pavement is uncurbed, poles are as remote from pavement
edge as practicable with minimum distance of four feet (4') (1.2 m) outside the
outer shoulder line of the roadway and are not within the clear zone;
         (d)   No pole is located in the ditch line of a highway; and
         (e)   No ground-mounted appurtenance will be permissible within the
highway.
      2.   Underground Parallel Facilities: An underground parallel facility
may be located within the right-of-way lines of a highway only if:
         (a)   The facility is located as near the right-of-way line as
practicable and not more than eight feet (8') (2.4 m) from and parallel to the
right-of-way line;
         (b)   A new facility may be located under the paved portion of a
highway only if other locations are impracticable or inconsistent with sound
engineering judgment (e.g., a new cable may be installed in existing conduit
without disrupting the pavement); and
         (c)   In the case of an underground power or communications line, the
facility shall be located as near the right-of-way line as practicable and not
more than five feet (5') (1.5 m) from the right-of-way line and any above-
grounded appurtenance shall be located within one foot (1') (0.3 m) of the
right-of-way line or as near as practicable.
   (D)   Facilities Crossing Highways:
      1.   No Future Disruption: The construction and design of crossing
facilities installed between the ditch lines or curb lines of Village highways
may require the incorporation of materials and protections (such as encasement
or additional cover) to avoid settlement or future repairs to the roadbed
resulting from the installation of such crossing facilities.
      2.   Cattle Passes, Culverts, Or Drainage Facilities: Crossing facilities
shall not be located in cattle passes, culverts, or drainage facilities.
      3.   Ninety Degree Crossing Required: Crossing facilities shall cross at
or as near to a ninety degree (90°) angle to the centerline as practicable.
      4.   Overhead Power Or Communication Facility: An overhead power or
communication facility may cross a highway only if:
         (a)   It has a minimum vertical line clearance as required by ICC’s
rules entitled, “Construction of Electric Power and Communication Lines” (83
Ill. Adm. Code 305);
         (b)   Poles are located within one foot (1') (0.3 m) of the right- of-
way line of the highway and outside of the clear zone; and
         (c)   Overhead crossings at major intersections are avoided.
      5.   Underground Power Or Communication Facility: An underground power or
communication facility may cross a highway only if:
         (a)   The design materials and construction methods will provide
maximum maintenance-free service life; and
         (b)   Capacity for the utility’s or wireless provider’s foreseeable
future expansion needs is provided in the initial installation.
      6.   Markers: The Village may require the utility or wireless provider to
provide a marker at each right-of-way line where an underground facility other
than a power or communication facility crosses a highway. Each marker shall
identify the type of facility, the utility, and an emergency phone number.
Markers may also be eliminated as provided in current Federal Regulations (49
CFR section 192.707 (1989), as amended).
   (E)   Utility Facilities To Be Located Within Particular Rights-Of- Way: The
Village may require that utility facilities be located within particular
rights-of-way that are not highways, rather than within particular highways.
   (F)   Freestanding Facilities:
      1.   The Village may restrict the location and size of any freestanding
facility located within a right-of-way.
      2.   The Village may require any freestanding facility located within a
right-of-way to be screened from view.
   (G)   Utility Facilities Installed Above Ground: Above ground facilities may
be installed only if:
      1.   No other existing facilities in the area are located underground;
      2.   New underground installation is not technically feasible;
      3.   The proposed installation will be made at a location, and will
employ suitable design and materials, to provide the greatest protection of
aesthetic qualities of the area being traversed without adversely affecting
safety. Suitable designs include, but are not limited to, self-supporting
armless, single-pole construction with vertical configuration of conductors and
cable. Existing utility poles and light standards shall be used wherever
practicable; the installation of additional utility poles is strongly
discouraged, and
      4.   For internet service providers and mobile carriers, any
communication infrastructure is strongly discouraged from being above ground
and would need to show how they meet the criteria in Section
6-7-17(G) and is deemed by the Village that there are no other possibilities
for their facilities to be underground.
   (H)   Utility Facility Attachments To Bridges Or Roadway Structures:
      1.   Facilities may be installed as attachments to bridges or roadway
structures only where the utility has demonstrated that all other means of
accommodating the facility are not practicable. Other means shall include, but
are not limited to, underground, underwater, independent poles, cable supports
and tower supports, all of which are completely separated from the bridge or
roadway structure. Facilities transmitting commodities that are volatile,
flammable, corrosive, or energized, especially those under significant pressure
or potential, present high degrees of risk and such installations are not
permitted.
      2.   A utility shall include in its request to accommodate a facility
installation on a bridge or roadway structure supporting data demonstrating the
impracticability of alternate routing. Approval or disapproval of an
application for facility attachment to a bridge or roadway structure will be
based upon the following considerations:
         (a)   The type, volume, pressure or voltage of the commodity to be
transmitted and an evaluation of the resulting risk to persons and property in
the event of damage to or failure of the facility;
         (b)   The type, length, value, and relative importance of the highway
structure in the transportation system;
         (c)   The alternative routings available to the utility and their
comparative practicability;
         (d)   The proposed method of attachment;
         (e)   The ability of the structure to bear the increased load of the
proposed facility;
         (f)   The degree of interference with bridge maintenance and painting;
         (g)   The effect on the visual quality of the structure; and
         (h)   The public benefit expected from the utility service as compared
to the risk involved.
   (I)   Not Applicable To Wireless Providers: The requirements under
subsections (G) and (H) of this section are only applicable to utilities, and
shall not apply to wireless providers seeking to collocate, or already
collocating, small wireless facilities in the right-of-way. Wireless providers
must comply with the requirements of section
6-7-9 of this chapter.
   (J)   Appearance Standards:
      1.   The Village may require that utilities or wireless providers install
screening or otherwise camouflage facilities in particular locations in order
to preserve visual quality.
      2.   A facility may be constructed only if its construction does not
require extensive removal or alteration of trees or terrain features visible to
the right-of-way user or to adjacent residents and property owners, and if it
does not impair the aesthetic quality of the lands being traversed. (Ord. 18-
09, 8-6-2018; amd. Ord. 24-09, 8-19-2024)
6-7-18: CONSTRUCTION METHODS AND MATERIALS:
   (A)   Standards And Requirements For Particular Types Of Construction
Methods:
      1.   Boring Or Jacking:
         (a)   Pits And Shoring: Boring or jacking under rights-of-way shall be
accomplished from pits located at a minimum distance specified by the Village
Superintendent of Public Works from the edge of the pavement. Pits for boring
or jacking shall be excavated no more than forty eight (48) hours in advance of
boring or jacking operations and backfilled within forty eight (48) hours after
boring or jacking operations are completed. While pits are open, they shall be
clearly marked and protected by barricades. Shoring shall be designed, erected,
supported, braced, and maintained so that it will safely support all vertical
and lateral loads that may be imposed upon it during the boring or jacking
operation.
         (b)   Wet Boring Or Jetting: Wet boring or jetting shall not be
permitted under the roadway.
         (c)   Borings With Diameters Greater Than Six Inches: Borings over six
inches (6") (0.15 m) in diameter shall be accomplished with an auger and
following pipe, and the diameter of the auger shall not exceed the outside
diameter of the following pipe by more than one inch (1") (25 mm).
         (d)   Borings With Diameters Six Inches Or Less: Borings of six inches
(6") or less in diameter may be accomplished by either jacking guided with
auger or auger and following pipe method.
         (e)   Tree Preservation: Any facility located within the drip line of
any tree designated by the Village to be preserved or protected shall be bored
under or around the root system.
      2.   Trenching: Trenching for facility installation, repair, or
maintenance on rights-of-way shall be done in accord with the applicable
portions of section 603 of IDOT’s Standard Specifications for Road and Bridge
Construction.
         (a)   Length: The length of open trench shall be kept to the
practicable minimum consistent with requirements for pipe-line testing. Only
one-half (1/2) of any intersection may have an open trench at any time unless
special permission is obtained from the Superintendent of Public Works.
         (b)   Open Trench And Excavated Material: Open trench and windrowed
excavated material shall be protected as required by the Manual On Uniform
Traffic Control Devices. Where practicable, the excavated material shall be
deposited between the roadway and the trench as added protection. Excavated
material shall not be allowed to remain on the paved portion of the roadway.
Where right-of-way width does not allow for windrowing excavated material off
the paved portion of the roadway, excavated material shall be hauled to an off-
road location.
         (c)   Drip Line Of Trees: The utility or wireless provider shall not
trench within the drip line of any tree designated by the Village to be
preserved.
      3.   Backfilling:
         (a)   Any pit, trench, or excavation created during the installation
of facilities shall be backfilled for its full width, depth, and length using
methods and materials in accordance with IDOT’s “Standard Specifications for
Road and Bridge Construction”. When excavated material is hauled away or is
unsuitable for backfill, suitable granular backfill shall be used.
         (b)   For a period of three (3) years from the date construction of a
facility is completed, the utility or wireless provider shall be responsible to
remove and restore any backfilled area that has settled due to construction of
the facility. If so ordered by the Superintendent of Public Works, the utility
or wireless provider, at its expense, shall remove any pavement and backfill
material to the top of the installed facility, place and properly compact new
backfill material, and restore new pavement, sidewalk, curbs, and driveways to
the proper grades, as determined by the Superintendent of Public Works.
      4.   Pavement Cuts: Pavement cuts for facility installation or repair
shall be permitted on a highway only if that portion of the highway is closed
to traffic. If a variance to the limitation set forth in this subsection (A)4
is permitted under section
6-7-23 of this chapter, the following requirements shall apply:
         (a)   Any excavation under pavements shall be backfilled and compacted
as soon as practicable with granular material of CA-6 or CA-10 gradation, as
designated by the Superintendent of Public Works.
         (b)   Restoration of pavement, in kind, shall be accomplished as soon
as practicable, and temporary repair with bituminous mixture shall be provided
immediately. Any subsequent failure of either the temporary repair or the
restoration shall be rebuilt upon notification by the Village.
         (c)   All saw cuts shall be full depth.
         (d)   For all rights-of-way which have been reconstructed with a
concrete surface/base in the last seven (7) years, or resurfaced in the last
three (3) years, permits shall not be issued unless such work is determined to
be an emergency repair or other work considered necessary and unforeseen before
the time of the reconstruction or unless a pavement cut is necessary for a
JULIE locate.
      5.   Encasement:
         (a)   Casing pipe shall be designed to withstand the load of the
highway and any other superimposed loads. The casing shall be continuous either
by one-piece fabrication or by welding or jointed installation approved by the
Village.
         (b)   The venting, if any, of any encasement shall extend within one
foot (1') (0.3 m) of the right-of-way line. No above-ground vent pipes shall be
located in the area established as clear zone for that particular section of
the highway.
         (c)   In the case of water main or service crossing, encasement shall
be furnished between bore pits unless continuous pipe or Village-approved
jointed pipe is used under the roadway. Casing may be omitted only if pipe is
installed prior to highway construction and carrier pipe is continuous or
mechanical joints are of a type approved by the Village. Bell and spigot type
pipe shall be encased regardless of installation method.
         (d)   In the case of gas pipelines of sixty (60) psig or less,
encasement may be eliminated.
         (e)   In the case of gas pipelines or petroleum products pipelines
with installations of more than sixty (60) psig, encasement may be eliminated
only if:
         (1)    Extra heavy pipe is used that precludes future maintenance or
repair; and
         (2)   Cathodic protection of the pipe is provided.
         (f)   If encasement is eliminated for a gas or petroleum products
pipeline, the facility shall be located so as to provide that construction does
not disrupt the right-of-way.
      6.   Minimum Cover Of Underground Facilities: Cover shall be provided and
maintained at least in the amount specified in the following table for minimum
cover for the type of facility:
 
Type Of Facility                         Minimum Cover
Electric lines                           30 inches (0.8 m)
Communication, cable or video service    18 to 24 inches (0.46 m to 0.6 m, as
lines                                    determined by Village)
Gas or petroleum products                30 inches (0.8 m)
Water line                               Sufficient cover to provide freeze
                                         protection
Sanitary sewer, storm sewer, or drainage Sufficient cover to provide freeze
line                                     protection
 
   (B)   Standards And Requirements For Particular Types Of Facilities:
      1.   Electric Power Or Communication Lines:
         (a)   Code Compliance: Electric power or communications facilities
within Village rights-of-way shall be constructed, operated, and maintained in
conformity with the provisions of 83 Ill. Adm. Code part 305 (formerly general
order 160 of the Illinois Commerce Commission) entitled “Rules for Construction
of Electric Power and Communication Lines”, and the National Electrical Safety
Code.
         (b)   Overhead Facilities: Overhead power or communication facilities
shall use single pole construction and, where practicable, joint use of poles
shall be used. Utilities or wireless providers shall make every reasonable
effort to design the installation so guys and braces will not be needed.
Variances may be allowed if there is no feasible alternative and if guy wires
are equipped with guy guards for maximum visibility.
         (c)   Underground Facilities:
         (1)   Cable may be installed by trenching provided that special
consideration is given to boring in order to minimize damage when crossing
improved entrances and side roads.
         (2)   If a crossing is installed by boring or jacking, encasement
shall be provided between jacking or bore pits. Encasement may be eliminated
only if:
            A.   The crossing is installed by the use of “moles”, “whip
augers”, or other approved methods which compress the earth to make the opening
for cable installation; or
            B.   The installation is by the open trench method which is only
permitted prior to roadway construction.
         (3)   Cable shall be grounded in accordance with the National
Electrical Safety Code.
         (d)   Burial Of Drops: All temporary service drops placed between
November 1 of the prior year and March 15 of the current year, also known as
“snowdrops”, shall be buried by May 31 of the current year, weather permitting,
unless otherwise permitted by the Village. Weather permitting, utilities shall
bury all temporary drops, excluding snowdrops, within ten (10) business days
after placement.
      2.   Underground Facilities Other Than Electric Power Or Communication
Lines: Underground facilities other than electric power or communication lines
may be installed by:
         (a)   The use of “moles”, “whip augers”, or other approved methods
which compress the earth to move the opening for the pipe;
         (b)   Jacking or boring with vented encasement provided between the
ditch lines or toes of slopes of the highway;
         (c)   Open trench with vented encasement between ultimate ditch lines
or toes of slopes, but only if prior to roadway construction; or
         (d)   Tunneling with vented encasement, but only if installation is
not possible by other means.
      3.   Gas Transmission, Distribution And Service: Gas pipelines within
rights-of-way shall be constructed, maintained, and operated in a Village
approved manner and in conformance with the Federal Code of the Office of
Pipeline Safety Operations, Department of Transportation, part 192 -
Transportation of Natural and Other Gas by Pipeline: Minimum Federal Safety
Standards (49 CFR section 192), IDOT’s Standard Specifications for Road and
Bridge Construction, and all other applicable laws, rules, and regulations.
      4.   Petroleum Products Pipelines: Petroleum products pipelines within
rights-of-way shall conform to the applicable sections of ANSI Standard Code
for Pressure Piping (Liquid Petroleum Transportation Piping Systems ANSI-
B 31.4).
      5.   Water Lines, Sanitary Sewer Lines, Stormwater Sewer Lines Or
Drainage Lines: Water lines, sanitary sewer lines, storm sewer lines, and
drainage lines within rights-of-way shall meet or exceed the recommendations of
the current Standard Specifications for Water and Sewer Main Construction in
Illinois.
      6.   Ground Mounted Appurtenances: Ground mounted appurtenances to
overhead or underground facilities, when permitted within a right-of-way, shall
be provided with a vegetation-free area extending one foot (1') (305 mm) in
width beyond the appurtenance in all directions. The vegetation-free area may
be provided by an extension of the mounting pad, or by heavy duty plastic or
similar material approved by the Superintendent of Public Works. With the
approval of the Superintendent of Public Works, shrubbery surrounding the
appurtenance may be used in place of vegetation-free area. The housing for
ground-mounted appurtenances shall be painted a neutral color to blend with the
surroundings.
   (C)   Materials:
      1.   General Standards: The materials used in constructing facilities
within rights-of-way shall be those meeting the accepted standards of the
appropriate industry, the applicable portions of IDOT’s Standard Specifications
for Road and Bridge Construction, the requirements of the Illinois Commerce
Commission, or the standards established by other official regulatory agencies
for the appropriate industry.
      2.   Material Storage On Right-Of-Way: No material shall be stored on the
right-of-way without the prior written approval of the Superintendent of Public
Works. When such storage is permitted, all pipe, conduit, wire, poles, cross
arms, or other materials shall be distributed along the right-of-way prior to
and during installation in a manner to minimize hazards to the public or an
obstacle to right-of-way maintenance or damage to the right-of- way and other
property. If material is to be stored on the right- of-way, prior approval must
be obtained from the Village.
      3.   Hazardous Materials: The plans submitted by the utility or wireless
provider to the Village shall identify any hazardous materials that may be
involved in the construction of the new facilities or removal of any existing
facilities.
   (D)   Operational Restrictions:
      1.   Construction operations on rights-of-way may, at the discretion of
the Village, be required to be discontinued when such operations would create
hazards to traffic or the public health, safety, and welfare. Such operations
may also be required to be discontinued or restricted when conditions are such
that construction would result in extensive damage to the right-of-way or other
property.
      2.   These restrictions may be waived by the Superintendent of Public
Works when emergency work is required to restore vital utility services.
      3.   Unless otherwise permitted by the Village, the hours of construction
are those set forth in this Code.
   (E)   Location Of Existing Facilities: Any utility or wireless provider
proposing to construct facilities in the Village shall contact JULIE and
ascertain the presence and location of existing above-ground and underground
facilities within the rights-of-way to be occupied by its proposed facilities.
The Village will make its permit records available to a utility or wireless
provider for the purpose of identifying possible facilities. When notified of
an excavation or when requested by the Village or by JULIE, a utility or
wireless provider shall locate and physically mark its underground facilities
within forty-eight (48) hours, excluding weekends and holidays, in accordance
with the Illinois Underground Facilities Damage Prevention Act 1 . (Ord. 18-09,
8-6-2018; amd. Ord. 24-09, 8-19-2024)
 
Notes
1 1. 220 ILCS 50/1 et seq.
6-7-19: VEGETATION CONTROL:
   (A)   Electric Utilities; Compliance With State Laws And Regulations: An
electric utility shall conduct all tree-trimming and vegetation control
activities in the right-of-way in accordance with applicable Illinois laws and
regulations, and additionally, with such local franchise or other agreement
with the Village as permitted by law.
   (B)   Other Utilities Or Wireless Providers; Tree Trimming Permit Required:
Tree trimming that is done by any other utility or wireless provider with
facilities in the right-of-way and that is not performed pursuant to applicable
Illinois laws and regulations specifically governing same, shall not be
considered a normal maintenance operation, but shall require the application
for, and the issuance of, a permit, in addition to any other permit required
under this chapter.
      1.   Application For Tree Trimming Permit: Applications for tree trimming
permits shall include assurance that the work will be accomplished by competent
workers with supervision who are experienced in accepted tree pruning
practices. Tree trimming permits shall designate an expiration date in the
interest of assuring that the work will be expeditiously accomplished.
      2.   Damage To Trees: Poor pruning practices resulting in damaged or
misshapen trees will not be tolerated and shall be grounds for cancellation of
the tree trimming permit and for assessment of damages. The Village will
require compensation for trees extensively damaged and for trees removed
without authorization. The formula developed by the International Society of
Arboriculture will be used as a basis for determining the compensation for
damaged trees or unauthorized removal of trees. The Village may require the
removal and replacement of trees if trimming or radical pruning would leave
them in an unacceptable condition.
   (C)   Specimen Trees Or Trees Of Special Significance: The Village may
require that special measures be taken to preserve specimen trees or trees of
special significance. The required measures may consist of higher poles, side
arm extensions, covered wire or other means.
   (D)   Chemical Use:
      1.   Except as provided in the following paragraph, no utility or
wireless provider shall spray, inject or pour any chemicals on or near any
trees, shrubs or vegetation in the Village for any purpose, including the
control of growth, insects or disease.
      2.   Spraying of any type of brush-killing chemicals will not be
permitted on rights-of-way unless the utility or wireless provider demonstrates
to the satisfaction of the Superintendent of Public Works that such spraying is
the only practicable method of vegetation control. (Ord. 18-09, 8-6-2018; amd.
Ord. 24-09, 8-19-2024)
6-7-20: REMOVAL, RELOCATION, OR MODIFICATIONS OF FACILITIES:
   (A)   Notice: Within ninety (90) days following written notice from the
Village, a utility or wireless provider shall, at its own expense, protect,
support, temporarily or permanently disconnect, remove, relocate, change or
alter the position of any utility or wireless facilities within the rights-of-
way whenever the Corporate Authorities have determined that such removal,
relocation, change or alteration, is reasonably necessary for the construction,
repair, maintenance, or installation of any Village improvement in or upon, or
the operations of the Village in or upon, the rights-of-way.
   (B)   Removal Of Unauthorized Facilities: Within thirty (30) days following
written notice from the Village, any utility or wireless provider that owns,
controls, or maintains any unauthorized facility or related appurtenances
within the rights- of-way shall, at its own expense, remove all or any part of
such facilities or appurtenances from the rights-of-way. A facility is
unauthorized and subject to removal in the following circumstances:
      1.   Upon expiration or termination of the permittee’s license or
franchise, unless otherwise permitted by applicable law;
      2.   If the facility was constructed or installed without the prior grant
of a license or franchise, if required;
      3.   If the facility was constructed or installed without prior issuance
of a required permit in violation of this chapter; or
      4.   If the facility was constructed or installed at a location not
permitted by the permittee’s license or franchise.
   (C)   Emergency Removal Or Relocation Of Facilities: The Village retains the
right and privilege to cut or move any facilities located within the rights-of-
way of the Village, as the Village may determine to be necessary, appropriate
or useful in response to any public health or safety emergency. If
circumstances permit, the Municipality shall attempt to notify the utility or
wireless provider, if known, prior to cutting or removing a facility and shall
notify the utility or wireless provider, if known, after cutting or removing a
facility.
   (D)   Wireless Provider Options Upon Removal Of A Village Utility Pole: The
Village may eliminate above-ground utility poles as long as such decision is
made on a nondiscriminatory basis. In the event the Village chooses to
eliminate a utility pole upon which a small wireless facility is collocated,
the Village will either: 1) install and maintain a reasonable alternative
utility pole or wireless support structure for the collocation of the small
wireless facility; 2) offer to sell the utility pole to the wireless provider
at a reasonable cost; or 3) allow the wireless provider to install its own
utility pole so it can maintain serviced from that location.
   (E)   Abandonment Of Facilities: Upon abandonment of a facility within the
rights-of-way of the Village, the utility or wireless provider shall notify the
Village within ninety (90) days. Following receipt of such notice the Village
may direct the utility or wireless provider to remove all or any portion of the
facility if the Superintendent of Public Works determines that such removal
will be in the best interest of the public health, safety and welfare. In the
event that the Village does not direct the utility or wireless provider that
abandoned the facility to remove it, by giving notice of abandonment to the
Village, the abandoning utility or wireless provider shall be deemed to consent
to the alteration or removal of all or any portion of the facility by another
utility or person.
   (F)   Small Wireless Facilities; Deemed Abandoned: A small wireless facility
that is not operated for a continuous period of twelve (12) months shall be
considered abandoned. The owner of the facility shall remove the small wireless
facility within ninety (90) days after receipt of written notice from the
Village notifying the wireless provider of the abandonment. The notice shall be
sent by certified or registered mail, return receipt requested, by the Village
to the owner at the last known address of the wireless provider. If the small
wireless facility is not removed within ninety (90) days of such notice, the
Village may remove or cause the removal of such facility pursuant to the terms
of its pole attachment agreement for Municipal utility poles or through
whatever actions are provided for abatement of nuisances or by other law for
removal and cost recovery. (Ord. 18-09, 8-6-2018; amd. Ord. 24-09, 8-19-2024)
6-7-21: CLEANUP AND RESTORATION:
The utility or wireless provider shall remove all excess material and restore
all turf and terrain and other property within ten (10) days after any portion
of the rights-of-way are disturbed, damaged or destroyed due to construction or
maintenance by the utility or wireless provider, all to the satisfaction of the
Village. This includes restoration of entrances and side roads. Restoration of
roadway surfaces shall be made using materials and methods approved by the
Superintendent of Public Works. Such cleanup and repair may be required to
consist of backfilling, regrading, reseeding, resodding, or any other
requirement to restore the right-of-way to a condition substantially equivalent
to that which existed prior to the commencement of the project. The time period
provided in this section may be extended by the Superintendent of Public Works
for good cause shown.
   (A)    Should a utility, provider (telecommunications or wireless) or their
contractors or any others working or operating in the right-of-way fail to
remove all excess material and restore turf and terrain to the satisfaction of
the Village, they will not receive their ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00)
deposit defined in Section
6-7-5-A-1 and be charged the full costs of restoration (if greater than the
deposit), including all related fees. The Village will charge the permit
applicant; however, the Village reserves the right to charge whoever the
Village finds responsible. Should the Village determine the applicant has
performed insufficient restoration efforts, the Village will notify the
applicant and provide    ten (10) business days to improve the restoration. If
afterwards the Village still determines the restoration efforts remain
insufficient, the Village will proceed with charging the applicant the fees
listed above. (Ord. 18-09, 8-6-2018; amd. Ord. 24-09, 8-19-2024)
6-7-22: MAINTENANCE AND EMERGENCY MAINTENANCE:
   (A)   General: Facilities on, over, above, along, upon, under, across, or
within rights-of-way are to be maintained by or for the utility or wireless
provider in a manner satisfactory to the Village and at the utility’s or
wireless provider’s expense.
      1.   If a utility or wireless provider does not maintain their
infrastructure in a manner satisfactory to the Village, the Village will notify
the utility or provider of the deficiency. If the utility or provider does not
correct the deficiency within 10 days (or sooner if the deficiency represents
and emergency), the Village will make arrangements to correct the deficiency
and the utility or provider will be charged in full (including the Village’s
time and costs) for the repairs.
   (B)   Emergency Maintenance Procedures: Emergencies may justify non-
compliance with normal procedures for securing a permit:
      1.   If an emergency creates a hazard on the traveled portion of the
right-of-way, the utility or wireless provider shall take immediate steps to
provide all necessary protection for traffic on the highway or the public on
the right-of-way including the use of signs, lights, barricades or flaggers. If
a hazard does not exist on the traveled way, but the nature of the emergency is
such as to require the parking on the shoulder of equipment required in repair
operations, adequate signs and lights shall be provided. Parking on the
shoulder in such an emergency will only be permitted when no other means of
access to the facility is available.
      2.   In an emergency, the utility or wireless provider shall, as soon as
possible, notify the Superintendent of Public Works or his or her duly
authorized agent of the emergency, informing him or her as to what steps have
been taken for protection of the traveling public and what will be required to
make the necessary repairs. If the nature of the emergency is such as to
interfere with the free movement of traffic, the Village police shall be
notified immediately.
      3.   In an emergency, the utility or wireless provider shall use all
means at hand to complete repairs as rapidly as practicable and with the least
inconvenience to the traveling public.
   (C)   Emergency Repairs: The utility or wireless provider must file in
writing with the Village a description of the repairs undertaken in the right-
of-way within forty eight (48) hours after an emergency repair.
   (D)   Should the utility or wireless provider fail to perform up to the
standards outlined above during an emergency, the Village reserves the right to
fine the provider the deposit fee of ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00) and
charge the utility or provider all costs to correct the deficiency (including
the Village’s time and any other direct costs related to correcting the
deficiency). (Ord. 18-09, 8-6-2018; amd. Ord. 24-09, 8-19-2024)
6-7-23: VARIANCES:
   (A)   Request For Variance: A utility or wireless provider requesting a
variance from one or more of the provisions of this chapter must do so in
writing to the Superintendent of Public Works as a part of the permit
application. The request shall identify each provision of this chapter from
which a variance is requested and the reasons why a variance should be granted.
   (B)   Authority To Grant Variances: The Superintendent of Public Works shall
decide whether a variance is authorized for each provision of this chapter
identified in the variance request on an individual basis.
   (C)   Conditions For Granting Of Variance: The Superintendent of Public
Works may authorize a variance only if the utility or wireless provider
requesting the variance has demonstrated that:
      1.   One or more conditions not under the control of the utility or
wireless provider (such as terrain features or an irregular right-of-way line)
create a special hardship that would make enforcement of the provision
unreasonable, given the public purposes to be achieved by the provision; and
      2.   All other designs, methods, materials, locations or facilities that
would conform with the provision from which a variance is requested are
impracticable in relation to the requested approach.
   (D)   Additional Conditions For Granting Of A Variance: As a condition for
authorizing a variance, the Superintendent of Public Works may require the
utility or wireless provider requesting the variance to meet reasonable
standards and conditions that may or may not be expressly contained within this
chapter but which carry out the purposes of this chapter.
   (E)   Right To Appeal: Any utility or wireless provider aggrieved by any
order, requirement, decision or determination, including denial of a variance,
made by the Superintendent of Public Works under the provisions of this chapter
shall have the right to appeal to the Corporate Authorities, or such other
board or commission as it may designate. The application for appeal shall be
submitted in writing to the Village Clerk within thirty (30) days after the
date of such order, requirement, decision or determination. The Corporate
Authorities shall commence its consideration of the appeal at the Board’s next
regularly scheduled meeting occurring at least seven (7) days after the filing
of the appeal. The Corporate Authorities shall timely decide the appeal. (Ord.
18-09, 8-6-2018; amd. Ord. 24-09, 8-19-2024)
6-7-24: DISPUTE RESOLUTION FOR WIRELESS FACILITIES:
The Circuit Court of Kankakee County shall have exclusive jurisdiction to
resolve all disputes arising under the Small Wireless Facilities Deployment
Act. Pending resolution of a dispute concerning rates for collocation of small
wireless facilities on Municipal utility poles within the right-of-way, the
Village shall allow the collocating person to collocate on its poles at annual
rates of no more than two hundred dollars ($200.00) per year per Municipal
utility pole, with rates to be determined upon final resolution of the dispute.
(Ord. 18-09, 8-6-2018; amd. Ord. 24-09, 8-19-2024)
6-7-25: PENALTIES:
Any person who violates, disobeys, omits, neglects or refuses to comply with
any of the provisions of this chapter shall be subject to fine in accordance
with the penalty provisions of section
1-4-1 of this Code. There may be times when the Village will incur delay or
other costs, including third party claims, because the utility or wireless
provider will not or cannot perform its duties under its permit and this
chapter. Unless the utility or wireless provider shows that another allocation
of the cost of undertaking the requested action is appropriate, the utility or
wireless provider shall bear the Village’s costs of damages and its costs of
installing, maintaining, modifying, relocating, or removing the facility that
is the subject of the permit. No other administrative agency or commission may
review or overrule a permit related cost apportionment of the Village.
Sanctions may be imposed upon a utility or wireless provider that does not pay
the costs apportioned to it. (Ord. 18-09, 8-6-2018; amd. Ord. 24-09, 8-19-2024)
6-7-26: ENFORCEMENT:
Nothing in this chapter shall be construed as limiting any additional or
further remedies that the Village may have for enforcement of this chapter.
(Ord. 18-09, 8-6-2018; amd. Ord. 24-09, 8-19-2024)
CHAPTER 8
LAKES, PONDS, CREEKS, AND RETENTION/DETENTION AREAS
SECTION:
6-8-1: Activities Prohibited
6-8-2: Exception
6-8-3: Penalty
6-8-4: Administration
6-8-1: ACTIVITIES PROHIBITED:
It shall be unlawful for any person to fish, swim, boat, paddle-board, kayak,
wade, walk, skate, or otherwise enter into or upon any lake, pond, creek, or
retention/detention area holding or having water in any state of matter that is
owned or maintained by the Village. (Ord. 19-34, 1-21-2020)
6-8-2: EXCEPTIONS:
Fishing from the banks of any lake, pond, creek, or retention/detention area
owned or maintained by the Village shall be permitted where no signs are posted
prohibiting that activity or trespassers, in general. (Ord. 19-34, 1-21-2020)
6-8-3: PENALTY:
Any person found in violation of the provisions of this chapter shall be fined
not less than one hundred, $100 and not more than seven hundred fifty, $750 for
each offense. Each day a violation continues shall constitute a separate and
distinct offense. (Ord. 19-34, 1-21-2020)
6-8-4: ADMINISTRATION:
Violations of this chapter may be administered in accordance with the
provisions of Title 1, Administrative, Chapter 17, Administrative Adjudication,
of the Municipal Code for the Village of Manteno. (Ord. 19-34, 1-21-2020)
TITLE 7
TRAFFIC REGULATIONS
CHAPTER 1
DEFINITIONS AND GENERAL PROVISIONS
SECTION:
7-1-1: Definitions
7-1-2: Police Chief
7-1-3: Duties
7-1-4: Records
7-1-5: Accident Records
7-1-6: Enforcement
7-1-7: Compliance
7-1-8: Obedience To Officers
7-1-9: Human Or Animal Propulsion
7-1-10: Skates And Wagons
7-1-11: Governmental Vehicles
7-1-12: Emergency Vehicles
7-1-13: Color (Rep. by Ord. 01-22, 10-15-2001)
7-1-14: Approach Of Emergency Vehicle
7-1-15: Accidents; Operator's Duty
7-1-16: Display Of Registration Plates
7-1-1: DEFINITIONS:
Whenever in this title the following words and phrases are used, they shall
have the meanings respectively ascribed to them in this chapter:
ABANDONED VEHICLE: A motor vehicle standing or parked on the public way which
vehicle is either: a) in such state of disrepair as to be incapable of being
driven in its present condition or b) has not been used or moved for more than
seven (7) consecutive days and is probably deserted.
ALLEY: A public way within a block generally giving access to the rear of lots
or buildings and not used for general traffic circulation.
AUTHORIZED EMERGENCY VEHICLE: Any vehicle of the police or fire departments,
the fire or police department of any governmental agency, or any ambulance, or
any repair or service vehicle of a governmental agency or public service
corporation.
BICYCLE: Every device propelled by human power upon which any person may ride,
having two (2) tandem wheels either of which is over twenty inches (20") in
diameter and including any device generally recognized as a bicycle though
equipped with two (2) front or two (2) rear wheels.
BUS: Every motor vehicle designed for carrying more than ten (10) passengers
and used for the transportation of persons; and every motor vehicle, other than
a taxicab, designed and used for the transportation of persons for
compensation.
BUS STOP: A fixed area in the roadway parallel and adjacent to the curb or edge
of the established roadway set aside for the expeditious loading and unloading
of passengers only.
BUSINESS STREET: The length of any street between intersections, when more than
fifty percent (50%) of the entire frontage at ground level of said street is in
use for retail or wholesale business by hotels, banks or office buildings
excepting schools.
CROSSWALK: That portion of a roadway ordinarily included within the
prolongation or connection of sidewalk lines at intersections, or any other
portion of a roadway clearly indicated for pedestrian crossing by markings.
DRIVER: Every person who operates or is in actual physical control of a
vehicle.
FREIGHT CURB LOADING ZONE: A space adjacent to a curb for the exclusive use of
vehicles during the loading or unloading of freight.
HOLIDAYS: When used in this title or on official signs erected by authority of
this chapter, shall mean New Year's Day, Memorial Day, Independence Day, Labor
Day, Thanksgiving Day and Christmas Day.
INTERSECTION: The area embraced within the prolongation or connection of the
property lines of two (2) or more streets which join at an angle, whether or
not one such street crosses the other.
LANED ROADWAY: A roadway which is divided into two (2) or more marked lanes for
vehicular traffic.
LIMITED ACCESS HIGHWAY: Every public way in respect to which owners or
occupants of abutting property or lands and other persons have no legal right
of access to or from the same, except at such points only and in such manner as
may be determined by the public authority having jurisdiction over such public
way.
MOTOR VEHICLE: Every vehicle which is self-propelled.
MOTORCYCLE: Every motor vehicle having a saddle for use of the rider and
designed to travel on not more than three (3) wheels in contact with the ground
but excluding a tractor.
MOTORDRIVEN CYCLE: Every motorcycle, including every motor scooter, with a
motor which produces not to exceed five (5) horsepower, and every bicycle with
motor attached.
OFFICIAL TIME STANDARD: Whenever certain hours are named herein they shall mean
standard time or daylight saving time as may be in current use in the village.
ONE-WAY STREET OR ALLEY: A public way upon the roadway of which traffic is
permitted to travel in one direction only.
OPERATOR: Every person who operates or is in actual physical control of a
vehicle.
PARKING (TO PARK): The standing of a vehicle whether occupied or not, upon a
roadway for a period of time greater than is necessary either for loading or
unloading or in obedience to traffic regulations or official traffic signs or
signals.
PASSENGER CURB LOADING ZONE: A space adjacent to a curb or edge of the
established roadway reserved for the exclusive use of vehicles during the
loading or unloading of passengers.
PEDESTRIAN: Any person afoot.
POLICE OFFICER: The police chief or any deputy of the village or any officer
authorized to direct or regulate traffic or to make arrests for violations of
traffic regulations.
PRIVATE ROAD OR DRIVEWAY: Every way or place in private ownership and used for
vehicular traffic by the owner and those having express or implied permission
from the owner, but not by others.
PROPERTY LINE: The line marking the boundary between any public way and the
private property abutting thereon.
PUBLIC BUILDING: A building used by any governmental agency.
PUBLIC WAY: Any sidewalk, roadway, alley or other public thoroughfare open to
the use of the public, as a matter of right, for purposes of travel.
RAILROAD: A carrier of persons or property on cars, operated on stationary
rails.
RAILROAD TRAIN: A steam engine, electric or other motor with or without cars
coupled thereto, operated upon rails.
RESIDENTIAL STREET: The length of any street between intersections when more
than fifty percent (50%) of the occupied frontage of said street is in use for
residential purposes.
RIGHT OF WAY: The privilege of the immediate use of the public way.
ROADWAY: That portion of a public way between the regularly established curb
lines or that part improved and intended to be used for vehicular travel.
SAFETY ZONE: The area or space officially set apart within a roadway for the
exclusive use of pedestrians and which is protected or is so marked or
indicated by appropriate signs as to be plainly visible at all times.
SIDEWALK: That portion of a public way between the curb lines, or the lateral
lines of a roadway and the adjacent property lines, intended for the use of
pedestrians.
STOP, STOPPING, OR STANDING: When prohibited, means any stopping or standing of
a vehicle, whether occupied or not, except when necessary to avoid conflict
with other traffic or in compliance with the directions of a police officer or
traffic control sign or signal.
STREET OR HIGHWAY: Every way or place, other than an alley, open to the use of
the public, as a matter of right, for purpose of travel.
TAXICAB STAND: A fixed area in the roadway alongside and parallel to the curb
set aside for taxicabs to stand or wait for passengers.
THROUGH STREET: Every public way or portion thereof at the entrances to which
vehicular traffic from intersecting public ways is required by law to stop
before entering or crossing the same and when stop signs are erected as
provided in this title.
TRAFFIC: Pedestrians, ridden or herded animals, vehicles and other conveyances
either singly or together while using any public way for purposes of travel.
TRAFFIC SIGNS, MARKINGS AND DEVICES: All signs, markings and devices officially
placed for the guiding, directing, warning or regulating of traffic.
VEHICLE: Every device in, upon or by which any person or property is or may be
transported or drawn upon a highway, except devices moved by human power or
used exclusively upon stationary rails or tracks. (1956 Code, Sec. 14-1)
7-1-2: POLICE CHIEF:
The office of police chief, established in title 1, chapter 11, of this code,
shall have the duty of the enforcement of the provisions of this title and in
connection therewith shall have the following powers and duties in addition to
powers and duties enumerated elsewhere in this code. (1956 Code, Sec. 14-2)
7-1-3: DUTIES:
It shall be the duty of the police chief to enforce the street traffic
regulations of the village, to make arrests for traffic violations, to
investigate accidents and to cooperate with all village officers in the
administration of the traffic laws and in developing ways and means to improve
traffic conditions and to carry out those duties specially imposed upon the
office of police chief by this title or other provisions of this code. (1956
Code, Sec. 14-3)
7-1-4: RECORDS:
The office of the police chief shall keep a record of all violations of the
traffic title of the village or of the state vehicle laws of which any person
has been charged, together with a record of the final disposition of all such
alleged offenses and all such records and reports shall be public records.
(1956 Code, Sec. 14-4)
7-1-5: ACCIDENT RECORDS:
The office of the police chief shall maintain a suitable system of filing
traffic accident reports and receive and file properly all accident reports
made to it under state law or under any provision of this code but all such
accident reports made by drivers shall be for the confidential use of the
police chief and other officers of the village for official use. (1956 Code,
Sec. 14-5)
7-1-6: ENFORCEMENT:
It shall be the duty of the office of the police chief to enforce all street
traffic provisions of this code and all of the state vehicle laws applicable to
street traffic in the village.
Village deputies or such authorized officers or crossing guards as are assigned
or authorized by the police chief are hereby authorized to direct all traffic
by voice, hand or signal in conformance with traffic laws or provisions,
provided that, in the event of a fire or other emergency or to expedite traffic
or to safeguard pedestrians, such officers may direct traffic as conditions may
require notwithstanding the provisions of the traffic title of this code.
Members of the fire department, while at the scene of a fire, may direct or
assist the police in directing traffic thereat or in the immediate vicinity.
(1956 Code, Sec. 14-6)
7-1-7: COMPLIANCE:
It shall be unlawful for any person to do any act forbidden or fail to perform
any act required in this title. (1956 Code, Sec. 14-7)
7-1-8: OBEDIENCE TO OFFICERS:
No person shall refuse or fail wilfully to comply with any lawful order or
direction of a police officer, fire department member or any other authorized
officer. (1956 Code, Sec. 14-8)
7-1-9: HUMAN OR ANIMAL PROPULSION:
Every person propelling any pushcart or riding an animal upon a roadway, and
any person driving any animaldrawn vehicle shall be subject to the provisions
of this title, except those provisions of this title which by their very nature
can have no application. (1956 Code, Sec. 14-9)
7-1-10: SKATES AND WAGONS:
No person upon roller skates, or riding in or by means of any coaster, toy
vehicle or similar device shall go upon any roadway except while crossing a
street upon a crosswalk and when so crossing such person shall be granted all
the rights and be subject to all the duties applicable to pedestrians. (1956
Code, Sec. 14-10)
7-1-11: GOVERNMENTAL VEHICLES:
The provisions of this title shall apply to the driver of any vehicle owned by
or used in the service of the United States government, this state, or any
political subdivision thereof, and it shall be unlawful for any such driver to
violate any of the provisions of this title, except as otherwise permitted in
this title or by state statute. (1956 Code, Sec. 14-11)
7-1-12: EMERGENCY VEHICLES:
The driver of an authorized emergency vehicle when responding to an emergency
call or when in pursuit of an actual or suspected violator of the law or when
responding to but not returning from a fire alarm may exercise the privileges
set forth in this section, but subject to the conditions herein stated.
The driver of an authorized emergency vehicle may:
   (A)   Park or stand irrespective of the provisions of this title;
   (B)   Proceed past a red or stop signal or stop sign, but only after slowing
down as may be necessary for safe operation;
   (C)   Exceed the prima facie speed limits so long as he does not endanger
life or property;
   (D)   Disregard regulations governing direction of movement or turning in
specified directions.
The exemptions herein granted to an authorized emergency vehicle shall apply
only when the driver of any said vehicle while in motion sounds audible signal
by bell, siren or exhaust whistle as may be reasonably necessary and when the
vehicle is equipped with at least one lighted lamp displaying an oscillating,
rotating or flashing red beam visible under normal atmospheric conditions from
a distance of five hundred feet (500') to the front of such vehicle, except
that an authorized emergency vehicle operated as a police vehicle need not be
equipped with or display a red light visible from in front of the vehicle.
The foregoing shall not relieve the driver of an authorized emergency vehicle
from the duty to drive with due regard for the safety of all persons, nor shall
such provisions protect the driver from the consequences of his reckless
disregard for the safety of others. (1956 Code, Sec. 14-12)
7-1-13: COLOR:
(Rep. by Ord. 01-22, 10-15-2001)
7-1-14: APPROACH OF EMERGENCY VEHICLE:
Upon the immediate approach of an authorized emergency vehicle operating as a
police vehicle giving audible signal by siren, exhaust whistle or bell, or upon
the immediate approach of any other authorized emergency vehicle giving audible
signal by siren, exhaust whistle or bell, and when such other vehicle is
equipped with at least one lighted lamp displaying an oscillating, rotating or
flashing red beam visible under normal atmospheric conditions from a distance
of five hundred feet (500') to the front of such vehicle, the driver of every
other vehicle shall yield the right of way and shall immediately drive to a
position parallel to and as close as possible to, the right hand edge or curb
of the roadway clear of any intersection and shall stop and remain in such
position until the authorized emergency vehicle has passed, except when
otherwise directed by a police officer or fireman in the lawful exercise of his
duties as provided in this title.
This section shall not operate to relieve the driver of an authorized emergency
vehicle from the duty to drive with due regard for the safety of all persons
using the highway. (1956 Code § 14-14)
7-1-15: ACCIDENTS; OPERATOR'S DUTY:
The operator of a vehicle involved in an accident resulting in injury to or
death of any person or property damage to an apparent extent of one hundred
dollars ($100.00) or more, if such operator is physically capable of doing so,
shall immediately by the quickest means of communication report such accident
to the office of the police chief. (1956 Code § 14-15)
7-1-16: DISPLAY OF REGISTRATION PLATES:
   (A)   State registration plates issued for a motor vehicle other than a
motorcycle shall be attached thereto, one in the front and the other in the
rear. The registration plate issued for a motorcycle or other vehicle required
to be registered by state law shall be attached to the rear thereof.
   (B)   Every such registration plate shall at all times be:
      1.   Securely fastened in a horizontal position to the vehicle for which
it is issued so as to prevent the plate from swinging;
      2.   Fastened in a place and position to be clearly visible;
      3.   Maintained free from foreign materials and is in a condition to be
clearly visible. (1956 Code § 14-53)
CHAPTER 2
TRAFFIC CONTROL DEVICES
SECTION:
7-2-1: Authority To Erect Traffic Control Signs And Devices
7-2-2: Type
7-2-3: Obedience
7-2-4: Evasion
7-2-5: Posting
7-2-6: Unauthorized Signs
7-2-7: Damage To
7-2-8: Safety Zones
7-2-9: Traffic Lanes
7-2-1: AUTHORITY TO ERECT TRAFFIC CONTROL SIGNS AND DEVICES:
   (A)   The superintendent of public works is hereby vested with the authority
to determine and designate the character and location of all traffic control
signs and devices. All traffic control signs and devices shall be erected in
conformity with the provisions of the state manual and specifications.
   (B)   The superintendent of public works shall act as the traffic engineer
to determine the installation and proper timing and maintenance of traffic
control devices, to conduct engineering analyses of traffic accidents and to
devise remedial measures, to conduct engineering investigation of traffic
conditions, to plan the operation of traffic on the streets and highways of
this village, to erect signs in conformance therewith, and to cooperate with
other village officials in the development of ways and means to improve traffic
conditions.
   (C)   The village board has the authority by motion to determine and
designate the character and location of a traffic control sign and device.
   (D)   Any traffic control sign and device erected in the village as of the
date of passage hereof is hereby approved and such traffic control sign or
device shall be presumed to be erected in conformity with the provisions of
this section.
   (E)   It shall be unlawful for any person to disobey a traffic control sign
or device. (Ord. 03-04, 7-7-2003)
7-2-2: TYPE:
All traffic control signs, signals and devices shall conform to the manual and
specifications approved by the state department of public works and buildings.
(1956 Code, Sec. 14-17)
7-2-3: OBEDIENCE:
The driver of any vehicle shall obey the instructions of any official traffic
control device applicable thereto placed in accordance with the provisions of
this chapter, unless otherwise directed by a police officer, subject to the
exceptions granted the driver of an authorized emergency vehicle in this title.
(1956 Code, Sec. 14-18)
7-2-4: EVASION:
No operator of a vehicle shall attempt to avoid obedience to any traffic
control device or traffic control signal by driving upon or through any private
property, any alley or any traffic island. (1956 Code, Sec. 14-19)
7-2-5: POSTING:
No provision of any traffic regulations for which signs are required shall be
enforced against an alleged violator if at the time and place of such alleged
violation an official sign is not in proper position and sufficiently legible
to be seen by an ordinary, observant person. Whenever a particular section does
not state that signs are required, such section shall be effective even though
no signs are erected or in place. (1956 Code, Sec. 14-20)
7-2-6: UNAUTHORIZED SIGNS:
No person shall place, maintain or display upon or in view of any public way
any unauthorized sign, signal, marking or device which purports to be or is an
imitation of or resembles an official traffic control device or railroad sign
or signal, or which attempts to direct the movement of traffic, or which hides
from view or interferes with the effectiveness of any official traffic control
device or any railroad sign or signal and no person shall place or maintain nor
shall any public authority permit upon any public way any traffic sign or
signal bearing thereon any commercial advertising. This shall not be deemed to
prohibit the erection upon private property adjacent to public ways of signs
giving useful directional information and of a type that cannot be mistaken for
official signs. (1956 Code, Sec. 14-21)
7-2-7: DAMAGE TO:
No person shall without lawful authority attempt to or in fact, alter, deface,
injure, knock down or remove any official traffic control device or any
railroad sign or signal or any inscription, shield or insignia thereon, or any
part thereof. (1956 Code, Sec. 14-22)
7-2-8: SAFETY ZONES:
The police chief is hereby authorized:
   (A)   To designate and maintain, by appropriate devices, marks or lines upon
the surface of the roadway, crosswalks at intersections where in his opinion
there is particular danger to pedestrians and at such other places as he shall
deem necessary.
   (B)   To establish safety zones of such kind and character and at such
places as he shall deem necessary for the protection of pedestrians. (1956
Code, Sec. 14-23)
7-2-9: TRAFFIC LANES:
The police chief is hereby authorized to mark traffic lanes upon the roadway
where in his opinion a regular alignment of traffic is necessary. Where such
lanes have been marked, it shall be unlawful for the driver of any vehicle to
fail or refuse to keep his vehicle within the designated boundaries of any such
lane except where lawfully passing another vehicle. (1956 Code, Sec. 14-24)
CHAPTER 3
MISCELLANEOUS DRIVING RULES
SECTION:
7-3-1: Turning Movements
7-3-2: Restricted Turn Signs
7-3-3: Limitations On Turning Around
7-3-4: Emerging From Alley, Driveway
7-3-5: Stop When Traffic Obstructed
7-3-6: Obstruction Of Traffic
7-3-7: Obedience To Railroad Signals
7-3-8: Following Fire Apparatus
7-3-9: Negligent Driving
7-3-10: Crossing Fire Hose
7-3-11: Driving Through Funeral, Other Procession
7-3-12: Driving On Right Side
7-3-13: Overtaking A Vehicle On The Left
7-3-14: When Overtaking On Right Permitted
7-3-15: Limitation On Overtaking On Left
7-3-16: Vehicle Approaching Or Entering Intersection
7-3-17: Driving On Sidewalk Or Parkway Areas
7-3-18: Backing
7-3-19: Motorcycles, Motordriven Cycles
7-3-20: Cruising Of Public Passenger Vehicles
7-3-21: Clinging To Moving Vehicles
7-3-22: Speed Restrictions
7-3-23: School Buses
7-3-24: Driving While Intoxicated
7-3-25: Unlicensed Motorized Devices
7-3-1: TURNING MOVEMENTS:
The driver of a vehicle intending to turn at an intersection shall do so as
follows:
   (A)   Right Turns: Both the approach for a right turn and a right turn shall
be made as close as practicable to the right hand curb or edge of the
established roadway.
   (B)   Left Turns On Two-Way Roadways: At any intersection where traffic is
permitted to move in both directions on both roadways entering the
intersection, an approach for a left turn shall be made in that portion of the
right half of the roadway nearest the centerline thereof and by passing to the
right of such centerline where it enters the intersection or on that portion of
the roadway which may be specially designated for such purpose by appropriate
markings, and after entering the intersection the left turn shall be made so as
to leave the intersection to the right of the centerline of the roadway being
entered. Whenever practicable the left turn shall be made in that portion of
the intersection to the left of the center of the intersection. (1956 Code,
Sec. 14-26)
7-3-2: RESTRICTED TURN SIGNS:
The police chief is hereby authorized to determine those intersections, alleys
and driveways at which drivers of vehicles shall not make a right or left turn
and he shall erect appropriate signs at such intersections, alleys and
driveways giving appropriate notice thereof. (1956 Code, Sec. 14-27)
7-3-3: LIMITATIONS ON TURNING AROUND:
The driver of any vehicle shall not turn such vehicle so as to proceed in the
opposite direction upon any street or part thereof where such turns are
permitted at any point closer than one hundred feet (100') to any street
intersection nor when such turn cannot be made in safety. (1956 Code, Sec. 14-
28)
It shall be unlawful for the operator of any vehicle to turn such vehicle on
Main Street, or any part or extension thereof, so as to proceed in the opposite
direction. (1956 Code, Sec. 14-29)
7-3-4: EMERGING FROM ALLEY, DRIVEWAY:
The driver of a vehicle emerging from an alley, driveway or building shall stop
such vehicle immediately prior to driving onto a sidewalk area extending across
any alleyway, yielding the right of way to any pedestrian as may be necessary
to avoid collision, and upon entering the roadway shall yield the right of way
to all vehicles approaching on said roadway. (1956 Code, Sec. 14-36)
7-3-5: STOP WHEN TRAFFIC OBSTRUCTED:
No operator of a vehicle shall enter an intersection or crosswalk unless there
is sufficient space beyond such intersection or crosswalk in the direction in
which such vehicle is proceeding to accommodate the vehicle without obstructing
the passage of other vehicular traffic or pedestrians. (1956 Code, Sec. 14-37)
7-3-6: OBSTRUCTION OF TRAFFIC:
The operator of a vehicle shall not so operate such vehicle or allow the same
to remain upon the street in such a manner as to form an unreasonable
obstruction to the traffic. (1956 Code, Sec. 14-38)
7-3-7: OBEDIENCE TO RAILROAD SIGNALS:
   (A)   Whenever any person driving a vehicle approaches a railroad grade
crossing under any of the circumstances stated in this section, the driver of
such vehicle shall stop not less than ten feet (10') from the nearest rail of
such railroad, and shall not proceed until he can do so safely. The foregoing
requirements shall apply when:
      1.   A clearly visible electric or mechanical signal device gives warning
of the immediate approach of a train.
      2.   When a human flagman gives or continues to give a signal of the
approach of a train.
      3.   A train approaching within approximately one thousand five hundred
feet (1,500') of the street or highway crossing emits a signal audible from
such a distance and such train, by reason of its speed or nearness to such
crossing, is an immediate hazard.
      4.   An approaching train is plainly visible and is in hazardous
proximity to such crossing.
   (B)   No person shall drive any vehicle through, around or over any such
railroad crossing when any of the conditions in subsection (A) of this section
shall exist. (1956 Code, Sec. 14-39)
7-3-8: FOLLOWING FIRE APPARATUS:
The driver of any vehicle other than one on official business shall not follow
any fire apparatus traveling in response to a fire alarm closer than five
hundred feet (500') or drive into or park such vehicle within the block where
fire apparatus has stopped in answer to a fire alarm. (1956 Code, Sec. 14-40)
7-3-9: NEGLIGENT DRIVING:
It shall be unlawful for any person to operate any vehicle upon a public way
negligently, heedlessly and without due caution in a manner so as to endanger
or be likely to endanger any person or property. (1956 Code, Sec. 14-41)
7-3-10: CROSSING FIRE HOSE:
No vehicle shall be driven over any unprotected hose of a fire department when
laid down on any street or private driveway to be used at any fire or alarm of
fire, without the consent of the fire official in command. (1956 Code, Sec. 14-
42)
7-3-11: DRIVING THROUGH FUNERAL, OTHER PROCESSION:
No operator of a vehicle shall drive between the vehicles, persons or animals
comprising a funeral or other authorized procession except when otherwise
directed by a police officer. This provision shall not apply to authorized
emergency vehicles as defined in this title. (1956 Code, Sec. 14-43)
7-3-12: DRIVING ON RIGHT SIDE:
Upon all roadways, all vehicles proceeding at less than normal speed of traffic
at the time and place and under the conditions then existing shall be driven in
the right hand lane then available for traffic, or as close as practicable to
the right hand lane, curb or edge of the roadway, except when overtaking and
passing another vehicle proceeding in the same direction or when preparing for
a left turn at an intersection or into a private road or driveway. (1956 Code,
Sec. 14-44)
7-3-13: OVERTAKING A VEHICLE ON THE LEFT:
The following rules shall govern the overtaking and passing of vehicles
proceeding in the same direction, subject to those limitations, exceptions and
special rules hereinafter stated:
   (A)   The driver of a vehicle overtaking another vehicle proceeding in the
same direction shall pass to the left thereof at a safe distance and shall not
again drive to the right side of the roadway until safely clear of the
overtaken vehicle.
   (B)   Except when overtaking and passing on the right is permitted, the
driver of an overtaken vehicle shall give way to the right in favor of the
overtaking vehicle on audible signal and shall not increase the speed of his
vehicle until completely passed by the overtaking vehicle. (1956 Code, Sec. 14-
45)
7-3-14: WHEN OVERTAKING ON RIGHT PERMITTED:
   (A)   The driver of a vehicle may overtake and pass on the right of another
vehicle only under the following conditions:
      1.   When the vehicle overtaken is making or about to make a left turn;
      2.   Upon a street or highway with unobstructed pavement not occupied by
parked vehicles of sufficient width for two (2) or more lanes of moving traffic
in each direction;
      3.   Upon a one-way street, or upon any roadway on which traffic is
restricted to one direction of movement, where the roadway is free from
obstructions and of sufficient width for two (2) or more lanes of moving
vehicles.
   (B)   The driver of a vehicle may overtake and pass another vehicle on the
right only under conditions permitting such movement in safety. In no event
shall such movement be made by driving off the pavement or main traveled
portion of the roadway. (1956 Code, Sec. 14-46)
7-3-15: LIMITATION ON OVERTAKING ON LEFT:
No vehicle shall be driven to the left side of the center of the roadway in
overtaking and passing another vehicle proceeding in the same direction unless
such left side is clearly visible and is free of oncoming traffic for a
sufficient distance ahead to permit such overtaking and passing to be
completely made without interfering with the safe operation of any vehicle
overtaken. In every event the overtaking vehicle must return to the right hand
side of the roadway before coming within one hundred feet (100') of any vehicle
approaching from the opposite direction. (1956 Code, Sec. 14-47)
7-3-16: VEHICLE APPROACHING OR ENTERING INTERSECTION:
   (A)   The driver of a vehicle approaching an intersection shall yield the
right of way to a vehicle which has entered the intersection from a different
highway.
   (B)   When two (2) vehicles enter an intersection from different streets at
approximately the same time, the driver of the vehicle on the left shall yield
the right of way to the vehicle on the right.
   (C)   The right of way rules declared in subsections (A) and (B) of this
section are modified at through streets as provided in this chapter. (1956
Code, Sec. 14-48)
7-3-17: DRIVING ON SIDEWALK OR PARKWAY AREAS:
The driver of a vehicle shall not drive within any sidewalk area or within any
parkway area between a sidewalk area and the curb of roadway except at a
permanent or temporary driveway. (1956 Code, Sec. 14-49)
7-3-18: BACKING:
The driver of a vehicle shall not back the same unless such movement can be
made with reasonable safety and without interfering with other traffic. (1956
Code, Sec. 14-50)
7-3-19: MOTORCYCLES, MOTORDRIVEN CYCLES:
A person operating a motorcycle or motordriven cycle shall not ride other than
upon the permanent and regular seat attached thereto or carry any other person
nor shall any other person ride upon such motorcycle or motordriven cycle other
than upon a firmly attached seat to the rear or side of the operator. (1956
Code, Sec. 14-51)
7-3-20: CRUISING OF PUBLIC PASSENGER VEHICLES:
No operator of a public passenger vehicle shall solicit business in such manner
as to interfere with the lawful movement of traffic. (1956 Code, Sec. 14-52)
7-3-21: CLINGING TO MOVING VEHICLES:
Any person riding upon any bicycle, motorcycle, motordriven cycle, coaster,
sled, roller skates or any toy vehicle shall not attach the same or himself to
any moving vehicle upon any roadway. (1956 Code, Sec. 14-54)
7-3-22: SPEED RESTRICTIONS:
Notwithstanding the absolute maximum speed limit established herein, no person
shall drive any vehicle upon any street or public way within the corporate
limits of the village at a speed which is greater than reasonable and proper
with regard to traffic conditions and the use of the street or public way or
endangers the safety of any person or property.
   (A)   Twenty Miles Per Hour: A maximum speed limit of twenty (20) miles per
hour is hereby established on the following streets of the village:
      Adams Street, east and west, for the entire length thereof.
      Baker Street, east and west, for the entire length thereof.
      Beauchamp Street, for the entire length thereof.
      Birch Court, for the entire length thereof.
      Brian Drive, for the entire length thereof.
      Dolly Drive, for the entire length thereof.
      Elm Street, for the entire length thereof.
      Hesburgh Street, for the entire length thereof.
      Hickory Street, north and south, for the entire length thereof.
      Holtz Street, for the entire length thereof.
      Jan Drive from its intersection with Birch Street, east, for the entire
length thereof.
      Jeffrey Street, for the entire length thereof.
      Katie Lane, for the entire length thereof.
      Keigher Drive, for the entire length thereof.
      Lakeview Drive, for the entire length thereof.
      Leahy Street, for the entire length thereof.
      Lincoln Drive, for the entire length thereof.
      Longfellow Street, for the entire length thereof.
      Louise Drive, for the entire length thereof.
      Lynn Drive, for the entire length thereof.
      Main Street, north and south, for the entire length thereof.
      Marquette Drive, for the entire length thereof.
      Marquette Place, for the entire length thereof.
      McGuire Drive, for the entire length thereof.
      North Maple Street from its intersection with 8th Street south to Section
Line Road.
      North Westshore Boulevard, for the entire length thereof.
      Oak Street, north and south, for the entire length thereof.
      Park Street, for the entire length thereof.
      Parseghian Street, for the entire length thereof.
      Poplar Street, north and south, for the entire length thereof.
      Reiter Road, for the entire length thereof.
      Rockne Drive, for the entire length thereof.
      St. Aubin Circle, for the entire length thereof.
      Section Line Road, for the entire length thereof.
      Sorin Circle, for the entire length thereof.
      Spruce Street, north and south, for the entire length thereof.
      Vine Street, for the entire length thereof.
      Walnut Street, north and south, for the entire length thereof.
      Water Tower, north and south, for the entire length thereof.
      West End Drive, for the entire length thereof.
      Willow Road, for the entire length thereof.
      First Street, east and west, for the entire length thereof.
      Second Street, east and west, for the entire length thereof.
      Third Street, east and west, for the entire length thereof.
      Sixth Street, east and west, for the entire length thereof.
      Seventh Street, east and west, for the entire length thereof.
      Eighth Street, east and west, for the entire length thereof.
   (B)   Thirty Miles Per Hour: A maximum speed limit of thirty (30) miles per
hour is hereby established upon the following streets of the village:
      Maple Street from its intersection with 8th Street north to Ronnie Gray
Drive.
   (C)   Thirty Five Miles Per Hour: A maximum speed limit of thirty five (35)
miles per hour is hereby established on the following streets of the village:
      Ronnie Gray Drive.
      South Cypress Street south of its intersection with Division Street to
the village limits.
      Sycamore Street from its intersection with Third Street (County Highway
9) to its intersection with Rock Creek Drive.
   (D)   School Zone:
      1.   Notwithstanding the speed limit restrictions established herein, no
person shall drive any vehicle within an area designated school zone at a speed
which is greater than twenty (20) miles per hour.
      2.   The following areas shall be designated as school zones:
         Cook Street from its intersection with Elm Street to its intersection
with South Creek Drive, where South Creek Drive heads north from Cook.
         Marquette Drive from its intersection with South Creek Drive east a
distance of eight hundred feet (800').
         North Maple from its intersection with West 2nd Street to West 6th
Street.
         Park Street from its intersection with Maple Street to its
intersection with Poplar Street.
         Poplar Street from its intersection with West End Drive to Park
Street.
         South Creek Drive from its intersection with Cook Street to its
intersection with Marquette Drive.
   (E)   Park Zone: The following streets are hereby declared park zone streets
and shall have a maximum speed limit of twenty (20) miles per hour on any day
children are present and within fifty feet (50') of motorized traffic:
      Maple Street from its intersection with Ronnie Gray Drive thence north to
the north end of Legacy Park.
      Ronnie Gray Drive from its intersection with Maple Street thence west to
I-57.
   (F)   Forty Miles Per Hour: The village hereby establishes a speed limit of
forty (40) miles per hour on the following streets:
      Sycamore Street between County Road 9 and the southernmost village
limits.
   (G)   Forty Five Miles Per Hour: A maximum speed limit of forty five (45)
miles per hour is hereby established on the following streets of the village:
      Sycamore Street north of its intersection with Rock Creek Drive to the
village limits. (Ord. 12-04, 5-7-2012)
7-3-23: SCHOOL BUSES:
The driver of any vehicle upon any public way in the village, upon meeting or
overtaking from either direction any school bus which has stopped on said
public way for the purpose of receiving or discharging any school children,
shall, before reaching such school bus, bring the vehicle to a complete stop,
when there is in operation on said school bus a visual sign as specified in 625
Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/12-805, as amended, and said driver shall not
proceed until such school bus resumes motion, or until such driver is signaled
by the school bus driver to proceed, or until such visible signals are no
longer actuated. (Ord., 3-4-1957)
7-3-24: DRIVING WHILE INTOXICATED 1 :
   (A)   No person who is under the influence of intoxicating liquor may drive
or be in actual physical control of any vehicle within this village.
   (B)   No person who is an habitual user of or under the influence of any
narcotic drug or who is under the influence of any other drug to a degree which
renders him incapable of safely driving a vehicle may drive or be in actual
physical control of any vehicle within this village. The fact that a person
charged with a violation of this subsection is or has been entitled to use such
drug under the law of this state does not constitute a defense against any
charge of violation of this subsection.
   (C)   Upon the trial of any action or proceeding arising out of the acts
alleged to have been committed by any person while driving or in actual
physical control of a vehicle while under the influence of intoxicating liquor,
evidence of the amount of alcohol in the person's blood at the time of the act
alleged as shown by a chemical analysis of his breath, blood, urine, saliva or
other bodily substance is admissible, as provided hereinafter in this
subsection and the result of any such analysis shall give rise to the following
presumptions:
      1.   If there was at the time of such analysis five one- hundredths
percent (0.05%) or less by weight of alcohol in the person's blood, it shall be
presumed that the person was not under the influence of intoxicating liquor.
      2.   If there was at the time of such analysis in excess of five one-
hundredths percent (0.05%) but less than ten one- hundredths percent (0.10%) by
weight of alcohol in the person's blood, such fact shall not give rise to any
presumption that the person was or was not under the influence of intoxicating
liquor, but such fact may be considered with other competent evidence in
determining whether such person was under the influence of intoxicating liquor.
      3.   If there was at the time of such analysis ten one- hundredths
percent (0.10%) or more by weight of alcohol in the person's blood, it shall be
presumed that the person was under the influence of intoxicating liquor.
   Percent by weight of alcohol in the blood shall be based upon grams of
alcohol per one hundred (100) cubic centimeters of blood. Evidence based upon a
chemical analysis of blood, urine, breath, saliva, or other bodily substance
shall not be admitted unless such substance was procured and such analysis made
with the consent of the person as provided in this section, whose bodily
substance was so analyzed.
   The foregoing provisions of this subsection shall not be construed as
limiting the introduction of any other competent evidence bearing upon the
question whether or not the defendant was under the influence of intoxicating
liquor.
   (D)   Chemical analysis of the person's blood or breath to be considered
valid under this section must be performed according to uniform standards
adopted by the state department of public health, in cooperation with the
superintendent of state police, and by an individual possessing a valid permit
issued by that department for this purpose.
   (E)   When an unconscious person or person otherwise incapable of refusal is
given a blood test at the request of a law enforcement officer under the
provisions of this section, only a physician authorized to practice medicine in
all its branches, a registered nurse or other qualified person may withdraw
blood, in a manner prescribed by the department of public health for the
purpose of determining the alcoholic content therein.
   (F)   The person tested may have a physician authorized to practice medicine
in all its branches, a qualified technician, chemist, registered nurse, or
other qualified person of his own choosing, to administer a chemical test or
tests, at his own expense, in addition to any administered at the direction of
a law enforcement officer. The failure or inability to obtain an additional
test by a person does not preclude the admission of evidence relating to the
test or tests taken at the direction of a law enforcement officer.
   (G)   Upon the request of the person who submitted to a chemical test or
tests at the request of a law enforcement officer, full information concerning
the test or tests must be made available to him or his attorney.
   (H)   Evidence of a refusal to submit to a chemical test is inadmissible in
any civil action or proceeding, or in any action brought against him for a
violation of this section. However, nothing in this subsection shall prevent
the admission of evidence of such refusal in a hearing on the suspension of a
person's privilege to operate a motor vehicle under 625 Illinois Compiled
Statutes 5/11-501.1 of the Illinois motor vehicle code.
   (I)   Every person who is convicted of a violation of this section shall be
guilty of a "misdemeanor" as defined in section
1-3-2 of this code. (Ord. 77-3, 6-6-1977)
 
Notes
1 1. See also subsection 7-7-1(A) of this title.
7-3-25: UNLICENSED MOTORIZED DEVICES:
   (A)   Prohibited On Public Property: It shall be unlawful for a person to
operate an unlicensed motorized device on any public property. For purposes of
this section, an "unlicensed motorized device" is defined as any motorized
device or vehicle not bearing the proper registration plates from the Illinois
secretary of state or incapable of being registered by the Illinois secretary
of state under the provisions of the Illinois vehicle code, and shall include,
but is not limited to, motor scooters, go-carts, golf carts, go-peds,
minibikes, or motorbikes. This section shall not apply to automobiles,
"motorized wheelchairs" and "electric personal assistive mobility devices" (as
defined by the Illinois vehicle code), and any motorized device or vehicle
incapable of reaching a speed in excess of three (3) miles per hour. For
purposes of this section, "public property" is defined as any public street,
public sidewalk, public alley, public parks or any other property owned or
controlled by the village of Manteno, a public or private high school or
grammar school or any other property owned or controlled by a unit of local
government located within the village of Manteno.
   (B)   Procedure For Impoundment: Whenever a police officer has probable
cause to believe that a violation of subsection (A) of this section has
occurred, he is hereby authorized to seize and impound the unlicensed motorized
device. The failure to display the proper registration from the Illinois
secretary of state is prima facie proof that the instrumentality constitutes an
unlicensed motorized device.
   (C)   Preliminary Hearing: The owner of an unlicensed motorized device (or
any interested party) which has been impounded pursuant to subsection (B) of
this section shall have a right to a preliminary hearing to determine whether
the seizure and impoundment were erroneous. The preliminary hearing shall be
requested in writing to the chief of police, or his designee, within forty
eight (48) hours of the seizure. The hearing shall be conducted within forty
eight (48) hours of receipt of a written demand for the hearing by the chief of
police or his designee. Failure to request or attend a scheduled hearing within
forty eight (48) hours of the seizure shall be deemed a waiver of the right to
a preliminary hearing. If the hearing officer determines by a preponderance of
the evidence that the provisions of subsection (A) of this section have been
violated, he shall order that the unlicensed motorized device remain impounded
until a bond in the amount of one hundred dollars ($100.00) is posted with the
Manteno police department. If the hearing officer determines that the
provisions of subsection (A) of this section were not violated, the item seized
shall be returned to its owner.
   (D)   Hearings: A hearing shall be conducted pursuant to the provisions of
title 1, chapter 17, "Administrative Adjudication", of this code. The hearing
shall be held within forty five (45) days of the seizure. The hearing officer
shall be authorized to release the seized unlicensed motorized device upon the
payment of a fine and an additional storage charge in the amount of five
dollars ($5.00) per day. If a bond has been posted, it shall be applied towards
the fine and storage charges. If the hearing officer determines that the
provisions of subsection (A) of this section have not been violated, the seized
item shall be returned to its owner and any posted bond refunded. Any
unlicensed motorized device which remains unclaimed for a period in excess of
one year shall be presumed abandoned and may be destroyed. (Ord. 04-23, 10-18-
2004)
CHAPTER 4
THROUGH, ONE-WAY AND STOP STREETS 1
SECTION:
7-4-1: One-Way Streets Designated
7-4-2: Through Streets
7-4-3: Authority To Erect Stop Signs
7-4-4: Nonthrough Streets
7-4-5: Duty To Stop
7-4-6: Entering Through, Stop Intersections
7-4-7: Stop Signs And Through Streets
7-4-8: Erection Of Yield Signs
 
Notes
1 1. See chapter 6 of this title for through, stop streets designated.
7-4-1: ONE-WAY STREETS DESIGNATED:
The police chief is authorized, subject to the approval of the village board,
to determine and designate one-way streets and alleys and he shall erect and
maintain appropriate signs giving notice thereof.
It shall be unlawful for any person to drive any vehicle in violation of any
signs erected in accordance with this section. (1956 Code, Sec. 14-30)
7-4-2: THROUGH STREETS:
Only those streets or parts of streets which have been or are designated as
through streets by the village board shall be considered as such for the
purpose of this chapter. (1956 Code, Sec. 14-31)
7-4-3: AUTHORITY TO ERECT STOP SIGNS:
Whenever any ordinance of the village designates and describes a through street
it shall be the duty of the police chief to place and maintain a stop sign on
each and every street intersecting such through street. (1956 Code, Sec. 14-32)
7-4-4: NONTHROUGH STREETS:
The police chief is hereby authorized to determine and designate intersections
where particular hazards exist upon other than through streets and shall place
and maintain stop signs at all such places. (1956 Code, Sec. 14-33)
7-4-5: DUTY TO STOP:
When stop signs are erected as herein provided at or near the entrance to any
intersection every operator of a vehicle shall stop such vehicle at such sign
or at a clearly marked stop line before entering the intersection except when
directed to proceed by a police officer. (1956 Code, Sec. 14-34)
7-4-6: ENTERING THROUGH, STOP INTERSECTIONS:
   (A)   After the operator of a vehicle has stopped at the entrance to a
through street, such operator shall yield the right of way to other vehicles
which have entered the intersection from said through street or which are
approaching so closely on such through street as to constitute an immediate
hazard, but said operator having so yielded may proceed and the operator of all
other vehicles approaching the intersection on said through street shall yield
the right of way to the vehicles so proceeding into or across the through
street.
   (B)   After the operator of a vehicle has stopped in obedience to a stop
sign at an intersection where a stop sign has been erected at one or more
entrances thereto although not part of a through street, such operator shall
proceed cautiously, yielding to vehicles not so obliged to stop which are
within the intersection or approaching so closely as to constitute an immediate
hazard, but may then proceed. (1956 Code, Sec. 14-35)
7-4-7: STOP SIGNS AND THROUGH STREETS:
   (A)   Erection Of Stop Signs: All vehicles traveling within the village
shall stop and yield the right of way at the following locations:
      All traffic proceeding either east or west on West Sixth Street at its
intersection with North Walnut Street.
      All traffic proceeding either north or south on North Hickory Street at
its intersection with West Sixth Street.
      All traffic proceeding west on Cook, Lane and Baker Streets shall stop at
their intersection with Elm Street.
      All traffic traveling east on Jeanne Drive shall stop at its intersection
with North Walnut Street.
      All traffic traveling west on Sixth Street shall stop at its intersection
with Maple Street.
      Barry Turn at its intersection with Jeffrey Drive.
      Gipp Drive at its intersection with Maple Street.
      Holtz Street at its intersection with Parseghian Street.
      Holtz Street at its intersection with Willow Road.
      Leahy Circle at its intersection with Willow Road.
      The intersection of Rock Creek Drive and Reiter Road.
      The intersection of Section Line, First Street, and Walnut Street.
      Westbound traffic on First Street at its intersection with North Hickory.
      When traveling north on Poplar Street at its intersection with Park
Street and when traveling south on Poplar Street at its intersection with Park
Street.
      When traveling north on Vine Street at its intersection with West End
Drive and when traveling south on Vine Street at its intersection with West End
Drive.
      When traveling west on Jan Drive at its intersection with North Birch
Street.
      Willow Road at its intersection with Holtz Street.
      Willow Road at its intersection with West End Drive.
      Sixth Place at its intersection with Walnut Road. (Ord. 75-8, 12-1-1975;
amd. Ord. 80-1, 2-18-1980; Ord. 81-8, 1981; Ord. 86-19, 4-6-1987; Ord. 87-8, 9-
8-1987; Ord. 88-3, 7-6-1988; Ord. 95-18, 4-1-1996; Ord. 01-01, 6-4-2001; Ord.
01-07, 7-2-2001; Ord. 01-11, 8-20-2001; Ord. 01-19, 10-1-2001; Ord. 01-26, 11-
12-2001; Ord. 02-15, 9-3-2002; Ord. 02-19, 10-7-2002)
   (B)   One-Way Stops: A one-way stop is hereby established for:
      Clover Lane at its intersection with Spring Street.
      Halfway Road at its intersection with Somerset Drive.
      Northbound traffic in the alley between North Main Street and North
Walnut Street at its intersection with West Third Street.
      Northbound traffic on Marquette Place at its intersection with Division
Street.
      Northbound traffic on Rockne Drive at its intersection with Park Street.
      Northbound traffic on South Creek at its intersection with Cook Street.
      Southbound traffic on Beauchamp Avenue at its intersection with Hesburgh
Drive.
      Spring Street at its intersection with Somerset Drive.
      Spring Street at its intersection with Windfield Drive.
      Tallgrass Lane at its intersection with Spring Street.
      Westbound traffic on Brian Drive at its intersection with South Cypress
Street.
      Westbound traffic on Cook Street at its intersection with South Cypress
Street.
      Westbound traffic on West Second Street at its intersection with the
alley between North Main Street and North Walnut Street. (Ord. 18-10, 8-6-2018)
   (C)   Two-Way Stops: A two-way stop is hereby established on:
      Alley between North Main Street and North Walnut Street at its
intersection with Second Street.
      Beauchamp Avenue at its intersection with Water Tower North.
      Eighth Street at its intersection with North Hickory Street.
   (D)   Three-Way Stops: A three-way stop is hereby established at:
      Baker Street at its intersection with McGuire Drive.
      Brian Drive with the eastern intersection with White Tail Bend.
      Dolly Drive with its intersection with South Poplar Street.
      Jeffrey Street at its intersection with South Walnut.
      Longfellow Drive at its intersection with Jefferson Street.
      Longfellow Drive at its intersection with Sandburg Drive.
      Maple Lane at its intersection with Birch Street.
      South Creek Drive at its intersection with West Cook Street.
      Willow Street at its intersection with Hesburgh Street.
      Fifth and Main Street.
      Eighth Street at its intersection with North Walnut Street. (Ord. 17-19,
9-5-2017)
   (E)   Four-Way Stops: A four-way stop is hereby established at:
      Brian Drive at its intersection with South Creek Drive.
      Brian Drive with the western intersection with White Tail Bend.
      Hesburgh Street at its intersection with North Water Tower Street and
South Water Tower Street.
      Jeffrey Street at its intersection with South Poplar.
      Meadow Path and South Creek Drive.
      North Maple Street at its intersection with West Seventh Street.
      North Walnut Street at its intersection with West Third Street.
      Park and Poplar Streets.
      Poplar Street at its intersection with Cook Street.
      The intersection of Cook Street and Walnut Street.
      The intersection of Maple and Lake Manteno Road (10000 N. Road).
      West Adams Street and South Elm Street.
      West Adams Street and South Poplar Street.
      West Cook Street at its intersection with South Elm Street.
      Willow Road at its intersection with Park Street. (Ord. 18-10, 8-6-2018)
   (F)   Through Streets:
      Division Street is hereby declared a through street at its intersection
with Spruce Street.
      Dolly Street at its intersection with Elm Street is hereby declared a
through street.
      East Baker Street is hereby declared a through street at its intersection
with Keigher Drive.
      Hesburgh Street is hereby declared a through street at its intersection
with Water Tower Street.
      Lake Manteno Road is hereby declared a through street at its intersection
with North West Shore Boulevard.
      Leahy Street is hereby declared to be a through street at its
intersection with Parseghian Street.
      McGuire Drive is hereby declared a through street at its intersection
with Keigher Drive.
      North Maple Street is hereby declared a through street at its
intersection with Hesburgh Street.
      North Maple Street is hereby declared a through street at its
intersection with Water Tower Street.
      North Maple Street is hereby declared a through street at its
intersection with Eighth Street.
      North Willow Street is hereby declared a through street at its
intersection with Hesburgh Street.
      Park Street is hereby declared a through street at its intersections with
Vine Street and Willow Street.
      Poplar Street is hereby declared to be a through street at its
intersection with Leahy Street.
      Spruce Street is hereby declared a through street at its intersection
with Lincoln Drive.
      Spruce Street is hereby declared a through street at its intersection
with Longfellow Street.
      Sycamore Street is hereby declared a through street at its intersection
with Reiter Road.
      Walnut Street at its intersection with Dolly Street is hereby declared a
through street.
      Walnut Street is hereby declared a through street at its intersection
with Baker Street.
      Willow Road is hereby declared a through street at its intersection with
Hesburgh Street.
      Fifth Street is hereby declared a through street at its intersection with
West Walnut Street.
      Sixth Street is hereby declared a through street at its intersection with
Louise Drive.
      Sixth Street is hereby declared a through street at its intersection with
North Hickory Street.
      Eighth Street is hereby declared a through street at its intersection
with North Hickory Street. (Ord. 76-5, 5-3-1976; amd. Ord. 76-12, 12-20-1976;
Ord. 81-4, 5-18-1981; Ord. 83-10, 9-19-1983; Ord. 83-11, 9-19-1983; Ord. 87-10,
10-19-1987; Ord. 92-5, 8-17-1992; Ord. 94-19, 12-5-1994)
7-4-8: ERECTION OF YIELD SIGNS:
All vehicles traveling within the Village shall yield the right-of-way at the
following intersections:
   Adams Street at its intersection with Division Street.
   Adams Street at its intersection with First Street.
   Cardinal Drive at its intersection with Raven Drive.
   East Baker Street at its intersection with South Oak Street.
   East Cook Street at its intersection with South Oak Street.
   East First Street at its intersection with South Oak Street.
   East Fourth Street at its intersection with South Oak Street.
   East Second Street westbound at its intersection with South Oak Street.
   Holtz Street at its intersection with Leahy Circle.
   Holtz Street eastbound at its intersection with Poplar Street.
   Katie Lane at its intersection with McGuire Drive.
   Keigher Drive at the northernmost intersection with McGuire Drive.
   Lester Drive at its intersection with Cardinal Drive.
   North Hickory Street at its intersection with Seventh Street.
   Parseghian Street northbound at its intersection with Hesburgh Street.
   Raven Drive at its intersection with Lester Drive.
   St. Aubin Circle at its intersection with North Poplar Street.
   Sorin Circle at its intersection with Beauchamp Avenue.
   Sorin Circle at its intersection with Malloy Street.
   South Poplar Circle at its intersection with Brian Drive.
   Sixth Place with its intersection with Walnut Street. (Ord. 91-14, 11-4-
1991; amd. Ord. 94-19, 12-5-1994; Ord. 96-15, 8-19-1996; Ord. 97-02, 6-16-1997;
Ord. 97-13, 11-3-1997; Ord. 01-02, 6-4-2001; Ord. 01-15, 8-20-2001; Ord. 02-06,
7-1-2002)
CHAPTER 5
DRIVING RULES AND EQUIPMENT
SECTION:
7-5-1: Unattended Motor Vehicles
7-5-2: Obstruction To Driver's View Or Driving Mechanism
7-5-3: Lamp Or Flag On Projecting Load
7-5-4: Horns, Warning Devices
7-5-5: Mufflers, Prevention Of Noise
7-5-6: Mirrors
7-5-7: Railroad Trains
7-5-8: Wheel, Axle Loads, Gross Weights
7-5-9: Officers To Weigh
7-5-1: UNATTENDED MOTOR VEHICLES:
No person driving or in charge of a motor vehicle shall permit it to stand
unattended without first stopping the engine, locking the ignition, removing
the key, and effectively setting the brake thereon, and when standing on any
grade, turning the front wheels to the curb or side of the roadway. (1956 Code,
Sec. 14-55)
7-5-2: OBSTRUCTION TO DRIVER'S VIEW OR DRIVING MECHANISM:
No person shall drive a vehicle when it is so loaded, or when there are in the
front seat such number of persons, exceeding three (3), so as to obstruct the
view of the driver to the front or the sides of the vehicle or as to interfere
with the driver's control over the driving mechanism. (1956 Code, Sec. 14-56)
7-5-3: LAMP OR FLAG ON PROJECTING LOAD:
Whenever the load upon any vehicle extends to the rear four feet (4') or more
beyond the bed or body of such vehicle there shall be displayed at the extreme
rear end of the load between sunset and sunrise, a red light or lantern plainly
visible from a distance of at least five hundred feet (500') to the sides and
rear. The red light or lantern required under this section shall be in addition
to the red rear light required upon every vehicle. At any other tine there
shall be displayed at the extreme rear end of such load a red flag or cloth not
less than sixteen inches (16") square and so hung that the entire area is
visible to the driver of a vehicle approaching from the rear or either side.
(1956 Code, Sec. 14-57)
7-5-4: HORNS, WARNING DEVICES:
   (A)   Every motor vehicle when operated upon any public way shall be
equipped with a horn in good working order and capable of emitting sound
audible under normal conditions from a distance of not less than two hundred
feet (200'), but no horn or other warning device shall emit an unreasonably
loud harsh sound or whistle.
   (B)   The driver of a motor vehicle shall when reasonably necessary to
ensure safe operation give audible warning with his horn but shall not
otherwise use such horn at any time.
   (C)   No vehicle shall be equipped with nor shall any person use upon a
vehicle any siren, whistle or bell, except that this shall not apply to an
authorized emergency vehicle permitted in this title. (1956 Code, Sec. 14-58)
7-5-5: MUFFLERS, PREVENTION OF NOISE:
   (A)   Every vehicle shall at all times be equipped with a muffler in good
working order and in constant operation to prevent excessive or unusual noise
and annoying smoke, and no person shall use a muffler cutout, bypass or similar
device upon a motor vehicle upon a public way.
   (B)   The engine and power mechanism of every motor vehicle shall be so
equipped and adjusted as to prevent the escape of excessive fumes or smoke.
(1956 Code, Sec. 14-59)
7-5-6: MIRRORS:
Every motor vehicle which is so constructed or loaded as to obstruct the
driver's view to the rear thereof from the driver's position shall be equipped
with a mirror so located as to reflect to the driver a view of the roadway for
a distance of at least two hundred feet (200') to the rear of such vehicle.
(1956 Code, Sec. 14-60)
7-5-7: RAILROAD TRAINS:
It shall be unlawful for the directing officer or the operator of any railroad
train to direct the operation of or to operate the same in such manner as to
prevent the use of any street for purposes of travel for a period of time
longer than five (5) minutes, except that this provision shall not apply to
trains or cars in motion other than those engaged in switching. (1956 Code,
Sec. 14-61)
7-5-8: WHEEL, AXLE LOADS, GROSS WEIGHTS:
   (A)   No vehicle or combination of vehicles equipped with pneumatic tires
shall be operated unladen or with load, upon any public way in the village when
the gross weight on the road surface through any axle thereon exceeds eighteen
thousand (18,000) pounds, except a two (2) axle motor vehicle which shall not
exceed twenty four thousand (24,000) pounds on the rear axle.
   (B)   No vehicle or combination of vehicles equipped with other than
pneumatic tires shall be operated, unladen or with load, upon any public way in
the village when the gross weight on the road surface through any wheel thereof
exceeds eight hundred (800) pounds per inch width of tire tread or when the
gross weight on the road surface through any axle thereof exceeds sixteen
thousand (16,000) pounds.
   (C)   An "axle load" shall be defined as the total load transmitted to the
road by all wheels whose centers may be included between two (2) parallel
transverse vertical planes forty inches (40") or less apart extending across
the full width of the vehicle.
   (D)   Any two (2) consecutive axles whose centers are more than forty inches
(40") and not more than seventy two inches (72") apart, measured to the nearest
inch, shall be defined as tandem axles, and the gross weight transmitted to the
road surface through axles so spaced shall not exceed sixteen thousand (16,000)
pounds per axle.
   (E)   The gross weight of all vehicles and combinations of vehicles,
including the weight of the vehicle or combination and its maximum load,
operated upon any public way in this village shall be subject to the foregoing
limitations and further shall not exceed the following:
2-axle motor vehicle                                                   36,000
3 or more axle motor vehicle                                           41,000
3-axle truck tractor semitrailer combination                           45,000
4-axle truck and trailer combination                                   63,000
5 or more axle truck and trailer combination                           72,000
5 or more axle truck tractor semitrailer combination when transporting 72,000
loads that cannot reasonably be dismantled or disassembled
Trailers                                                               36,000
Vehicles operating on caterpillar type trucks                          40,000
 
(1956 Code, Sec. 14-90)
7-5-9: OFFICERS TO WEIGH:
   (A)   Any police officer having reason to believe that the weight of a
vehicle and load is unlawful shall require the driver to stop and submit to a
weighing of the same either by means of portable or stationary scales. If such
scales are not available at the place where such vehicle is stopped, the police
officer shall require that such vehicle be driven to the nearest public scales.
   (B)   Whenever a police officer upon weighing a vehicle and load, as above
provided, determines that the weight is unlawful, such officer shall require
the driver to stop the vehicle in a suitable place and remain standing until
such portion of the load is removed as may be necessary to reduce the gross
weight of such vehicle to such limit as permitted under this chapter and shall
forthwith file charges against the driver in the proper village court. All
material so unloaded shall be cared for by the owner or operator of such
vehicle at the risk of such owner or operator.
   (C)   It shall be unlawful for the driver of any vehicle to fail or refuse
to stop and submit the vehicle and its load to a weighing or to fail or refuse
when directed by a police officer upon weighing of the vehicle to stop the
vehicle and otherwise comply with the provisions of this section. (1956 Code,
Sec. 14-91)
CHAPTER 6
STOPPING, STANDING, PARKING
SECTION:
7-6-1: Parking Prohibited
7-6-2: Close To Curb
7-6-3: Diagonal Parking
7-6-4: Lights
7-6-5: Alley Parking
7-6-6: Police Authority
7-6-7: Parking For Certain Purposes Prohibited
7-6-8: Public Carrier Stops
7-6-9: Stopping Of Buses
7-6-10: Use Of Bus Stops, Taxicab Stands
7-6-11: Through Streets Designated
7-6-12: Stop Streets Designated
7-6-13: Parking Violations
7-6-14: Handicapped Parking
7-6-15: Snow Routes Designated
7-6-16: Prohibited Parking Of Semitractors And Trailers
7-6-17: Time Limited Parking
7-6-18:    Unscheduled Bus Stops
7-6-1: PARKING PROHIBITED:
It shall be unlawful for the operator of any vehicle to stop, stand or park
such vehicle in any of the following places except when necessary to avoid
conflict with other traffic or in compliance with directions of a police
officer or official sign or signal:
   (A)   Intersection: Within an intersection.
   (B)   Crosswalk: On a crosswalk.
   (C)   Crosswalk At An Intersection: Within twenty feet (20') of a crosswalk
at an intersection.
   (D)   Fire Hydrant: At any curb or edge of the roadway within fifteen feet
(15') of a fire hydrant.
   (E)   Fire Station: At any place within twenty feet (20') of the entrance to
any fire station and on the side of the street opposite the entrance to any
fire station within seventy five feet (75') of said entrance.
   (F)   Driveway: At any place where the standing of any vehicle will block
the use of any driveway.
   (G)   Sidewalk: On any sidewalk.
   (H)   Excavation Or Obstruction: Alongside any street excavation or
obstruction when such stopping, standing or parking would obstruct traffic.
   (I)   Roadway Side Of Vehicle: On the roadway side of any vehicle stopped or
parked at the edge or curb of a street.
   (J)   Where Signs Have Been Erected: At any place where official traffic
signs have been erected prohibiting stopping, standing or parking.
   (K)   Railroad Crossing: Within fifty feet (50') of the nearest rail of a
railroad crossing.
   (L)   Specific Streets:
      Birch Street on the easterly or westerly side between Fourth Street on
the north and Third Street on the south between the hours of one o'clock (1:00)
A.M. and six o'clock (6:00) A.M.
      Cook Street on the south side from Main Street to Walnut Street.
      West Cook Street on the southerly side from its intersection with Poplar
Street to its intersection with South Creek Drive.
      Division Street on the northerly or southerly sides from the intersection
of Cypress Street to its intersection with Walnut Street.
      Division Street on either northerly or southerly side between Locust
Street and the alley lying immediately west thereof.
      Division Street on the northerly side within twenty five feet (25') east
of the northeast corner of the intersection of said Division Street and the
alley between Main and Walnut Streets.
      Division Street on the northerly side within twenty five feet (25') west
of the northwest corner of the intersection of said Division Street and Main
Street. The parking of automobiles owned or operated by duly licensed
physicians shall not be considered a violation hereof.
      Division Street on the southerly side within thirty five feet (35') of
its intersection with Main Street.
      Illinois Route 50 on both sides from Sixth Street southerly to the south
Village limits.
      Locust Street, also known as Route 50, on either the easterly or westerly
side anywhere between Fourth Street on the north and Second Street on the
south.
      Locust Street, also known as Route 50, on the westerly side within fifty
feet (50') north of the northwest corner of the intersection of said Locust
Street and Adams Street.
      Locust Street, also known as Route 50, on the westerly side within fifty
feet (50') of the northwest corner of the intersection of said Locust Street
and Baker Street.
      Locust Street, also known as Route 50, on the westerly side within fifty
feet (50') of the northwest corner of the intersection of said Locust Street
and Division Street.
      Locust Street, also known as Route 50, on the westerly side within fifty
feet (50') of the northwest corner of the intersection of said Locust Street
and First Street.
      Locust Street, also known as Route 50, on the westerly side within fifty
feet (50') of the southwest corner of the intersection of said Locust Street
and First Street.
      Locust Street, also known as Route 50, on the westerly side within fifty
feet (50') south of the southwest corner of the intersection of said Locust
Street and Adams Street.
      Locust Street, also known as Route 50, on the westerly side within fifty
feet (50') south of the southwest corner of the intersection of said Locust
Street and Baker Street.
      Locust Street, also known as Route 50, on the westerly side within fifty
feet (50') south of the southwest corner of the intersection of said Locust
Street and Second Street.
      Locust Street, also known as Route 50, on the westerly side within one
hundred eighty feet (180') south of the southwest corner of the intersection of
said Locust Street and Division Street.
      Locust Street, also known as Route 50, within fifty feet (50') of the
west line on either the northerly or southerly side of any of the following
streets: Second Street, First Street, Division Street, Adams Street or Baker
Street.
      Main Street between Division and Third Street between the hours of three
o'clock (3:00) A.M. and six o'clock (6:00) A.M.
      Main Street on the easterly side between Cook Street and the south
entrance of the public parking lot.
      Main Street on the easterly side within two hundred feet (200') north of
the northeast corner of the intersection of Main Street and Division Street;
except that within said two hundred feet (200') it shall be lawful for buses
and regularly licensed taxicabs to park for such time as shall be reasonably
necessary to take on or to discharge passengers.
      Main Street on the westerly side within twenty five feet (25') of the
intersection of said Main Street with any of the following streets: Fourth
Street, Third Street, Second Street, First Street, Division Street, Adams
Street or Baker Street.
      Maple Street on the westerly side from Park Street to a point one hundred
fifty feet (150') north of said intersection.
      Maple Street on the westerly side from the northerly property line of
Manteno Senior High School to the southerly property line of Manteno Senior
High School from the hours of eight o'clock (8:00) A.M. until four o'clock (4:
00) P.M. on school days when children are present.
      Maple Street on the westerly side from two hundred forty feet (240')
north of Fifth Street to Eighth Street (1,100 feet).
      Maple Street on the westerly side within the north boundary line and the
south boundary line of the school property on school days when children are
present.
      Maple Street on the westerly side within two hundred feet (200') north of
Maple Street's intersection with Third Street from the hours of seven o'clock
(7:00) A.M. until four o'clock (4:00) P.M. only on school days when children
are present.
      Oak Street on the west side from Second Street to the southern limits,
parking shall be limited to residential and parallel parking, provided no
parallel parking shall be permitted between First Street and Division Street.
      Raven Drive on the north side commencing one hundred sixty five feet
(165') from its intersection with Cardinal Drive for a distance of two hundred
feet (200').
      Section Line Road on the north side commencing at the intersection with
West First Street and ending at the intersection of North Hickory.
      Spruce Street, on, upon or adjacent to. Any person violating this
provision of this Code shall be subject to a fine of one hundred dollars
($100.00) for each and every violation.
      Walnut Street within twenty five feet (25') north and south of its
intersection with West Third Street.
      West Second Street on the northerly side from its intersection with
Hickory to its intersection with Maple between the hours of twelve o'clock (12:
00) midnight and six o'clock (6:00) A.M.
      Third Street on either side between Locust Street and the alley lying
immediately west thereof.
      Third Street on either the northerly or southerly side within one hundred
feet (100') east of the east line of Locust Street, also known as Route 50.
      Third Street on the northerly side within two hundred fifty feet (250')
east of Third Street's intersection with Maple Street from the hours of seven
o'clock (7:00) A.M. until four o'clock (4:00) P.M. only on school days when
children are present.
      Third Street on the southerly side within two hundred feet (200') east of
its intersection with Maple from the hours of seven o'clock (7:00) A.M. until
four o'clock (4:00) P.M. only on school days when children are present.
      Third Street within twenty five feet (25') east and west of its
intersection with North Walnut Street.
      Walnut Street on the east side between the alley north of Section Line
Road and West Third Street. (1956 Code § 17-81; amd. Ord. 78-4, 3-20-1978; Ord.
78-8, 9-5-1978; Ord. 79-7, 9-17-1979; Ord. 84-6, 6-18-1984; Ord. 96-19, 9-16-
1996; Ord. 96-39, 1-20-1997; Ord. 97-04, 7-21-1997; Ord. 97-08, 10-6-1997; Ord.
97-14, 11-3-1997; Ord. 97-24, 1-19-1998; Ord. 98-22, 2-1-1999; Ord. 99-37, 3-6-
2000; Ord. 01-10, 7-17-2000; Ord. 02-16, 9-9-2002; Ord. 04-39, 2-22-2004; Ord.
13-03, 5-6-2013; Ord. 14-20, 9-15-2014; Ord. 17-12, 8-21-2017; Ord. 17-32, 3-
19-2018; Ord. 18-02, 6-4-2018; Ord. 21-07, 6-21-2021)
   (M)   Pickup Trucks And Vans Prohibition: No pickup trucks or vans may be
parked on the westerly side of Main Street between Division and Second Streets.
(Ord. 79-4, 6-18-1979)
   (N)   Motor Vehicles In Parks Prohibited: No person may drive a motor
vehicle, as defined in 625 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/1-146 upon any property
designated as a park by the Village.
      Such prohibiting shall not apply to designated parking areas, nor does it
apply to motor vehicles operated by Village personnel engaged in their official
capacity as Village employees for the purpose of maintaining said park property
or engaged in a law enforcement activity.
      Any person found guilty of violating the foregoing shall be subject to
the provisions of title 1, chapter 4 of this Code. (Ord. 85-7, 9-16-1985)
   (O)   Truck Weight Limits: All trucks weighing in excess of fourteen
thousand (14,000) pounds' gross weight shall be prohibited from parking in:
      The parking lots east of Main Street and west of the railroad tracks
between Adams Street and Third Street at all times.
      The alley west of Main Street and east of Walnut Street between Adams
Street and Third Street at all times. (Ord. 99-40, 3-20-2000)
7-6-2: CLOSE TO CURB:
No person shall stand or park a vehicle in a roadway other than parallel with
the edge of the roadway headed in the direction of lawful traffic movement and
with the wheels on the right within twelve inches (12") of the curb or edge of
the roadway. Double parking is prohibited. (1956 Code § 14-78)
7-6-3: DIAGONAL PARKING:
The Police Chief is authorized to determine those streets or portions thereof,
with approval of the Village Board, whereon diagonal parking may be permitted.
He shall then so indicate by appropriate signs or markings on such streets or
parts thereof. (1956 Code § 14-79)
7-6-4: LIGHTS:
Whenever a vehicle is lawfully parked at nighttime upon any lighted street
within a business or residential district, no lights need be displayed upon
such parked vehicle. (1956 Code § 14-80)
7-6-5: ALLEY PARKING:
No person shall stop, stand or park any vehicle in an alley for a period of
time longer than is necessary for the reasonably expeditious loading and
unloading of such vehicle.
No person shall stop, stand or park any vehicle within an alley in such
position as to leave available less than ten feet (10') of the width of the
alley for the free movement of vehicle traffic.
No person shall stop, stand or park any vehicle within an alley in such
position as to block the driveway or entrance to any abutting property. (1956
Code, Sec. 14-82)
7-6-6: POLICE AUTHORITY:
The police chief is authorized, with the consent and approval of the village
board, to determine and designate any other places within the village other
than those specifically set forth herein whereat stopping, standing or parking
of vehicle shall be prohibited and he shall so designate such places by
appropriate signs or markings. (1956 Code, Sec. 14-83)
7-6-7: PARKING FOR CERTAIN PURPOSES PROHIBITED:
No person shall park a vehicle upon any roadway:
   (A)   To display such vehicle for sale.
   (B)   To grease or repair such vehicle except for repairs necessitated by an
emergency.
   (C)   To sell merchandise from such vehicle. (1956 Code, Sec. 14-84)
7-6-8: PUBLIC CARRIER STOPS:
The police chief, with the approval of the village board, is hereby authorized
and required to establish bus stops and taxicab stands on such public streets
and in such places and in such number as he shall determine to be of the
greatest benefit and convenience to the public and every such bus stop and
taxicab stand shall be designated by appropriate signs. (1956 Code, Sec. 14-85)
7-6-9: STOPPING OF BUSES:
The driver of a bus shall not stand or park such vehicle upon any street at any
place other than at a designated bus stop, except in case of emergency. (1956
Code, Sec. 14-86)
7-6-10: USE OF BUS STOPS, TAXICAB STANDS:
No person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle other than a bus in a bus stop or
other than a taxicab in a taxicab stand, when any such stop or stand has been
so designated by appropriate signs. (1956 Code, Sec. 14-87)
7-6-11: THROUGH STREETS DESIGNATED:
See section
7-4-7 of this title. (Ord. 87-10, 10-19-1987)
7-6-12: STOP STREETS DESIGNATED:
See section
7-4-7 of this title. (Ord. 88-3, 7-6-1988)
7-6-13: PARKING VIOLATIONS:
   (A)   Each police officer shall attach to every vehicle parked in violation
of any provision of this chapter a notice that such vehicle has been illegally
parked. (Ord. 94-13, 8-15-1994)
   (B)   Any person accused of violating this chapter, or for having parked a
vehicle in a designated area in which a restricted length of time a vehicle may
be parked exists, is subject to a fine or penalty as set forth in section
1-4-1 of this code. (Ord. 99-09, 8-2-1999)
   (C)   The payment may be made at the village hall and a receipt shall be
issued for all money so received. The money shall be promptly turned over to
the police department fund to be used in the manner provided for disposition of
fines for traffic violations.
   (D)   The members of the police department are hereby authorized to refrain
from instituting a prosecution for the alleged offense involved. (Ord. 94-13,
8-15-1994)
7-6-14: HANDICAPPED PARKING:
The following parking spaces shall be restricted to vehicles operated or used
by the handicapped:
   (A)   The first parking space north of Division Street on the west side of
Main Street in the village.
   (B)   The first parking space north of First Street on the west side of Main
Street in the village. (Ord. 80-7, 8-4-1980)
   (C)   That parking spaces be designated on the west side of Main Street
between Division and First Street and spaces between First Street and Second
Street; that said parking spaces shall be as close as possible to the middle of
the block; and that the chief of police shall have discretion as to the
designation of these parking spaces. (Ord. 83-13, 10-17-1983)
7-6-15: SNOW ROUTES DESIGNATED:
   (A)   All public streets in the Village are designated and established as
snow routes.
   (B)   It shall be unlawful for any person to stop, stand, park or leave
unattended any vehicle on a public street designated and established as a snow
route following the accumulation of two (2") inches of snowfall or more within
any twenty-four (24)-hour period. The parking restriction shall be effective
for a period of twenty-four (24)-hours following the end of the snowfall event
or until the applicable street is completely clear of snow from "curb to curb,"
whichever is later.
   (D)   Any vehicle remaining on a public street following a qualified
snowfall event shall be subject to removal at the owner's expense.
   (E)   The owner of a vehicle stopped, standing, parked or left unattended in
violation of this section shall be fined not more than two hundred dollars
($200.00) for each offense. Each day a violation occurs or is permitted to
continue constitutes a new and separate violation. (Ord. 83-14, 12-19-1983;
amd. Ord. 89-8, 12-18-1990; Ord. 92-8, 1-11-1993; Ord. 99-36, 3-6-2000; Ord.
21-26, 3-7-2022)
7-6-16: PROHIBITED PARKING OF SEMITRACTORS AND TRAILERS:
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for the owner or operator of any semitractor and/
or trailer to park such vehicle in or upon any dedicated roadway within the
village limits. This prohibition shall not apply to semitractors and/or
trailers parked for the purposes of loading and unloading cargo at a commercial
enterprise within the village limits. Such loading/unloading operation shall
not be more than one hour in duration from the initial time of parking said
vehicle(s). (Ord. 92-4, 8-10-1992)
   (B)   Any person who shall violate this section shall be liable to a fine or
penalty as set forth in section
1-4-1 of this code for each and every violation hereof. Each twenty four (24)
hour period that said vehicle remains unmoved shall constitute a separate and
distinct violation subject to an additional fine. (Ord. 92-4, 8-10-1992; amd.
Ord. 99-09, 8-2-1999)
7-6-17: TIME LIMITED PARKING:
   (A)   Fifteen Minute Time Limited Parking: Monday through Saturday, between
the hours of eight o'clock (8:00) A.M. and five o'clock (5:00) P.M., it shall
be unlawful for the owner or operator of any vehicle to stop, stand, or park
such vehicle in a posted time limited parking space at or near 157 North Main
Street, in excess of fifteen (15) minutes.
   (B)   Thirty Minute Time Limited Parking: It shall be unlawful for the owner
or operator of any vehicle to stop, stand, or park such vehicle for a period in
excess of thirty (30) minutes along the following streets:
      On the south side of East Division Street between Oak Street and the
alley between Oak Street and Locust Street (Route 50).
   (C)   Two Hour Time Limited Parking: It shall be unlawful for the owner or
operator of any vehicle to stop, stand, or park such vehicle for a period in
excess of two (2) hours along the following streets:
      On the north side of East Division Street west of the alley between Oak
Street and Locust Street (Route 50) and east of Oak Street. (Ord. 11-13, 10-17-
2011)
   (D)   Forty Eight Hour Time Limited Parking: It shall be unlawful for the
owner or operator of any vehicle to park such vehicle for a period in excess of
forty eight (48) consecutive hours in any of the following village parking
lots:
      On the west side of Oak Street between the Metro Bus Station and Division
Street; on the east side of Main Street between Third Street and Cook Street;
Adams Street between Locust Street and the alley to the east; Adams Street
between Main Street and the alley to the west; Belcher Park; Ruder Park; or any
public parking area. (Ord. 14-49, 4-6-2015)
7-6-18: UNSCHEDULED BUS STOPS:
   (A)   Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, as used in this
section, shall have the following meanings ascribed to them unless the context
clearly indicates a different meaning:
APPLICATION: A request for approval to make a bus stop in the Village of
Manteno meeting all of the requirements of this section.
APPROVAL: A written notice or permit signed by the Chief of Police approving an
application submitted in accordance with this section.
BUS: Any type of motor vehicle that is designed to carry, or is actually
carrying, more than seven (7) individuals.
CHIEF OF POLICE: The Chief of Police of the Village of Manteno Police
Department.
REGULARLY SCHEDULED SERVICE: A bus service that operates trips involving the
loading and unloading of passengers in the Village of Manteno on a predictable
and recurring basis, following a schedule that is published in advance and
available to the general public, and provides service in exchange for paying a
fare.
UNSCHEDULED BUS STOP: A location in the Village of Manteno where individuals
are dropped off by a bus that originated from a location outside of Kankakee
County, Illinois that is not providing regularly scheduled service and not
operating pursuant to an approved application and plan from the Chief of
Police.
   (B)   Application. The owner, operator, or driver of any bus that is not
providing regularly scheduled service that is desirous of making a stop to
unload passengers in the Village of Manteno shall file an application with the
Chief of Police for authority therefor. A complete application (including all
required information) shall be submitted to the Chief of Police at least five
(5) calendar days prior to the proposed arrival date. The application shall
include the following information:
      1.   The full names, addresses, and telephone numbers (including mobile
telephones) of the owner, operator, and driver of the bus;
      2.   The full name of all persons that are proposed to be unloaded in the
Village of Manteno, including copies of IDs for said persons to the extent IDs
exist or are in possession of the passengers;
      3.   The address of the location in the Village of Manteno where the
applicant will unload its passengers;
      4.   The exact date and time the applicant will unload its passengers in
the Village of Manteno;
      5.   The full names, addresses, mobile and land line phone numbers of the
individuals who shall be present in the Village of Manteno to meet the bus and
receive the passengers; and,
      6.   A detailed plan identifying how the passengers will be temporarily
cared for, housed, and fed after arrival in the Village of Manteno. The plan
shall include full names, addresses, mobile and land line phone numbers for all
persons that will be present at the time and date of the unloading that will be
responsible for the care, housing and feeding of the passengers.
   (C)   Application Review and Approval. Upon receipt of an application, the
Chief of Police shall review the same to ensure all information is present and
to verify the truth and veracity Village of the same. The Chief of Police shall
advise the applicant in writing if any information is missing, or if any other
deficiencies are present on the face or from his/her investigation. The Chief
of Police shall inform the applicant that the application is approved no later
than four (4) calendar days after receiving a completed and verified
application. The Chief of Police shall further provide a telephone number to
the applicant or driver to coordinate the arrival of the bus in the Village of
Manteno.
   (D)   Violations. It shall be unlawful for any owner, operator, or driver of
any bus to:
      1.   Make an unscheduled bus stop for the purpose of unloading passengers
in the Village of Manteno.
      2.   Make a bus stop for the purpose of unloading passengers in the
Village of Manteno at a location different from that identified or not
identified in the approved application;
      3.   Make a bus stop for the purpose of unloading passengers in the
Village of Manteno outside the hours of ten o’clock (10:00) A.M. and four
o’clock (4:00) P.M. Monday through Friday, and excluding holidays, and at a
time that is more than fifteen (15) minutes before or more than thirty (30)
mintutes after the drop-off time identified in the approved application;
      4.   Make a bus stop for the purpose of unloading any passenger(s) not
identified on the passenger manifest in the approved application;
      5.   Unload any passenger at a time or location where those individuals
identified in the approved application that are to be responsible for meeting
the bus and receiving the passengers are not present;
      6.   Fail to provide for the immediate and adequate care, feeding, or
housing of any passenger unloaded in the Village of Manteno; or,
      7.   Fail to implement or perform all of the terms and conditions of the
plan approved in an application.
   (E)    Penalties. Any person or entity violating any provision of this
section shall be fined in an amount of seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00)
for each passenger transported on a bus being operated in violation of this
section. Each day a violation occurs or is permitted to continue shall
constitute a new and separate offense.
   (F)   Administration. Violations of this section may be administered through
the provisions of Title 1, Administration, Chapter 17, Administrative
Adjudication, of the Village of Manteno Municipal Code. Nothing in this section
shall be interpreted to limit the remedies or penalties available to Village of
Manteno.
   (G)   Seizure and Impoundment: Whenever a police officer or other authorized
officer has reason to believe that a violation of this section has occurred, he
shall cause the seizure and impoundment of the bus to a facility controlled by
the Village of Manteno or its agents provided such seizure and impoundment is
otherwise reasonable under the circumstances. The impounded bus will be
released to the owner of record upon payment of the towing and storage costs.
(Ord. 23-16, 1-16-2024)
CHAPTER 7
DRIVERS
SECTION:
7-7-1: Liquor Or Drugs
7-7-2: Reckless Driving
7-7-1: LIQUOR OR DRUGS:
   (A)   It is unlawful and punishable as provided in section
1-4-1 of this code for any person who is an habitual user of narcotic drugs or
any person who is under the influence of intoxicating liquor or narcotic drugs
to drive any vehicle within the village 1 .
   (B)   Every person violating the provisions of this section shall be deemed
guilty of a misdemeanor and subject to penalty as provided for by section
1-4-1 of this code. (1956 Code, Sec. 14-88)
 
Notes
1 1. See also section
  7-3-24 of this title.
7-7-2: RECKLESS DRIVING:
Any person who drives any vehicle within the village with a wilful or a wanton
disregard for the safety of persons or property is guilty of reckless driving,
and any person violating this section shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor
and subject to penalty as provided for by section
1-4-1 of this code. (1956 Code, Sec. 14-89)
CHAPTER 8
PEDESTRIANS
SECTION:
7-8-1: Right Of Way In Crosswalk
7-8-2: Use Right Half Of Crosswalk
7-8-3: Crossing At Right Angles
7-8-4: Pedestrian To Yield
7-8-5: Walking
7-8-6: Soliciting On Roadways
7-8-7: Due Care
7-8-8: School Crossing Guards
7-8-1: RIGHT OF WAY IN CROSSWALK:
   (A)   When the movement of traffic is not controlled by official traffic
control signals or a police officer, the driver of a vehicle shall yield the
right of way slowing down or stopping if need be so to yield, to a pedestrian
crossing the roadway within a crosswalk when the pedestrian is upon the half of
the roadway upon which the vehicle is traveling, or when the pedestrian is
approaching so closely from the opposite half of the roadway as to be in
danger.
   (B)   No pedestrian shall suddenly leave a curb, edge of the roadway or
other place of safety and walk or run into the path of a vehicle which is so
close that it is impossible for the driver to yield.
   (C)   Whenever any vehicle is stopped at any marked crossing or at any
unmarked crosswalk at an intersection to permit a pedestrian to cross the
roadway, the driver of any other vehicle approaching from the rear shall not
overtake or pass such stopped vehicle. (1956 Code, Sec. 14-62)
7-8-2: USE RIGHT HALF OF CROSSWALK:
Pedestrians shall move, whenever practicable, upon the right half of
crosswalks. (1956 Code, Sec. 14-63)
7-8-3: CROSSING AT RIGHT ANGLES:
No pedestrian shall cross a roadway at any place other than by a route at right
angles to the curb or edge or by the shortest route to the opposite curb except
in a marked walk. (1956 Code, Sec. 14-64)
7-8-4: PEDESTRIAN TO YIELD:
Every pedestrian crossing a roadway at any place other than within a marked
crosswalk or within an unmarked crosswalk at an intersection shall yield the
right of way to all vehicles upon the roadway. (1956 Code, Sec. 14-65)
7-8-5: WALKING:
   (A)   Where sidewalks are provided it shall be unlawful for any pedestrian
to walk along and upon an adjacent roadway.
   (B)   Where sidewalks are not provided any pedestrian walking along and upon
a street or highway shall when practicable walk only on the left side of the
roadway or its shoulder facing traffic which may approach from the opposite
direction. (1956 Code, Sec. 14-66)
7-8-6: SOLICITING ON ROADWAYS:
It shall be unlawful for any person to stand in a roadway for the purpose of
soliciting a ride, employment or business from the occupant of any vehicle.
(1956 Code, Sec. 14-67)
7-8-7: DUE CARE:
   (A)   Notwithstanding the foregoing provisions of this chapter every driver
of a vehicle shall exercise due care to avoid colliding with any pedestrian
upon any roadway and shall give warning by sounding the horn when a confused or
incapacitated person is upon a roadway.
   (B)   Nothing in this chapter shall relieve a pedestrian from the duty of
exercising due care. (1956 Code, Sec. 14-68)
7-8-8: SCHOOL CROSSING GUARDS:
The president of the village is hereby authorized to appoint five (5) crossing
guards who shall act during hours to be established by the board of trustees of
Manteno Community School District 5, Kankakee and Will Counties, at the
following intersections within the village: (Ord. 76-4, 5-3-1977; amd. Ord. 99-
41, 3-20-2000)
   (A)   On Park Street with its intersection with North Poplar.
   (B)   On North Maple at its intersection with Park Street.
   (C)   On West Third Street at its intersection with Maple Street. (Ord. 99-
41, 3-20-2000)
   (D)   On West Cook Street at its intersection with the eastern entrance to
the elementary school pick up/drop off lane. (Ord. 00-15, 1-2-2001)
   (E)   On West Second Street at its intersection with Maple Street. (Ord. 99-
41, 3-20-2000)
All of the above duly appointed crossing guards shall carry a stop sign which
shall comply with the specifications for stop signs as determined by the state.
(Ord. 76-4, 5-3-1977)
The above duly appointed crossing guards shall have the power to stop traffic
at the intersections above indicated by entering said roadway with the stop
sign raised. (Ord. 76-4, 5-3-1977; amd. Ord. 99-41, 3-20-2000)
All motor vehicles approaching a crossing guard standing in the above
intersections with a stop sign raised shall stop prior to entering said
intersection and shall not proceed until directed to do so by said crossing
guard.
Any driver of a motor vehicle failing to stop as required above shall be
subject to the general penalty provisions of title 1, chapter 4 of this code.
(Ord. 76-4, 5-3-1977)
CHAPTER 9
BICYCLES
SECTION:
7-9-1: Effect
7-9-2: Application Of Traffic Laws
7-9-3: Obedience
7-9-4: Riding
7-9-5: Speed
7-9-6: Carrying Articles
7-9-7: Parking
7-9-8: Lamps And Other Equipment
7-9-9: Violation
7-9-10: Restricted Areas
7-9-1: EFFECT:
   (A)   The parent of any child and the guardian of any ward shall not
authorize or knowingly permit any such child or ward to violate any of the
provisions of this chapter applicable to bicycles.
   (B)   The regulations in this chapter applicable to bicycles shall apply
whenever a bicycle is operated upon any street or public sidewalk or upon any
public path set aside for the exclusive use of bicycles, subject to those
exceptions herein. (1956 Code, Sec. 14-69)
7-9-2: APPLICATION OF TRAFFIC LAWS:
Every person riding a bicycle upon a roadway shall be granted all of the rights
and shall be subject to all of the duties applicable to the driver of a vehicle
by the laws of this state declaring rules of the road applicable to vehicles or
by the provisions of this code applicable to the driver of a vehicle except as
to those provisions of laws and this code which by their nature can have no
application. (1956 Code, Sec. 14-70)
7-9-3: OBEDIENCE:
Any person operating a bicycle shall comply with official traffic control
signals, signs and other devices applicable to vehicles, unless otherwise
directed by a police officer. (1956 Code, Sec. 14-71)
7-9-4: RIDING:
   (A)   A person propelling a bicycle shall not ride other than astride a
permanent and regular seat attached thereto.
   (B)   No bicycle shall be used to carry more persons at one time than the
number for which it is designed and equipped. (1956 Code, Sec. 14-72)
7-9-5: SPEED:
No person shall operate a bicycle at a speed greater than is reasonable and
prudent under the conditions then existing. (1956 Code, Sec. 14-73)
7-9-6: CARRYING ARTICLES:
No person operating a bicycle shall carry any package, bundle or article which
prevents the rider from keeping at least one hand upon the handlebars. (1956
Code, Sec. 14-74)
7-9-7: PARKING:
No person shall park a bicycle upon a street other than upon the roadway
against the curb or upon the sidewalk in a rack to support the bicycle or
against a building or at the curb, in such a manner as to afford the least
obstruction to pedestrian traffic. (1956 Code, Sec. 14-75)
7-9-8: LAMPS AND OTHER EQUIPMENT:
   (A)   Every bicycle when in use at nighttime shall be equipped with a
headlamp which shall emit a white light visible from a minimum distance of five
hundred feet (500') from the front end and with a rear end reflector, red in
color, of the type capable of reflecting the headbeams of an approaching motor
vehicle back to the operator of such vehicle at distances up to two hundred
feet (200') or a rear lamp emitting a red light visible from a distance of at
least two hundred feet (200') from the rear.
   (B)   No person shall operate a bicycle unless it is equipped with a bell or
other device capable of giving a signal audible for a distance of at least one
hundred feet (100'), except that a bicycle shall not be equipped with, nor
shall any person use upon a bicycle, any siren or whistle.
   (C)   Every bicycle shall be equipped with a brake which will enable the
operator to make the braked wheel skid on a dry, level, clean pavement. (1956
Code, Sec. 14-76)
7-9-9: VIOLATION:
Every person convicted of a violation of any provision of sections
7-9-1 through
7-9-8 of this chapter regulating bicycles shall be liable to a fine or a
penalty as set forth in section
1-4-1 of this code or by impounding such person's bicycle for a period not to
exceed thirty (30) days or by any combination thereof. (1956 Code, Sec. 14-77;
amd. Ord. 99-09, 8-2-1999)
7-9-10: RESTRICTED AREAS:
   (A)   No person shall rollerskate, ride a skateboard or operate a bicycle
upon the sidewalk located on the west side of Main Street between Division
Street and Third Street. (Ord. 96-17, 9-16-1996)
   (B)   Any person violating any provision of this section shall be liable to
a fine or a penalty as set forth in section
1-4-1 of this code. (Ord. 96-17, 9-16-1996; amd. Ord. 99-09, 8-2-1999)
CHAPTER 10
SNOWMOBILES AND OFF HIGHWAY VEHICLES
SECTION:
7-10-1: Definitions
7-10-2: Prohibitions
7-10-3: Operation Upon Private Property
7-10-4: Operation Within Village Parks
7-10-5: Sidewalks
7-10-6: Penalties
7-10-1: DEFINITIONS:
ALL-TERRAIN VEHICLE: Any motorized off highway device traveling on three (3) or
more low pressure tires, designed with a seat or saddle for operator use, and
handlebars or steering wheel for steering control.
OFF HIGHWAY MOTORCYCLE: Any motorized device designed to travel primarily off
highway on two (2) wheels, having a seat or saddle for the use of the operator,
upon or which any person, persons or property may be transported or drawn.
SNOWMOBILE: A self-propelled device designed for travel on snow or ice or
natural terrain steered by skis or runners and supported in part by skis, belts
or cleats. (Ord. 92-10, 1-25-1993; amd. Ord. 99-42, 4-17-2000)
7-10-2: PROHIBITIONS:
It shall be unlawful for any person to drive or operate any vehicle described
in section
7-10-1 of this chapter on any portion of a dedicated roadway within the
village. This prohibition is not limited to the improved area used for regular
traffic, but includes any area dedicated for roadway purposes. (Ord. 92-10, 1-
25-1993; amd. Ord. 99-42, 4-17-2000)
7-10-3: OPERATION UPON PRIVATE PROPERTY:
It shall be unlawful for any person to drive or operate any vehicle described
in section
7-10-1 of this chapter on private property without the written consent of the
owner or the lessee thereof. (Ord. 92-10, 1-25-1993; amd. Ord. 99-42, 4-17-
2000)
7-10-4: OPERATION WITHIN VILLAGE PARKS:
No person shall operate any unauthorized motorized vehicle within any area
dedicated as a public park within the village. This prohibition extends to and
includes the property owned by said village and operated as the Manteno
municipal golf course. (Ord. 09-37, 4-5-2010)
7-10-5: SIDEWALKS:
No person shall operate any vehicle described in section
7-10-1 of this chapter on or within any sidewalk in the village. (Ord. 92-10,
1-25-1993; amd. Ord. 99-42, 4-17-2000)
7-10-6: PENALTIES:
The penalty provisions of title 1, chapter 4 of this code, shall apply to all
violations of this chapter. (Ord. 92-10, 1-25-1993)
CHAPTER 11
LOAD LIMITS
SECTION:
7-11-1: Dedicated Truck Routes And Load Limit Streets
7-11-2: Violators
7-11-3: Penalty
7-11-1: DEDICATED TRUCK ROUTES AND LOAD LIMIT STREETS:
   (A)   The maximum gross weight of any vehicle traveling upon the roadways of
the village is fourteen thousand (14,000) pounds; except for documented pick up
and delivery or upon dedicated truck routes as provided herein.
   (B)   The following roadways within the village are hereby declared
dedicated truck routes: (Ord. 98-16, 12-7-1998)
      1.   Third Street east of its intersection with Locust Street (Illinois
Route 50). (Ord. 99-39, 3-20-2000)
      2.   The entire length of Locust Street (Illinois Route 50).
      3.   Division Street, west of Locust Street.
      4.   Sycamore north of East Third Street (County Highway 9). (Ord. 98-16,
12-7-1998)
7-11-2: VIOLATORS:
Any person operating a truck weighing in excess of fourteen thousand (14,000)
pounds' gross weight upon roadways affected by section
7-11-1 of this chapter shall be in violation hereof. (Ord. 86-4, 8-4-1986)
7-11-3: PENALTY:
The penalty provisions of section
1-4-1 of this code shall apply to all violations of this chapter. (Ord. 86-4,
8-4-1986)
CHAPTER 12
SEIZURE AND IMPOUNDMENT OF MOTOR VEHICLES
SECTION:
7-12-1: Definitions
7-12-2: Violations
7-12-3: Vehicle Impoundment
7-12-4: Posting A Bond
7-12-5: Preliminary Hearing
7-12-6: Final Hearing
7-12-7: Unclaimed Vehicles
7-12-8: Liability For Penalty And Costs
7-12-1: DEFINITIONS:
For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply unless
the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning:
               Any violation as defined in the following sections of the Illinois Criminal
BURGLARY:      Code of 2012, as amended from time to time: "Burglary" (720 ILCS 5/19-1); or
               "Residential Burglary" (720 ILCS 5/19-3).
CANCELED,
SUSPENDED OR   A violation of section 3-702 of the Illinois vehicle code 1 , as amended from
REVOKED        time to time.
REGISTRATION:
               Any substance as defined and included in the schedules contained in article II
CONTROLLED     of the Illinois controlled substance act 2  as amended from time to time, and
SUBSTANCE:     cannabis as defined in section 3 of the cannabis control act 3 , as amended
               from time to time.
               Except as otherwise authorized by law including, but not limited to, the
               Cannabis Regulation and Tax Act or the Compassionate Use of Medical Cannabis
               Pilot Program Act, a violation of one or more of the following statutes of the
               Illinois Controlled Substances Act or the Illinois Cannabis Control Act:
CONTROLLED     "Manufacture or Delivery of a Controlled Substance" (720 ILCS 570/401);
SUBSTANCES     "Controlled Substance Trafficking" (720 ILCS 570/401.1); "Possession of a
VIOLATION:     Controlled Substance" (720 ILCS 570/402); "Possession of More than 10 Grams of
               Any Substance Containing Cannabis" (720 ILCS 550/4); "Manufacture or Delivery
               of Cannabis" (720 ILCS 550/5); "Cannabis Trafficking" (720 ILCS 550/5.1);
               "Delivery of Cannabis on School Grounds" (720 ILCS 550/5.2); or "Unauthorized
               Production or Possession of Cannabis Sativa Plant" (720 ILCS 550/8).
DRIVING UNDER  Any violation as defined in §11-501 of the Illinois Vehicle Code (625 ILCS 5/
THE INFLUENCE: 11-501), as amended from time to time.
DRIVING        A violation of §6-101 of the Illinois Vehicle Code (625 ILCS 5/6-101), as
WITHOUT A      amended from time to time, where the driver's license or driving privileges
VALID DRIVERS  have never been obtained, or previously have been obtained and have been
LICENSE:       expired for not less than six (6) months.
DRIVING WHILE
LICENSE,
PERMIT OR      Any violation as defined in §6-303 of the Illinois Vehicle Code (625 ILCS 5/6-
PRIVILEGE TO   303), as amended from time to time, except for suspensions resulting solely
OPERATE A      from violations of vehicle emission requirements.
MOTOR VEHICLE
IS SUSPENDED
OR REVOKED:
               Any paraphernalia, articles or equipment commonly used in aiding the
               consumption or ingestion of controlled substances or cannabis, as defined by
DRUG           the Illinois Controlled Substance Act, including, but not limited to: cocaine
PARAPHERNALIA: spoons and vials; pot pipes; water, carburetor, electric or air-driven pipes;
               hypodermic needles; syringes; carburetion tubes and devices; chillums, ice
               pipes, chillers, and bongs.
DRUG           Except as otherwise authorized by law, including, but not limited to, the
PARAPHERNALIA  Cannabis Regulation and Tax Act or the Compassionate Use of Medical Cannabis
VIOLATION:     Pilot Program Act, the possession of Drug Paraphernalia, except if such Drug
               Paraphernalia is prescribed for strictly medical purposes and is used as such.
EXPIRED        A violation of section 3-414 of the Illinois vehicle code 4 , as amended from
REGISTRATION:  time to time.
FLEEING AND    Any violation as defined in §11-204 of the Illinois Vehicle Code (625 ILCS 5/
ELUDING:       11-204), as amended from time to time.
HEARING        A certified hearing officer.
OFFICER:
OPERATION OF A A violation of section 6-101 and/or section 6-303 of the Illinois vehicle code
MOTOR VEHICLE  5 , as amended from time to time, where the driver's license or driving
WITHOUT A      privileges have been suspended, revoked, canceled, never obtained, or
VALID DRIVER'S previously had been obtained and have been expired for not less than six (6)
LICENSE:       months.
OWNER OF       The record titleholder to a motor vehicle.
RECORD:
PROSTITUTION:  A violation of section 11-14 of the criminal code of 1961 6 , as amended from
               time to time.
RECKLESS       A violation of §11-503 of the Illinois Vehicle Code (625 ILCS 5/11-503), as
DRIVING:       amended from time to time.
RETAIL THEFT:  Any violation as defined in §16-25 of the Illinois Criminal Code of 2012 (720
               ILCS 5/16-25), as amended from time to time.
               A violation of one or more of the following statutes of the Illinois Criminal
ROBBERY:       Code of 2012, as amended: "Robbery" (720 ILCS 5/18-1); or "Armed Robbery" (720
               ILCS 5/18-2).
SOLICITING FOR A violation of section 11-15 of the criminal code of 1961 7 , as amended from
A PROSTITUTE:  time to time.
UNLAWFUL USE   A violation of section 24-1 of the criminal code of 1961 8 , as amended from
OF WEAPONS:    time to time.
               A violation of one or more of the following statutes of the Illinois Criminal
               Code of 2012, as amended: "Unlawful Use of Weapons" (720 ILCS 5/24-1);
WEAPONS        "Unlawful Possession of Firearms and Firearm Ammunition" (720 ILCS 5/24-3.1);
VIOLATION:     or, "Unlawful Sale or Delivery of Firearms on the Premises of any School" (720
               ILCS 5/24-3.3). (Ord. 05-49A, 2-6-2006; amd. Ord. 05-64, 4-3-2006; Ord. 21-04,
               6-21-2021)
 
 
Notes
1 1. 625 ILCS 5/3-702.
2 2. 720 ILCS 570/101 et seq.
3 3. 720 ILCS 550/3.
4 4. 625 ILCS 5/3-414.
5 5. 625 ILCS 5/6-101 and 5/6-303.
6 6. 720 ILCS 5/11-14.
7 7. 720 ILCS 5/11-15.
8 8. 720 ILCS 5/24-1.
7-12-2: VIOLATIONS:
No Owner of Record shall permit or suffer to permit his/her motor vehicle to be
used in conjunction with, or in violation of, the following:
   (A)   Burglary;
   (B)   Controlled Substances Violation;
   (C)   Driving Under the Influence;
   (D)   Driving without a Valid Driver's License;
   (E)   Driving while License, Permit or Privilege to Operate a Motor Vehicle
is Suspended or Revoked;
   (F)   Drug Paraphernalia Violation;
   (G)   Fleeing and Eluding;
   (H)   Reckless Driving;
   (I)   Retail Theft;
   (J)   Robbery; or
   (K)   Weapons Violation. (Ord. 16-05, 6-6-2016; amd. Ord. 21-04, 6-21-2021)
7-12-3: VEHICLE IMPOUNDMENT:
   (A)   Whenever a police officer has probable cause to believe that a motor
vehicle is being used in violation of section
7-12-2 of this chapter, he shall cause the seizure and impoundment of that
motor vehicle to a facility controlled by the village or its agents. When a
motor vehicle is towed, the police officer shall notify the owner of record, or
any person in control of the vehicle at the time of the alleged violation, if
there is such a person, of the seizure, the owner of record's right to request
a preliminary hearing as provided in this chapter, and that the motor vehicle
will be held as bond to secure the owner of record's personal appearance at the
final hearing.
   (B)   No vehicle shall be seized or impounded under this chapter unless the
police officer determines that such action is necessary and reasonable under
the circumstances including, but not limited to, the exercise of his/her
community caretaking functions. If the motor vehicle is capable of being
removed from the scene by an individual who is present on the scene, and who
has permission from the owner of record to drive the vehicle, and the
individual is otherwise capable of lawfully operating a motor vehicle in the
state of Illinois, the police officer shall allow that individual to remove the
motor vehicle without being subject to seizure and impoundment. Similarly, if
the motor vehicle is parked legally, and/or will not present a hazard to the
public safety, or jeopardize the efficient movement of vehicular traffic at its
location, the officer shall permit the vehicle to remain at its location
without being seized or impounded pursuant to this chapter. This determination
shall not apply when the vehicle is required to be seized or impounded due to
investigative measures or when a vehicle is seized or impounded pursuant to
another lawful purpose. (Ord. 16-05, 6-6-2016)
7-12-4: POSTING A BOND:
Any motor vehicle seized or impounded pursuant to this chapter shall be held as
a bond to secure the personal appearance of the owner of record at the final
hearing. A cash bond in the amount of five hundred dollars ($500.00) may be
posted with the village, in substitute, and the impounded vehicle released to
the owner of record upon the payment of the towing and storage costs. When a
motor vehicle is not seized or impounded pursuant to this chapter, the owner of
record shall not be required to post a cash bond. (Ord. 16-05, 6-6-2016)
7-12-5: PRELIMINARY HEARING:
Where the owner of a motor vehicle seized under the provisions of this chapter
requests a preliminary hearing within twelve (12) hours after the seizure of
the motor vehicle, the watch commander or any supervising officer must conduct
a preliminary hearing within twenty four (24) hours after the request for
preliminary hearing is received by the village; provided that if the date for
the hearing falls on a Saturday, Sunday, or legal holiday, the preliminary
hearing will be held on the next business day following the Saturday, Sunday or
legal holiday. No preliminary hearing shall be required or granted to an owner
whose vehicle was not seized or impounded pursuant to this chapter. For
purposes of this section, the following shall apply: (Ord. 06-47, 12-4-2006)
   (A)   All interested persons will be given a reasonable opportunity to be
heard at the preliminary hearing.
   (B)   The formal rules of evidence will not apply at the hearing, and
hearsay testimony will be allowed, and will be admissible.
   (C)   If, after the conclusion of the hearing, the watch commander or
supervising officer determines that there is probable cause to believe that the
vehicle was used as provided in section
7-12-2 of this chapter, he/she shall order the continued impoundment of the
vehicle, unless the owner of the vehicle posts a cash bond with the village in
the amount of five hundred dollars ($500.00), plus the towing and storage
costs.
   (D)   If the watch commander or supervising officer determines that there is
not probable cause to believe that the vehicle was used as provided in section
7-12-2 of this chapter, the motor vehicle will be returned to the owner of
record of the vehicle without any penalty or other costs. (Ord. 05-49A, 2-6-
2006)
7-12-6: FINAL HEARING:
   (A)   Notice Of Hearing: The village shall notify the owner of record of the
date, time and location of a final hearing. Such notice shall be mailed by
certified mail, return receipt requested, to the owner of record, as shown on
the records of the Illinois secretary of state.
   (B)   Hearing: For purposes of this section, the following shall apply to
the final hearing:
      1.   Unless continued by order of the hearing officer, the final hearing
shall be held within forty five (45) days after the date of violation.
      2.   All interested persons will be given a reasonable opportunity to be
heard at the final hearing.
      3.   If, after the conclusion of the hearing, the hearing officer
determines by a preponderance of the evidence that the motor vehicle was used
as provided in section
7-12-2 of this chapter, the hearing officer shall: a) order the continued
impoundment of the vehicle until the owner of record pays to the village the
penalty entered, plus the towing and storage costs; b) order any cash bond
forfeited to the village for payment of the penalty; or c) in the event the
motor vehicle or cash is not being held as bond, enter an order finding the
owner of record liable to the village in the amount of the penalty. The penalty
and costs shall be a debt due to the village.
      4.   If the owner of record fails to appear at the hearing, the hearing
officer shall enter an order of default in favor of the village.
      5.   If the hearing officer determines that the vehicle was not used as
provided in section
7-12-2 of this chapter, the hearing officer shall: a) release the motor vehicle
to the owner of record without any penalty or other costs; or b) release the
cash bond. (Ord. 16-05, 6-6-2016)
7-12-7: UNCLAIMED VEHICLES:
   (A)   Any motor vehicle that is not claimed within thirty (30) days after
the expiration of the time in which the owner of record may seek judicial
review of the action of the village under this chapter, or the time at which a
final judgment is rendered in favor of the village by a court, or the time at
which a final administrative decision is rendered against an owner of record
who is in default, may be disposed of as an abandoned or unclaimed vehicle, as
otherwise provided by law.
   (B)   If the penalty and towing and storage costs are not paid within eighty
(80) days after a penalty is imposed pursuant to this chapter, the vehicle
shall be deemed to be abandoned and may be disposed of in the manner provided
by law for the disposition of abandoned or unclaimed vehicles, unless a
petition for judicial review is filed with a court of proper jurisdiction.
Where a petition for judicial review of the hearing officer's determination is
filed and pending in a court of proper jurisdiction, the vehicle shall not be
deemed to be abandoned and shall not be sold. If the petition for judicial
review is resolved in favor of the village, the vehicle shall be deemed
abandoned and may be disposed of by the village if the penalty and towing and
storage costs are not paid within thirty (30) days after the date of the
court's order. (Ord. 05-49A, 2-6-2006)
7-12-8: LIABILITY FOR PENALTY AND COSTS:
   (A)   The owner of record of a motor vehicle, who is found to be in
violation of this chapter, shall be liable to the village for a penalty of five
hundred dollars ($500.00) in addition to any fees for the towing and storage of
the motor vehicle, if applicable. (Ord. 06-47, 12-4-2006)
   (B)   Fees for towing and storage are established by the towing company, and
not by the village, except where the motor vehicle is stored on village
property, in which case the storage cost will be established by the village
president or the chief of police.
   (C)   A vehicle impounded pursuant to this chapter shall remain impounded
until the earlier of the following occurs:
      1.   The penalty is paid to the village, and all towing and storage costs
are paid to the towing company; and
      2.   A bond in amount equal to the liability of the owner as provided in
subsection (A) of this section is posted with the village and all applicable
towing and storage costs are paid to the towing company; and
      3.   The vehicle is deemed abandoned, in which case the vehicle shall be
disposed of in the manner provided by law for the disposition of abandoned or
unclaimed vehicles.
      4.   Except as otherwise specifically provided by law, no owner, lien
holder, or any other person shall be legally entitled to take possession of a
motor vehicle impounded under this chapter until the penalty and all towing and
storage costs applicable under this chapter have been paid in full. (Ord. 05-
49A, 2-6-2006)
CHAPTER 13
ILLINOIS VEHICLE CODE
SECTION:
7-13-1: Illinois Vehicle Code Adopted By Reference
7-13-2: Penalty
7-13-1: ILLINOIS VEHICLE CODE ADOPTED BY REFERENCE:
In lieu of using any section or in addition to any section of this title, the
officer issuing a citation may issue it using any of the sections of the
Illinois vehicle code, 625 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/1-100 et seq., which
sections of said Illinois vehicle code, and all amendments made from time to
time, are hereby incorporated by reference as a part of this title. When
issuing a citation, every numbered section in said vehicle code shall be
referred to by the letter "M" as a prefix to the section number. All citations
so issued shall be issued in the name of the village and referred to in the
uniform traffic ticket or complaint as an ordinance violation. (Ord. 06-03, 5-
15-2006)
7-13-2: PENALTY:
The penalty provisions of section
1-4-1 of the municipal code for the village of Manteno shall apply to all
violations of this chapter. (Ord. 06-03, 5-15-2006)
CHAPTER 14
NONHIGHWAY VEHICLES
SECTION:
7-14-1: Definitions
7-14-2: Operation Of Nonhighway Vehicles
7-14-3: Nonhighway Vehicles Prohibited On Certain Roadways
7-14-4: Condition Of Nonhighway Vehicles
7-14-5: Mandatory Insurance
7-14-6: Registration Required
7-14-7: Capacity Limitations
7-14-8: Attachments
7-14-9: Penalty
7-14-1: DEFINITIONS:
For the purposes of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply unless
the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning:
 
                                  A vehicle specifically designed and intended
                                  for the purposes of transporting one or more
                                  persons and their golf clubs or maintenance
GOLF CART:                        equipment while engaged in the playing of
                                  golf, supervising the play of golf, or
                                  maintaining the condition of the grounds on a
                                  public or private golf course.
                                  A self-propelled, electric-powered, four (4)
                                  wheeled motor vehicle (or a self-propelled,
                                  gasoline-powered, 4 wheeled motor vehicle)
                                  that is capable of attaining in one mile a
NEIGHBORHOOD VEHICLE:             speed of more than twenty (20) miles per
                                  hour, but not more than twenty-five (25)
                                  miles per hour, and which conforms to federal
                                  regulations under Title 49 C.F.R. Part
                                  571.500.
                                  The following motor vehicles not specifically
                                  designed to be used on a public highway:
NONHIGHWAY VEHICLE:               (A)   a golf cart;
                                  (B)   a neighborhood vehicle; and
                                  (C)   a recreational off-highway vehicle.
                                  Any motorized off-highway device designed to
                                  travel primarily off-highway, sixty-four
                                  inches (64") or less in width, having a
                                  manufacturer's dry weight of two thousand
RECREATIONAL OFF-HIGHWAY VEHICLE: pounds (2,000) or less, travelling on four
                                  (4) or more nonhighway tires, designed with a
                                  non-straddle seat and a steering wheel for
                                  steering control, except equipment such as
                                  lawnmowers. (Ord. 21-17, 11-15-2021)
 
7-14-2: OPERATION OF NONHIGHWAY VEHICLES:
Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, it shall be lawful for a person
to drive or operate a nonhighway vehicle upon any roadway in the Village of
Manteno.
   (A)   No nonhighway vehicle shall be driven or operated upon any roadway in
the Village of Manteno with a speed limit greater than thirty five (35) miles
per hour. Provided, however, a nonhighway vehicle may cross a roadway at an
intersection where the roadway to be crossed has a posted speed limit of more
than thirty five (35) miles per hour.
   (B)   No person shall drive or operate a nonhighway vehicle upon any roadway
in the Village of Manteno without a valid Illinois driver's license issued in
his or her name by the Secretary of State.
   (C)   No person operating a nonhighway vehicle shall make a direct crossing
upon or across any highway under the jurisdiction of the State of Illinois,
toll road, interstate highway, or controlled access highway unless at an
intersection controlled by a traffic light or a four-way stop sign and the
speed limit of the highway to be crossed is thirty five (35) miles per hour or
less at the place of crossing.
   (D)   No nonhighway vehicle shall be driven or operated on any roadway not
exclusively under the jurisdiction of the Village of Manteno unless the Village
and the unit of local government with concurrent jurisdiction authorizes the
same.
   (E)   No all-terrain vehicles, as defined by section 1-101.8 of the Illinois
vehicle code 1 , or off highway motorcycles as defined by section 1-153.1 of
the Illinois vehicle code 2 , shall be driven or operated on any roadway in the
village of Manteno. (Ord. 09-21, 1-4-2010)
 
Notes
1 1. 625 ILCS 5/1-101.8.
2 2. 625 ILCS 5/1-153.1.
7-14-3: NONHIGHWAY VEHICLES PROHIBITED ON CERTAIN ROADWAYS:
No nonhighway vehicles shall be driven or operated on the following roadways:
   (A)   West Division Street except from Main Street to Route 50.
   (B)   East Third Street except from Birch Street to Route 50.
   (C)   Crossing West Division Street at Cypress is prohibited. (Ord. 09-21,
1-4-2010)
7-14-4: CONDITION OF NONHIGHWAY VEHICLES:
No nonhighway vehicle may be operated on any roadway in the village of Manteno,
unless at a minimum, it has the following: brakes, a steering apparatus, tires,
a rearview mirror, red reflectors in the front and rear, a slow moving emblem
(as required of other vehicles in section 12-709 of the Illinois vehicle code 1
) on the rear of the nonhighway vehicle, a headlight that emits a white light
visible from a distance of five hundred feet (500') to the front, a taillamp
that emits a red light visible from at least one hundred feet (100') to the
rear, brake lights and turn signals. All nonhighway vehicles shall have their
headlights and taillamps illuminated when driven or operated upon a roadway in
the village of Manteno as required by section 12-201 of the Illinois vehicle
code 2 . (Ord. 09-21, 1-4-2010)
 
Notes
1 1. 625 ILCS 5/12-709.
2 2. 625 ILCS 5/12-201.
7-14-5: MANDATORY INSURANCE:
Any person who operates a nonhighway vehicle on a street or roadway shall be
subject to the mandatory insurance requirements under article VI of chapter 7
of the Illinois vehicle code. (Ord. 09-21, 1-4-2010)
7-14-6: REGISTRATION REQUIRED:
It shall be unlawful for a person to drive or operate a nonhighway vehicle upon
any roadway in the Village of Manteno that is not registered with the Manteno
Police Department, or that does not have displayed conspicuously on the rear of
said nonhighway vehicle, a corresponding current registration number placard/
sticker.
   (A)   Commencing June 1, 2012, and annually thereafter, all owners of
nonhighway vehicles shall apply to register their nonhighway vehicles with the
Manteno Police Department by fully and truthfully completing a nonhighway
vehicle registration application. In order to be registered, the nonhighway
vehicle shall be subject to inspection by the Manteno Police Department and
must comply with the condition requirements of Section
7-14-4 of this chapter, and the owner of a nonhighway vehicle must show proof
of compliance with the mandatory insurance requirements of Section
7-14-5 of this chapter.
   (B)   Non-highway vehicle registration, and the corresponding placard/
sticker, shall be valid for a period of one year, from January 1 through
December 31 of each calendar year.
   (C)   Commencing June 1, 2013, a nonrefundable registration fee of twenty-
five dollars ($25.00) shall be paid by the owner at the time of application for
registration. Renewal registrations and nonrefundable fees are due January 1
each year and will be considered late after June 1 of each year. Late renewals
shall have an additional nonrefundable fee of twenty-five dollars ($25.00)
added to the original twenty-five dollar ($25.00) fee, for a total of fifty
dollars ($50.00) due at the time of registration.
   (D)   Registration shall be subject to revocation in the event the Manteno
Police Department determines the applicable insurance policy for the nonhighway
vehicle has been revoked, has lapsed or is otherwise invalid.
   (E)   All owners of nonhighway vehicles registered with the Manteno Police
Department will be issued a corresponding registration number placard/sticker,
which shall be affixed and remain conspicuously visible on the rear of said
nonhighway vehicle. (Ord. 21-17, 11-15-2021)
7-14-7: CAPACITY LIMITATIONS:
It shall be unlawful for any person to drive or operate a nonhighway vehicle
upon any roadway within the village of Manteno while transporting or carrying
more occupants than the nonhighway vehicle is designed to transport or carry as
determined by the number of permanent individual seats provided in the
nonhighway vehicle. (Ord. 12-03, 5-7-2012)
7-14-8: ATTACHMENTS:
It shall be unlawful for any person to drive or operate a non- highway vehicle
upon any roadway within the Village of Manteno while having attached thereto
any trailer, side car, cab, tram, shuttle, or pull-behind of any nature. (Ord.
19-03, 5-20-2019)
7-14-9: PENALTY:
   (A)   Except as otherwise provided herein, any person found to have violated
any provision of this chapter shall be fined not less than seventy-five dollars
($75.00) and not more than seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00) for each
offense.
   (B)   Any person operating a nonhighway vehicle upon a roadway in the
Village of Manteno that is not registered or having an expired registration
shall be fined fifty dollars ($50.00) for each offense.
   (C)   Each day a violation occurs or is permitted to continue constitutes a
new and separate violation. (Ord. 21-17, 11-15-2021)
TITLE 8
BUILDING REGULATIONS
CHAPTER 1
BUILDING CODE
SECTION:
8-1-1: General
8-1-2: Definitions
8-1-3: Administrative
8-1-4: Permits
8-1-5: Appeals
8-1-6: Enforcement
8-1-7: Fees
8-1-8: Inspections
8-1-9: Contractor Registration
8-1-10: Address Numbers
8-1-11: Mailboxes And Matching Monuments
8-1-12: Certificate Of Occupancy
8-1-13: Technical Codes
8-1-14: Exterior Wall Covering Materials
8-1-15: Accessory Buildings
8-1-16: Application Of Chapter
8-1-17: Conflict Of Ordinances
8-1-18: Penalties
8-1-19: Residential Garages
8-1-20: Storage Pods
8-1-1: GENERAL:
These regulations shall control matters concerning the construction,
alteration, addition, repair, removal, demolition, use, location, occupancy and
maintenance of all buildings and structures and shall apply to existing or
proposed buildings and structures, except as such matters are otherwise
provided for in other ordinances or statutes.
This chapter shall be construed to secure its expressed intent, which is to
ensure public safety, health and welfare insofar as they are affected by
building construction through structural strength, adequate means of ingress
and egress, sanitary equipment, lights, heating, ventilation, air conditioning,
and fire safety, and to secure safety to life and property.
Where a code conflicts with another code, requirement, or regulations, the
strictest shall apply. (Ord. 03-38, 4-19-2004, eff. 5-1-2004)
8-1-2: DEFINITIONS:
For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply unless
the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning:
CONTRACTOR: Any person engaged in the construction, alteration or repair of
buildings or other structures or sidewalks and provides said service for any
type of activity that requires a building permit and/or requires an inspection
per adopted building codes.
CORPORATION COUNSEL: The attorney for the village.
DECORATIVE LANDSCAPING: The process by which a landscape architect arranges and
modifies the effect of natural scenery over a given tract or area as to produce
the best aesthetic effect considering the use to which the tract or area is to
be put. This definition includes, but is not limited to, the use of decorative
planting.
EXPOSED AGGREGATE: Natural or cultured stone chips embedded in cement,
concrete, precast and epoxy materials in sections or panels.
FRONT ELEVATIONS: The clearly defined main entrance portion of a structure
which shall face the front lot line. In reference to structural requirements,
includes those side portions of a structure which face or are contiguous with a
public street or streets, thoroughfare or ways.
FRONT LOT LINE: The front property line of a zoning lot, abutting or within a
street. On a corner lot, the front lot line shall be the lot line having the
shortest dimension along the street right of way.
GLASS: Includes all windows and entry doors together with frames for same and/
or glass panels, precast, to the building.
MUNICIPALITY: The village of Manteno.
PASSENGER VEHICLE: A land motor vehicle with four (4) or more wheels that is
designed for use on public roads.
REAR ELEVATIONS: Includes that portion of a structure which faces away from all
public streets and which is not visible to the traffic on any public way.
ROOFTOP FIXTURES: All rooftop mechanical fixtures shall be screened from public
view with an approved architectural screening.
SIDE ELEVATIONS: Includes that portion or portions of a structure which do not
face or are not contiguous with a public street, thoroughfare or ways.
SOLID FINISH VENEERS: Brick stone, cultured stone, cultured brick, or any
primary materials laminated in any approved construction manner to the exterior
or interior walls.
SOLID MASONRY: Brick, cement, concrete blocks, stone or exposed aggregate or a
combination of these. (Ord. 03-38, 4-19-2004, eff. 5-1-2004; amd. Ord. 07-05,
6-4-2007; Ord. 13-07, 6-3-2013)
8-1-3: ADMINISTRATIVE:
   (A)   Building Department:
      1.   There is hereby created the building department of the village of
Manteno and the director in charge thereof shall be known as the code
enforcement officer.
      2.   The building department shall keep careful, systematic records of
the business and work of the office, including permit applications, survey
plats and building plot plans, construction plans and specifications, copies of
permits and certificates issued, affidavits and certificates received, a record
of inspections, copies of notices and orders issued, and reports of tests made.
      3.   The building department shall retain plans and specifications of
houses and accessories, including survey plats and building plot plans for a
period of seven (7) years. Parts of plans for other buildings which may be
useful for future periodic inspections shall also be retained. (Ord. 03-38, 4-
19-2004, eff. 5-1-2004)
   (B)   Director Of Building And Zoning:
      1.   The director may recommend a person or persons, hereby called
inspectors, for appointment by the village president and village board, who are
qualified by professional or practical training and experience to conduct
certain inspections and affairs of that office.
      2.   It shall be the duty of the director and the inspectors to enforce
all of the provisions of this chapter and to act on any questions relative to
the mode or manner of construction in the erection, addition, alteration,
repair, removal, demolition of structures, installation of service equipment,
use and occupancy permits, maintenance of all buildings, including sewer
connections, zoning and nuisance complaints, fire and life safety issues, other
applicable village ordinances, and state laws as herein referred to.
      3.   The director and inspectors are hereby authorized to make
inspections to enforce the provisions of this chapter and for such purpose are
hereby authorized to enter any building, structure or premises. (Ord. 09-23, 1-
19-2010)
8-1-4: PERMITS:
   (A)   Permit Required: It shall be unlawful to construct, enlarge, alter or
demolish a structure; or change the occupancy of a building or structure
requiring greater strength, exit, or sanitary provisions; or to change to
another use; or to install or alter any equipment for which provision is made
or the installation of which is regulated by this chapter, without first filing
an application with the building department in writing and obtaining the
required permit(s) therefor. (Ord. 03-38, 4-19-2004, eff. 5-1-2004)
   (B)   Permit Application: Before proceeding with the erection, enlargement,
alteration, or repair of any building component or any building in the village
of Manteno, an application for a permit shall be filed with the building
department. The application shall be on a form furnished by the director of
building and zoning or his/her designee. Every application for a permit shall:
describe the land upon which the proposed building or work is to be done by
some description that will readily identify the building or location of work;
show the proposed use or occupancy of all parts of the building; and, contain
such other information as the director of building and zoning or his/her
designee may require as outlined in the adopted technical codes, and their
appendices, herein.
      An application for a permit for any proposed work shall be deemed to have
been abandoned six (6) months after the date of filing, unless such application
has been diligently pursued. The director of building and zoning or his/her
designee may grant one extension for a period not to exceed ninety (90) days,
based upon reasonable cause.
      Action, by the director of building and zoning, on building permit
applications, shall be within fifteen (15) working days of receipt of the
application. In cases of denial, the director of building and zoning shall
advise the applicant, in writing, of the basis of the denial. If the director
of building and zoning fails to act within fifteen (15) days, the applicant may
then file with the director of building and zoning a written demand for the
permit. If no permit is received within five (5) working days, the applicant
may treat the application as being denied. In cases of denial, the applicant
may appeal the decision of the director of building and zoning to the plan
commission in the manner, and subject to the standard of, section
9-14-11 of this code. (Ord. 06-45, 11-20-2006)
   (C)   Surveys Required:
      1.   Site Plan: Every application for a building permit shall include a
site plan of the lot to be built upon, demonstrating the following:
         (a)   Any existing building or structure size and location; and
         (b)   The size (widest dimension in each direction), location, which
lists setback distances, and elevations of the building or structure to be
erected or structurally altered; and
         (c)   The size, location, and type of easement; and
         (d)   The location and dimensions of all proposed off street drives,
street parking and loading spaces; and
         (e)   Such other matters as the code enforcement officer may deem
necessary to determine conformance with this title.
      2.   Site Survey Required: Upon completion of said foundation and prior
to approval to proceed to framing, a professional site survey prepared by a
registered professional engineer or land surveyor accurately locating and
depicting any and all easements, the placement of the foundation, elevation of
foundation constructed, and proposed garage floor elevations must be submitted
to the village.
      3.   Plat Of Topography; Final Grade Survey: A plat of topography shall
be required after the pavement, turf, and landscaped areas have been final
graded. This plat shall include the elevation of the finished garage floor,
sidewalk at the driveway sides, lot corners at twenty five foot (25') intervals
along the front, side, and back lot lines, and any additional elevations needed
to confirm some drainage feature detailed on the neighborhood drainage plan or
site development plan. The plat of topography shall be provided to the director
of building and zoning, along with a final grade surveyor certification and a
final grade owner certification prior to requesting an occupancy permit.
Occupancy shall not be permitted if the plat indicates the site grades are not
constructed consistent with the neighborhood drainage plan or site development
plan.
      4.   Records: A careful record of all applications and plats shall be
kept for a period of at least seven (7) years in the office of the director of
building and zoning. (Ord. 07-29, 10-15-2007)
   (D)   Requirements For The Issuance Of A Building Permit: Prior to the
issuance of a building permit, the plans, drawings, etc., for any new
construction work, alteration, repair, expansion, addition, or modification of
any new buildings or existing buildings as defined in the adopted technical
codes, and their appendices, herein shall be furnished to the building
department for review.
   The architect, builder, or owner shall furnish the building department one
set of plans drawn to scale of not less than one-eighth inch (1/8") to one foot
(1') or as approved by the building department. Unless otherwise approved by
the building director, the contractor doing the work is the party required to
apply for the permit. (Ord. 09-11, 11-2-2009)
   (E)   Plans Required: No building permit shall be granted or plans approved
for any commercial, industrial, or public accessible building unless such plans
are prepared by an architect or structural engineer. Such plans shall be signed
and sealed by an architect or structural engineer licensed as provided by law,
listed in the architecture practice act and structural engineering licensing
act of the state of Illinois. The building official shall have the authority to
waive this requirement if the remodeling does not affect the footprint of the
building and does not involve or affect any exterior or load bearing walls. All
nonresidential plans carrying an architectural stamp and/or involving
occupancy, may be sent out to B&F Technical Code Services, or some other
independent plan review service as approved by the code enforcement officer,
for a complete plan review at the owner's expense. Provided that nothing
contained in this chapter shall be construed to prevent any person from making
plans and specifications for, or supervising the erection, enlargement or
alteration of, any building that is to be constructed by himself. All such
plans and drawings shall be drawn to an appropriate scale.
   (F)   Plan Approval Required:
      1.   For all multi-family residential, commercial, industrial building
permits applied for, the applicant shall supply site and structure information
according to the following plan review checklist, including, but not limited
to:
         (a)   Zoning and adjacent zoning.
         (b)   Setbacks.
         (c)   Traffic patterns and impact.
         (d)   Possible widening of street.
         (e)   Right of way acquisition.
         (f)   Easement acquisition.
         (g)   Green space, buffering, landscaping.
         (h)   Site layout.
         (i)   Parking lane widths, space sizes and numbers.
         (j)   Parking lot surfacing.
         (k)   Handicap accessibility.
         (l)   Site utilities.
         (m)   Grading of site.
         (n)   Entrances.
         (o)   Curbs.
         (p)   Sidewalks.
         (q)   Lighting.
         (r)   Refuse pick up.
         (s)   Signage.
         (t)   Storm flow and drainage calculations.
         (u)   Detention.
         (v)   Structure design and elevations.
         (w)   Construction elements.
         (x)   Other items as requested by the code enforcement officer. (Ord.
03-38, 4-19-2004, eff. 5-1-2004)
      2.   The presented plan(s) shall, at the discretion of the director of
building and zoning, be reviewed and approved by the following parties before a
permit is issued:
         (a)   Building plan review by an independent plan review service.
         (b)   Site plan review by the village engineer.
         (c)   Building department.
      3.   The presented plan(s) shall be reviewed by the Manteno community
fire protection district before a permit is issued. (Ord. 12-27, 12-17-2012)
   (G)   Permit Fees Established: The building department shall collect the
applicable permit fees at the time any building permit is granted. Permit and
inspection fees are set forth in sections
8-1-7 and
8-1-8 of this chapter. All not for profit corporations shall be exempt from the
aforementioned permit and inspection fees except for reinspection fees or any
portion that will be devoted to defraying the cost of a third party review.
      To defray the engineering expenses incurred by the village to verify the
stormwater and drainage plans for said project(s), the developer shall
reimburse the village for said expenses prior to the issuance of the building
permit. (Ord. 09-27, 2-1-2010)
   (H)   When Fees Are Payable; Records; Reports To The Board: All fees shall
be paid to the Village of Manteno upon the issuance of the necessary permits as
herein provided. The village treasurer shall keep in proper books for that
purpose an accurate account of fees paid over to the office, giving the name of
the person paying the same and the amount of each fee. The building department
shall prepare and present to the village board a report each quarter showing
the number of permits and the amount of fees paid.
   (I)   Notice To Inspect; Inspection Required; Approval: It shall be the duty
of the owner or agent, when a building is in the course of construction, to
notify the building department when the building is ready for inspection,
before concealing or moving to the next step of construction. The director of
building and zoning or his/her designee shall within two (2) working days after
receiving a request for inspection cause the same to be made. If the
construction is found to be in accordance with the requirements of this
chapter, he or she shall certify compliance by posting findings at the site or
documenting the findings on an inspection sheet. Failure by the permit holder
to request the required inspections shall be considered a violation of this
chapter and subject to the penalties set forth in section 8-1-18 of this
chapter.
      The director of building and zoning or his/her designee shall conduct
such inspections from time to time during and upon completion of work as deemed
necessary to ensure compliance with the approved plans for which a permit has
been issued.
      The director of building and zoning, or his/her designee, or any
authorized representative, shall have the authority to enter, at any reasonable
hour, any building, structure, or premises in the jurisdiction to enforce the
provisions of this chapter, as outlined in the adopted technical codes and
their appendices.
      Before issuing a permit, the director of building and zoning or his/her
designee may examine or cause to be examined all building structures, building
components and sites for which an application has been filed for a permit to
construct, enlarge, alter, repair, remove, demolish or change the use thereof.
(Ord. 06-45, 11-20-2006)
   (J)   Placard: The building permit and placard shall be kept on the site of
operation and available to the public for inspection during the entire time of
the work performed. The placard shall be kept in a conspicuous location on the
construction site in full view from the right of way.
      In unusual cases in which it is not practical to place the placard in the
view of the right of way, it shall be the discretion of the code enforcement
officer or his/her designee to determine the proper location for its placement.
   (K)   Starting And Stopping Times For Construction: The starting and
stopping times for construction projects are as listed below, unless shift work
is required and permission is granted by the code enforcement officer or his/
her designee:
 
                     Start       Stop
Building time         7:00 A.M.   7:00 P.M.
Sundays and holidays  10:00 A.M.  7:00 P.M.
 
      All work will be limited to daylight hours, if accompanied by loud
noises. (See also subsection
4-1-4-4(G) of this code.) (Ord. 03-38, 4-19-2004, eff. 5-1-2004)
   (L)   Permit Expiration:
      1.   Single-Family Residential: All work outlined in the building permit
shall cease after eight (8) months and the building permit shall expire unless
the director of building and zoning or his/her designee gives written approval
to extend the building permit an additional six (6) months. Any request for an
extension must be for good cause shown and based upon an agreed construction
schedule. A second extension may also be allowed at the discretion of the
director of building and zoning or his/her designee. The fee for a permit
extension is waived if written application is made prior to the expiration of
the building permit.
      2.   Commercial And Multi-Family Residential: All work outlined in the
building permit shall cease after twelve (12) months and the building permit
shall expire unless the director of building and zoning or his/her designee
gives written approval to extend the building permit an additional six (6)
months. Any request for an extension must be for good cause shown and based
upon an agreed construction schedule. A second extension may also be allowed at
the discretion of the director of building and zoning or his/her designee. The
fee for a permit extension is waived if written application is made prior to
the expiration of the building permit. A third extension may be allowed at the
sole discretion of the director of building and zoning or his/her designee
based upon a showing of extreme hardship. An administrative fee of twenty
dollars ($20.00) shall accompany the request for a third extension.
   (M)   Suspension, Revocation Of Permit: The code enforcement officer or his/
her designee may suspend or revoke, in writing, a permit or approval based upon
a false statement, any misrepresentation in the application, or violations of
any provision of this chapter.
   (N)   Construction Site Requirements:
      1.   Maintenance; Responsibility: It shall be the responsibility of the
permit holder to maintain a clean and safe construction site. The subdivision
developer shall ultimately be held responsible for the subdivision until the
lot is sold.
      2.   Vehicles: Construction vehicles shall be cleaned before leaving the
site to prevent littering of the streets. No mud or other debris is to be
permitted on any public right of way.
      3.   Construction Debris: No construction debris shall be stored or in
any way be allowed to remain at any location within the subdivision. Every
construction site may be required to have a garbage dumpster sufficient in size
to handle on site debris. Every dumpster shall be sufficiently covered to
prevent debris from blowing out and to prevent any unauthorized person from
rummaging or contributing to the contents. Debris shall be cleaned from the
site daily. The moving of debris from one lot to another will not be permitted.
      4.   Burning: In compliance with title 5, chapter 9 of this code, there
will not be any open burning.
      5.   Use Of Streets: The use of streets for the storage of materials in
the process of construction or alteration of a building may be granted by the
department of public works, where the same will not unduly interfere with
traffic and will not reduce the usable width of the roadway. No portion of the
street shall be used other than that directly abutting on the premises on which
work is being done or directly abutting any premises adjacent to the premises
on which work is being done with the consent of the owner or occupant of that
premises.
      6.   Obstruction Of Sidewalks: No sidewalk shall be obstructed or
removed, in the course of building construction or alteration, without
permission of the department of public works.
      7.   Barricades, Lights, And Safeguards: It shall be the duty of the
person or corporation doing any construction altering or wrecking work in the
village to do the same with proper care for the safety of persons and property.
Warnings, barricades, and lights shall be maintained whenever necessary for the
protection of pedestrians or traffic; and temporary roofs over sidewalks shall
be constructed whenever there is danger from falling articles or materials to
pedestrians.
      8.   Portable Restrooms: On every construction site, one portable
restroom facility shall be provided for each forty (40) workers on the site
with a minimum of one provided. These restrooms shall be cleaned and serviced
as required to maintain them in proper working order and sanitary. (Ord. 03-38,
4-19-2004, eff. 5-1-2004)
   (O)   Structures On Public Property Or Ways: No building or structure shall
be constructed, erected or allowed to stand on public property or any public
way including, but not limited to, streets, sidewalks, thoroughfares or
easements. There will be no structures, fences, trees, shrubs, landscaping, or
vegetation allowed in any drainage easement that would restrict the flow of
water, unless otherwise approved in writing by the village administrator with
the consent of the village engineer. (Ord. 06-15, 6-19-2006)
   (P)   Conflict: Any permit issued in conflict with the provisions of this
title shall be void. Under no circumstances shall a permit of any type be
issued for any lot which has not been recognized as a legal lot by the village.
(Ord. 07-60, 2-19-2008)
   (Q)   Commercial Projects: In addition to any permit fee required for a
commercial project under this section, a developer may be required to deposit
five thousand dollars ($5,000.00) with the village to be held in escrow. The
monies held in escrow shall be used to defray the cost of any third-party
review of engineering plans, stormwater plans, drainage plans, site plans,
parking plans, lot coverage, setbacks, handicap accessibility, etc. In the
event the monies held in escrow are expended and a review of the project is
incomplete, an additional two thousand five hundred dollars ($2,500.00) shall
be submitted to the village before a review of the development will be
continued. The director of building and zoning shall have the discretion to
require less than the additional two thousand five hundred dollars ($2,500.00)
based upon the size of the project and his expectation of the costs necessary
to complete the third-party review process already underway. (Ord. 08-05, 7-7-
2008; amd. Ord. 19-33, 1-21-2020; Ord. 25-01, 5-5-2025)
8-1-5: APPEALS:
All final orders, decisions, determinations, and rulings of the Director of
Building and Zoning under this chapter shall be subject to review in the
Circuit Court of the Twenty-First Judicial Circuit, Kankakee County, and the
provisions of the Administrative Review Law, as amended, are adopted and shall
apply to and govern every action for the judicial review of such orders,
decisions, determinations, and rulings.
   (A)   Created: There is hereby created a board of examiners and appeals
referred to in this chapter as the "board".
   (B)   Members:
      1.   The board shall consist of persons appointed by the village
president, for a period of five (5) year terms, or until a successor has been
appointed.
      2.   The code enforcement officer or his/her designee shall be an ex
officio member of said board but shall have no vote on any matter before the
board.
      3.   The village president shall appoint two (2) alternate members who
shall be called by the board chairperson to hear appeals during the absence or
disqualification of a member. Alternate members shall possess the
qualifications required for board membership and shall be appointed for five
(5) years, or until a successor has been appointed.
      4.   The board shall consist of five (5) individuals, one from each of
the following professions or disciplines:
         (a)   Registered design professional with architectural experience or
a builder or superintendent of building construction with at least ten (10)
years' experience, five (5) of which shall have been in responsible charge of
work.
         (b)    Registered design professional with structural engineering
experience.
         (c)   Registered design professional with electrical engineering
experience or an electrical contractor with at least ten (10) years'
experience, five (5) of which shall have been in responsible charge of work.
         (d)   Registered design professional with fire protection engineering
experience or a fire protection contractor with at least ten (10) years'
experience, five (5) of which shall have been in responsible charge of work.
      5.   The board is authorized to establish policies and procedures
necessary to carry out its duties.
      6.   The board shall annually select one of its members to serve as
chairperson.
      7.   A member shall not hear an appeal in which that member has a
personal, professional or financial interest.
      8.   The code enforcement officer or his/her designee shall serve as
secretary to the board. The secretary shall file a detailed record of all
proceedings in the office of the village clerk.
      9.   Compensation of the members shall be thirty dollars ($30.00) per
meeting attended.
   (C)   Application: The application for appeal shall be filed on a form
obtained from the building official within twenty (20) days after the notice
was served, along with a filing fee of four hundred dollars ($400.00).
   (D)   Notice Of Meeting: The board shall meet upon notice from the
chairperson, within ten (10) days of the filing of an appeal or at stated
periodic meetings.
      1.   All hearings before the board shall be open to the public. The
appellant, the appellant's representative, the code enforcement officer or his/
her designee, and any person whose interests are affected shall be given an
opportunity to be heard.
      2.   The board shall adopt and make available to the public through the
secretary procedures under which a hearing will be conducted. The procedures
shall not require compliance with strict rules of evidence, but shall mandate
that only relevant information be received.
      3.   When five (5) members are not present to hear an appeal, either the
appellant or the appellant's representative shall have the right to request a
postponement of the hearing. The board shall modify or reverse the decision of
the building official by a concurring vote of two-thirds (2/3) of its members.
      4.   The decision of the board shall be by resolution. Certified copies
shall be furnished to the appellant and to the code enforcement officer or his/
her designee.
   (E)   Functions Generally:
      1.   The board of examiners and appeals shall hear and decide appeals
from any order, requirement, decision or determination made by the building
department related to this chapter.
      2.   The board may reverse or affirm wholly or partly or may modify or
amend the order, requirement, decision, or determination appealed from to the
extent and in the manner that the board may decide to be fitting and proper in
the premises by a concurring vote of three (3) members, and to that end the
board shall also have all the powers of the officer from whom the appeal is
taken. Decisions by the board shall be made by resolution.
      3.   The board on its own initiative or at the request of any person or
group, including the code enforcement officer or his/her designee, may
recommend to the village board, after public hearing, amendments to the
building code.
   (F)   Effective Period Of Orders: No order of the board permitting the
erection or alteration of a building shall be valid for a longer period than
one year from the date of such order unless a building permit for such erection
or alteration is requested within such period and such erection or alteration
is started and proceeds to completion in accordance with the terms of such
permit when issued. (Ord. 03-38, 4-19-2004, eff. 5-1-2004; amd. Ord. 25-01, 5-
5-2025)
8-1-6: ENFORCEMENT:
   (A)   Violations; Notice Of Violation; Penalties; Abatement:
      1.   It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to violate
any section of this chapter. The director of building and zoning or his/her
designee shall serve a written notice of violation or order on the person
responsible for the erection, construction, alteration, extension, repair, use
or occupancy of a building in violation of the provisions of this chapter or in
violation of a detailed statement or plan approved thereunder, or if in
violation of a permit or certificate issued under the provisions of this
chapter. Such order shall direct the discontinuance of the illegal action or
condition and the abatement of the violation.
      2.   If the notice of violation is not complied with promptly, the
director of building and zoning or his/her designee shall issue a ticket or
request the legal counsel to institute the appropriate proceeding at law or in
equity to restrain, correct, or abate such violation or to require the removal
or termination of the unlawful use of the building or structure in violation of
the provisions of this chapter or other village regulations or of the order or
direction made pursuant thereto.
      3.   Any person who shall violate a provision of this chapter or shall
fail to comply with any of the requirements thereof or who shall erect,
construct, alter or repair a building or structure in violation of an approved
plan or directive of the director of building and zoning or his/her designee,
or of a permit or certificate issued under the provisions of this chapter,
shall be subject to a fine in accordance with section
8-1-18 of this chapter. Each day that a violation continues shall be deemed a
separate offense.
      4.   The fee for anyone initiating erection, installation, alteration,
conversion, remodeling, structurally repairing, moving or changing any building
or structure, or parts or appurtenances thereof, such as sewage disposal,
plumbing installation and electrical installation prior to obtaining a building
permit shall be assessed an additional fee of not less than five hundred
dollars ($500.00) or twice the amount of the required building permit fee,
whichever is greater.
      5.   The imposition of the penalties herein prescribed shall not preclude
the village from instituting appropriate action to prevent unlawful
construction or to restrain, correct or abate a violation, or to prevent
illegal occupancy of a building, structure or premises, or to stop an illegal
act, conduct, business or use of a building or structure on or about any
premises. (Ord. 07-13, 8-6-2007)
   (B)   Stop Work Orders: The director of building and zoning or his/her
designee shall have the authority to stop construction of any building or the
making of any alterations or repairs of any building or structure within the
village of Manteno when the same is being done in a reckless or careless manner
or in violation of this chapter.
The director of building and zoning or his/her designee shall have the
authority to stop all work, wrecking, tearing down, or moving of any building
or structure within the village when same is being done in such a manner as to
endanger life or property and to order any and all persons engaged in such work
to stop and desist therefrom. When such work has been stopped by the order of
the code enforcement officer or his/her designee, it shall not be resumed until
the director of building and zoning or his/her designee shall be satisfied that
adequate precautions have been taken for the protection of the life and
property and that the work will be done in conformity with the ordinances and
regulations of the village. (Ord. 03-38, 4-19-2004, eff. 5-1-2004; amd. Ord.
07-13, 8-6-2007)
Any person who shall continue any work in or about the structure after having
been served with a stop work order, except such work as that person is directed
to perform to remove a violation or unsafe conditions, shall be liable to a
fine as set forth in section
8-1-18 of this chapter. (Ord. 03-38, 4-19-2004, eff. 5-1-2004)
8-1-7: FEES:
   (A)   Fee Schedule:
      1.   Nonresidential Fee Schedule:
      All applicants of approved building permits shall be assessed
nonrefundable fees as follows: Fifty dollars ($50.00) for the permit itself and
in addition thereto, the sum of ten dollars ($10.00) per one thousand dollars
($1,000.00) of the cost of valuation of construction, improvement, or any
portion thereof.
      2.   Residential Fee Schedule:
         (a)   Scope: Residential fees shall apply to all single-family
dwellings, multi-family dwellings, manufactured homes, including, but not
limited to, their construction, repairing or beautification.
      Residential fees shall also include all accessory buildings and
structures, including, but not limited to, swimming pools (twenty-four (24)
inches or deeper), room additions, remodeling, roofs, decks, fences, siding,
garages, sheds, driveways, sidewalks, brickwork, patio, and patio enclosures.
         (b)   Fee Breakdown: Fees for building permits shall be assessed based
on the "estimated cost" which shall be determined by the code enforcement
officer or his/her designee, who shall calculate the cost by multiplying the
square footage of the proposed building or structure times the dollar cost per
square foot, using the following guidelines:
Dwelling with crawl space or slab (excluding garage) $150.00 per square foot
Dwelling with basement (excluding garage)            $175.00 per square foot
Attached garage                                      $65.00 per square foot
Detached garage                                      $55.00 per square foot
Additions                                            $125.00 per square foot
Sheds                                                $30.00 per square foot
Decks                                                $25.00 per square foot
Roof                                                 $175.00 per square
 
      The code enforcement officer or his/her designee may accept a contract
signed by the building contractor and property owner for the work to be
performed to compute the market value of construction for the sole purpose of
determining the building permit fee.
         (c)   Fee Schedule: All applicants of approved building permits shall
be assessed nonrefundable fees as follows: Twenty-five dollars ($25.00) for the
permit itself and in addition thereto the sum of six dollars ($6.00) per one
thousand dollars ($1,000.00) of the valuation of construction, improvement, or
any portion thereof. (Ord. 03-38, 4-19-2004, eff. 5-1-2004; amd. Ord. 18-07, 7-
16-2018; Ord. 21-24, 2-7-2022; Ord. 25-01, 5-5-2025)
8-1-8: INSPECTIONS:
In addition to the building permit fee, an inspection fee of forty-five dollars
($45.00) for each inspection required for the project shall be charged before
any permit is issued. Exception: A flat fee of eight hundred fifty dollars
($850.00) shall be charged for each new dwelling unit.
   (A)   Re-Inspections: For every reperformance of any inspection, the
building permit purchaser shall be assessed seventy-five dollars ($75.00) for
each reinspection. This fee shall be paid prior to an occupancy permit being
issued.
   (B)   Inspection Requests: All required inspections as identified on the
building permit shall be requested by the permit holder, allowing two (2)
working days for such inspection to be completed. Required inspections not
requested by the building permit holder shall be considered a violation of this
title and subject to penalty and fine in accordance with section 8-1-18 of this
chapter.
   (C)   Specialized Inspections: Additional specialized inspections may be
required by the code enforcement officer or his/her designee, when special
circumstances warrant. Such inspection(s) shall be paid for by the building
permit holder. This fee shall be paid prior to an occupancy permit being
issued. (Ord. 03-38, 4-19-2004, eff. 5-1-2004; amd. Ord. 06-45, 11-20-2006;
Ord. 19-02, 5-6-2019; Ord. 21-24, 2-7-2022; Ord. 25-01, 5-5-2025)
8-1-9: CONTRACTOR REGISTRATION:
   (A)   License Required: It shall be unlawful to engage in business in the
municipality as a contractor without having first obtained a license therefore
as hereinafter provided.
   (B)   Fee: The fee for such license shall be one hundred seventy-five
dollars ($175.00).
   (C)   Term Of License: All licenses shall expire one (1) year from the date
they are issued.
   (D)   Property/Homeowner Construction License: A property/homeowner may be
the general contractor/contractor of his/her new home provided the following
conditions are met:
      1.   All subcontractors must be licensed by the village.
      2.   The homeowner must live in the residence for at least a year from
the date of the certificate of occupancy.
      3.   The homeowner must live in the residence for at least a year from
the date of the certificate of occupancy.
   (E)   Compliance With Regulations: It shall be the duty of all contractors
to comply with all ordinances relating to the construction of buildings or
other structures, to the construction of sidewalks, and to all laws or
ordinances pertaining to or regulating the activities engaged in such
construction.
   (F)   Insurance Required: No license shall be issued for the construction of
a building or structure in the village, or for the repair or alteration of the
exterior of any building or structure, unless a certificate or other proof is
filed showing that the contractor carries workers' compensation insurance in
accordance with state and federal law, and general liability insurance with
limits of at least one million dollars ($1,000,000.00) and fifty thousand
dollars ($50,000.00) on property damage liability. If the contractor due to no
employees carries no workers' compensation, an affidavit must be signed at the
time of licensing. If employees are later discovered on the job, the license
will be revoked and a new license will be required with approval given by the
village board. Repayment of license fee and a fine will apply before work can
continue.
   (G)   Revocation Of License: Any contractor's license may be revoked by the
village board for repeated violations of any ordinance relating to the
construction of buildings, the use of streets, or the replacing of streets,
sidewalks or parkways, or any other ordinance relating to the work performed by
such contractor. Such revocation may be in addition to any fine imposed for
violation of this chapter.
   (H)   Renewal: The village shall not renew any contractor's or
subcontractor's license if, during the preceding license year, the contractor
or subcontractor has been guilty of two (2) or more violations of the village's
ordinances, rules or regulations. (Ord. 13-07, 6-3-2013; amd. Ord. 20-25, 2-16-
2021; Ord. 25-01, 5-5-2025)
8-1-10: ADDRESS NUMBERS:
All lots, buildings, and structures in the village shall be numbered in
accordance with the following plan:
   (A)   Every principal structure in the village shall have placed thereon, in
a space on that portion of the structure closest to the right of way, visible
from the street, numeric figures at least four inches (4") high, of a
contrasting color.
   (B)   All multi-family structures shall bear the unit number on the front of
the structure. Each dwelling unit shall also bear the unit number visible on
every entrance door.
   (C)   No certificate of occupancy shall be issued unless house numbers are
placed in accordance with this chapter. (Ord. 03-38, 4-19-2004, eff. 5-1-2004;
amd. Ord. 25- 01, 5-5-2025)
8-1-11: MAILBOXES AND MATCHING MONUMENTS:
It shall be the duty of the developer or owner of every principal structure in
the village, to provide a mailbox for each unit, in accordance with the United
States postal service requirements.
   (A)   The mailbox opening edge shall be behind the curb.
   (B)   No owner or occupant shall construct or install a masonry mailbox or
matching monument without a building permit.
   (C)   No owner or occupant shall be granted a permit for the installation of
a masonry mailbox or matching monument unless a waiver of rights is executed
absolving the village, and its employees, of liability for damage to those
structures during the course of their employment.
   (D)   If a masonry mailbox or matching monument is installed, no portion of
the structure shall be located closer than eight inches (8") from any curb and
public sidewalk. No masonry mailbox, or matching monument, shall be larger than
the following dimensions: five feet (5') high, four feet (4') in width, and
three feet (3') from the front of the mailbox/monument to the rear. On a corner
lot, no masonry mailbox or matching monument shall be installed within thirty
feet (30') of the nearest corner.
   (E)   No portion of a masonry mailbox or matching monument shall be located
beyond seven feet (7') of a driveway edge.
   (F)   There shall be permitted only one (1) structure, masonry mailbox or
matching monument, per driveway side.
   (G)   All matching monuments shall be identical to their masonry mailbox
counterparts in dimension, color and material.
   (H)   No portion of any masonry mailbox or matching monument may be placed
in a location prohibited by subsection
9-3-2(G) of this code when installed on a corner lot.
   (I)   The provisions of this section shall govern in the event they conflict
with subsection
6-1-3(B) of this code. (Ord. 08-27, 1-20-2009; amd Ord. 25-01, 5-5-2025)
8-1-12: CERTIFICATE OF OCCUPANCY:
In the event that winter weather conditions prevent completion of all exterior
concrete work or lot grading, and at the discretion and approval of the
director of building and zoning, a cash escrow payment, equal to one hundred
twenty five percent (125%) of the amount of all incomplete improvements, as
determined by the director of building and zoning, shall be filed with the
village to ensure that improvements will be completed by June 1 of the next
building season. The filing of this cash escrow and written guarantee shall
allow for the issuance of a temporary certificate of occupancy. Improvements
not completed by the June 1 date shall be considered a violation of this
provision, subject to fines for each and every day that the violation is
allowed to continue. (Ord. 03-38, 4-19-2004, eff. 5-1-2004; amd. Ord. 25-01, 5-
5-2025)
8-1-13: TECHNICAL CODES:
   (A)   Scope: The purpose of this title is to provide minimum requirements to
safeguard life or limb, health and public welfare, and the protection of
property as it relates to these safeguards by regulating and controlling the
design, construction, prefabrication, equipment or appliance installation,
quality of materials, use and occupancy, location and repair of all buildings
and structures within the Village. Also, the purpose is to further standardize
requirements by using a compilation of data from the following technical codes.
   (B)   Building Codes: The technical codes listed below are hereby adopted as
the building codes of the Village of Manteno for the control of buildings,
structures, and sites as herein provided:
      1.   2024 International Building Code and appendices C, F, G and I.
      2.   2024 International Residential Code and appendix BF.
      3.   2024 International Mechanical Code.
      4.   2024 International Fire Code and appendices, except appendix A.
      5.   2024 International Property Maintenance Code and appendix A.
      6.   Illinois Plumbing Code (latest edition).
      7.   2023 National Electrical Code, as amended.
      8.   2024 International Fuel Gas Code and appendices, except appendix D.
      9.   Illinois Energy Conservation Code (latest edition).
      10.   The Illinois Accessibility Code, as amended.
      11.   The Village of Manteno subdivision ordinance, as amended from time
to time.
      12.   2024 International Performance Code.
      13.   2025 International Swimming Pool and Spa Code.
      14.   2025 International Existing Building Code and appendices, except
appendix D.
   (C)   International Building Code: The following insertions, deletions,
additions or changes shall be made and supersede any of the regulations of the
2024 International Building Code:
      Section 101.1 Title: Insert: Village of Manteno.
      Section 101.4.3 Plumbing: Delete in its entirety. Replace with the
Illinois Plumbing Code, (latest edition).
      Section 101.4.6 Energy: Delete in its entirety. Replace with the Illinois
Energy Conservation Code (latest edition).
      Section 105.2 Work Exempt from Permit: Delete in its entirety.
      Section 1612.3 Establishment of Flood Hazard Areas: Insert: Village of
Manteno, dated January 20, 2010.
      Chapter 11 Accessibility: Delete in its entirety. Replace with the
Illinois Accessibility Code, as amended.
      Chapter 27 Electrical: Delete in its entirety. Replace with the 2023
National Electrical Code with amendments.
      Chapter 29 Plumbing Systems: Delete in its entirety. Replace with
Illinois Plumbing Code, (latest edition).
   (D)   International Residential Code: The following insertions, deletions,
additions or changes shall be made to the 2024 International Residential Code:
      Section R101.1 Title: Insert: Village of Manteno.
      Section R105.2 Work Exempt from Permit: Delete in its entirety.
      Table R301.2(1) Climatic and Geographic Design Criteria: Insert:
 
Ground Snow Wind Speed  Seismic  Subject To Damage From         Winter Design
Load        (mph)       Design   Weathering Frost Line Termite  Temp.
                        Category            Depth
25          115         A        Severe     42"        Moderate 0
 
 
Ice Barrier Underlayment Flood Hazards  Air Freezing Index Mean Annual Temp.
Required
Yes                      See local maps 2000               50 deg.
 
      Section R309 Automatic Fire Sprinkler Systems: Delete this section except
if a system is installed, P2904 Dwelling Unit Automatic Sprinkler System
applies.
      Chapter 11 Energy Efficiency: Delete in its entirety. Replaced by the
Illinois Energy Conservation Code (latest edition).
      Chapters 25 through 32, Plumbing: Delete in their entirety. Replaced by
the Illinois Plumbing Code, (latest edition).
      Chapters 34 through 40, Electrical: Delete in their entirety. Replaced by
the National Electrical Code, 2023 version, with amendments.
   (E)   International Mechanical Code: The following insertions, deletions,
additions or changes shall be made to the 2024 International Mechanical Code:
      Section 101.1 Title: Insert: Village of Manteno.
      Section 113 Board of Appeals: Delete in its entirety.
      Section 114.4 Violation Penalties: Delete in its entirety and replace
with section
8-1-6 of the Manteno Code.
   (F)   International Fire Code: The following insertions, deletions,
additions or changes shall be made to the 2024 International Fire Code:
      Section 101.1 Title: Insert: Village of Manteno.
      Section 113.4 Violation Penalties: Delete in its entirety and replace
with section
8-1-6 of the Manteno Code.
   (G)   International Property Maintenance Code: The following insertions,
deletions, additions or changes shall be made to the 2024 International
Property Maintenance Code:
      Section 101.1 Title: Insert "Village of Manteno".
      Section 102.3 Application of Other Codes: Change to read "Repairs,
additions or alterations to a structure, or changes of occupancy, shall be done
in accordance with the procedures and provisions of the adopted versions of the
International Building Code, Illinois Energy Conservation Code (latest
version), International Fire Code, International Fuel Gas Code, International
Mechanical Code, International Residential Code, National Electrical Code (2023
version), and the latest edition of the Illinois Plumbing Code. Nothing in this
code shall be construed to cancel, modify or negate any provision of the
Manteno Zoning Ordinance."
      Section 102.4 Existing Remedies: Add "The village shall have the right to
cause the demolition, repair or enclosure of unsafe buildings as provided for
in chapter 65, article 11, division 31, of the Illinois Compiled Statutes
without following any of the procedures and notice requirements of this code."
      Section 103.1 Creation of Agency: Insert "Village of Manteno Building
Department".
      Section 107.2 Notice of Violation: Add "The code official may serve a
notice of violation, but no such notice is a prerequisite to the existence of a
violation or to action by the village to restrain, correct or abate such
violation."
      Section 109.1.1 Unsafe Structures: Add "No structure may be boarded up
for more than 6 months. An unsafe structure includes any structure boarded up
for more than 6 months."
      Section 111.1 Demolition General: Change to read "The code official may
order the demolition of any structure which is:
      1.   Dangerous, unsafe, unsanitary or otherwise unfit for human
habitation or occupancy.
      2.   A public nuisance.
      3.   Vacant or abandoned for more than six (6) months.
      4.   Boarded up for more than six (6) months.
      5.   Under construction where there has been a cessation of normal
construction activity for a period of more than six (6) months.
      6.   Maintained in violation of the provisions of this code for more than
6 months."
      Section 111.2 Notices and Orders: Change to read "A notice of order of
demolition shall be serviced as provided for in chapter 65, article 11,
division 31, of the Illinois Compiled Statutes."
      Section 201.3 Terms Defined in Other Codes: Change to read "Where terms
are not defined in this code and are defined in the International Building
Code, International Fire Code, International Mechanical Code, National
Electrical Code (2023 version) , the latest version of the Illinois Plumbing
Code or the Manteno Zoning Ordinance, such terms shall have the meanings
ascribed to them in those codes."
      Section 301.3 Vacant Structures and Land: Add "No structure shall be
maintained which is:
      1.   Dangerous, unsafe, unsanitary or otherwise unfit for human
habitation or occupancy.
      2.   A public nuisance.
      3.   Vacant or abandoned for more than six (6) months.
      4.   Boarded up for more than six (6) months.
      5.   Under construction where there has been a cessation of normal
construction activity for a period of more than six (6) months.
      6.   In violation of the provisions of this code for more than six (6)
months."
      Section 302.4 Weeds: Insert eight (8") inches.
      Section 304.3 Premises Identification: Add "Street numbers must be
attached to the structure, light pole or mailbox, and may not be painted
thereon. Street numbers may not be painted on any stairway, stoop, sidewalk,
curb, or other area."
      Section 304.14 Insect Screens: Insert "May 1" and "October 1".
      Section 602.3 Heat Supply: Insert "October 1" and "May 1".
      Section 602.4 Occupiable Work Spaces: Insert "October 1" and "May 1".
   (H)   ICC Electrical Code Administrative Provisions: (Rep. by Ord. 14-05, 7-
7-2014)
   (I)   National Electrical Code: The following amendments, shall be made to
the 2023 National Electrical Code:
      Arc-fault receptables are only required in bedrooms for all residential
applications.
      The use of aluminum conductors or wire is prohibited for all new
installations.
      All branch circuits shall have a minimum gauge of no. 12, 20-amp for all
new construction and renovation projects, both commercial and residential.
      All refrigerators, deep freezers and microwaves shall be connected by
individual branch circuits.
      Metal conduit shall be used for all new and renovated electrical services
from the point of attachment at the Commonwealth Edison wires to the main
distribution point.
      All new exposed wiring shall be in metal conduit.
      All wiring for commercial, industrial, office, public purpose building or
residential multi-family buildings with greater than four (4) units shall be
installed in heavy wall conduit, thin wall conduit, or approved metal raceways.
      All unfinished garages and basements shall be wired in EMT or rigid metal
conduit.
      Romex shall be permitted as the means of wiring for all residential
construction of four (4) units or less. Romex is not to be exposed wiring;
provided, however, exposed wiring shall be permitted for a vertical run not
exceeding two feet (2') from the main distribution panel to the ceiling if the
distribution panel is in a basement.
      All fire alarm boxes shall be identified in red at the time of rough
inspection.
      All potential areas for ceiling fans shall have approved ceiling fan
boxes installed at time of rough inspection.
      All flexible conduits shall be supplied with a ground wire regardless of
length.
      All electrical fixtures used in a grid ceiling shall be supported by grid
ceiling wires to the main structure: one (1) for small fixtures; and two (2)
for any item two feet (2') or greater. Exception: Fixtures attached to
suspended ceiling framing members may be secured with screws, bolts, rivets, or
listed clips identified for application.
      All electrical outlets must be visible at the time of final inspection.
      The disconnect switch for residential auto charging circuits must be
located near the meter socket and be accessible from the exterior of the home.
   (J)   International Fuel Gas Code: The following insertions, deletions,
additions or changes shall be made to the 2024 International Fuel Gas Code:
      Section 101.1 Title: Insert: Village of Manteno.
      Section 113.4 Violation Penalties: Replace with section
8-1-18 of the Manteno Code.
   (K)   International Swimming Pool and Spa Code:
      Section 101.1 Title: Insert Village of Manteno.
      Section 103.1 Creation of Agency: Insert Village of Manteno Building
Department.
      Section 113.4 Violation Penalties: Replace with Section
8-1-18 of the Manteno Code.
   (L)   International Existing Building Code:
      Section 101.1 Title: Insert: Village of Manteno.
      Section 112 Board of Appeals: Delete in its entirety.
   (M)   Studs And Rafters: All new home buildings and additions shall have
interior partition walls, exterior walls, floor joists, ceiling joists and
rafters placed no farther than sixteen inches (16") on center. (Ord. 06-72, 2-
5-2007)
   (N)   Eaves And Overhangs: All new residential construction shall have eaves
and overhangs built at a minimum of twelve inches (12").
      1.   Exceptions:
         (a)   A remodel or addition which needs a small allowance to meet
existing construction.
         (b)   Dormers, due to their size, may reduce overhangs and eaves to
allow them to appear proportional. (Ord. 14-05, 7-7-2014)
   (O)   Rebar: All footings must contain two (2) continuous horizontal rows of
a minimum no. 4 rebar. All footings will be required to have a keyway placed in
the center of the footing measuring a minimum of two inches wide by one inch
deep (2" x 1") if a poured concrete wall is placed on top of the footing.
      All poured foundation walls shall have a minimum of two (2) continuous
no. 4 horizontal reinforcing bars. One (1) shall be placed at forty-eight
inches (48") on center and one (1) shall be placed within twelve inches (12")
of the top of the wall story.
      All required rebar shall be in place and supported by an approved system
prior to the placement of concrete. (Ord. 06-72, 2-5-2007)
   (P)   Driveway And Public Walk Installation Dates: No private driveway,
public walk, or other flat work likely to see road salt as determined by the
Building Director may be poured between the dates of November 1 and April 1
unless otherwise approved by the Building Director.
   (Q)   Driveways: The materials and methods of construction shall conform to
the "Illinois Department of Transportation Standard Specifications for Road and
Bridge Construction", latest edition or ICC guidelines, whichever is more
restrictive.
      1.   All aprons for driveways between the curb and the public sidewalk
shall be made of concrete a minimum four inches (4") in thickness, reinforced
with fiber mesh.
      2.   The contractor may select one (1) of the following options for
residential driveway construction on private property or radius entrances to
right-of-way:
         (a)   Material shall be base course consisting of IDOT gradation CA-6,
CA-7 or CA-10, eight inches (8") in thickness, and surface course consisting of
bituminous concrete surface course, two and one-half inches (2-1/2") in
thickness (asphalt). All thicknesses shall be measured with materials in place
and compacted.
   (R)   Open Cutting Of Pavements: Open cutting of existing village pavements
and/or curbs shall require a permit from the village. In some instances, the
village may require boring and jacking under the pavement instead of open
cutting.
   (S)   Sidewalks:
      1.   Specifications: Sidewalks are to be located on the right of way, the
nearest edge being one foot (1') from the property line. The sidewalks are to
be five inches (5") higher than the curb on the side close to the curb, and six
inches (6") higher than the curb on the side far from the curb.
      2.   Public Sidewalks Intersecting With Street Curb And Gutter: The back
of the curb at this point of intersection shall be depressed and shall not
exceed one-half inch (1/2") elevation over the flow line of the gutter pan.
      The materials and methods of construction shall conform to the "Illinois
Department Of Transportation Standard Specifications For Road And Bridge
Construction", latest edition or ICC guidelines whichever is more restrictive.
         (a)   Material shall be base course consisting of IDOT gradation CA-6,
CA-7 or CA-10, four inches (4") in thickness, and class SI portland cement
concrete, four inches (4") in thickness, reinforced with fiber mesh. All
thicknesses shall be measured with materials in place and compacted.
         (b)   Width shall be five feet (5') except where the planning
commission or village engineer deems a wider sidewalk necessary.
         (c)   Control joints shall be constructed at right angles to the
centerline of the sidewalk and shall extend one-fourth inch (1/4") the depth of
the sidewalk. They shall not be less than one-eighth inch (1/8") nor more than
one-fourth inch (1/4") in width, and shall be edged with an edging tool having
a one-fourth inch (1/4") radius.
   (T)   Pedestrian Walkways: Pedestrian walkway improvements shall conform to
the specifications for sidewalks, including the width requirement. The sidewalk
shall generally be centered in the pedestrian walkway.
   (U)   Flat Work: All exterior flat work must be reinforced with fiber mesh.
Wire may be used in addition but not as an alternative.
      1.   All basement floors will be required to have control joints in place
within forty eight (48) hours of completing the pour. (Ord. 06-57, 12-18-2006)
   (V)   Backfill: All exterior areas of a home which will eventually have flat
work in place not supported by foundation must be backfilled with a
noncompactable stone.
      1.   All over digs within the foundation area of the garage and front
stoops must be backfilled with a noncompactable stone or a properly compacted
stone or an alternative approved by the building director. All requests for
alternatives must be made in writing.
      2.   Crushed lime may be used as an approved base for areas contained
within foundation walls. (Ord. 07-01, 5-7-2007)
   (W)   Foundations: Foundations which are intended to be used for a brick
ledge must be stepped down a minimum of four inches (4") to support the brick.
(Ord. 06-57, 12-18-2006)
   (X)   Private Walkways: All walkways located on private property shall be
constructed according to the following specifications:
      1.   Material shall be base course consisting of IDOT gradation CA-6, CA-
7 or CA-10, four inches (4") in thickness, and class SI portland cement
concrete, four inches (4") in thickness, reinforced with fiber mesh. All
thickness shall be measured with materials in place and compacted.
      2.   Control joints shall be constructed at right angles to the
centerline of the sidewalk and shall extend one-fourth inch (1/4") the depth of
the walkway. They shall not be less than one-eighth inch (1/8") nor more than
one-fourth inch (1/4") in width, and shall be edged with an edging tool having
a one-fourth inch (1/4") radius or equivalent saw cut. The maximum spacing of
control joints shall not exceed the width of the sidewalk. (Ord. 10-04, 7-19-
2010; amd. Ord. 24-17, 1-6-2025; Ord. 25-01, 5-5-2025)
8-1-14: EXTERIOR WALL COVERING MATERIALS:
   (A)   Compliance: Any new building or additions constructed on any real
property zoned and classified as a multi-family residential, business
commercial, manufacturing or industrial district under the official zoning map
of the village and its zoning regulations shall comply with all items and
provisions of this section.
   (B)   Front Elevations:
      1.   In multi-family residential districts, shall consist of not less
than fifty percent (50%) of primary materials and not more than fifty percent
(50%) of secondary materials as listed in this section.
      2.   In commercial business districts, shall consist of not less than
ninety percent (90%) of primary materials and not more than ten percent (10%)
of secondary materials as listed in this section.
      3.   In industrial and manufacturing districts, shall consist of not less
than thirty percent (30%) of primary materials with the remainder percent of
secondary materials as listed in this section.
   (C)   Side And Rear Elevations:
      1.   In multi-family residential districts, shall consist of not less
than fifty percent (50%) of primary materials and not more than fifty percent
(50%) of secondary materials as listed in this section.
      2.   In commercial business districts, shall consist of not less than
seventy percent (70%) of primary materials and not more than thirty percent
(30%) of secondary materials as listed in this section.
      3.   In industrial and manufacturing districts, shall consist of not less
than thirty percent (30%) of primary materials with the remainder percent of
secondary materials as listed in this section.
   (D)   Structural Elements:
      1.   All new buildings, developments, moved buildings, and additions in
the multi-family residential, commercial business, industrial or manufacturing
districts of the village of Manteno shall have exterior walls with approved
weather resistant coverings of primary materials as listed, but not limited to,
the following:
         (a)   Face brick.
         (b)   Common brick.
         (c)   Solid masonry.
         (1)   Split face (block or brick).
         (2)   Exposed aggregate.
         (3)   Natural stone.
         (d)   Precast and/or poured concrete.
         (1)   Exposed aggregate.
         (e)   Dryvit or equal.
         (f)   Glass.
         (g)   Ceramics.
         (h)   Marble and/or granite or equal.
         (i)   Cultured stone or brick.
         (j)   Cement board siding.
         (k)   LP Smart Siding (or equal).
      2.   The secondary materials as listed, but not limited to, the
following:
         (a)   Architectural metals.
         (b)   Wood or wood products or equal.
         (c)   Vinyl.
         (d)   Aluminum.
         (e)   Clad metals.
         (f)   Metal lap siding shall be allowed after review and approval by
the village board.
      3.   In any design in which the structural frame is exposed to view, the
structural materials shall be compatible within themselves and harmonious to
their surroundings.
      4.   All materials shall be of a permanent nature and require a minimum
amount of maintenance.
   (E)   Exterior Materials For Accessory Buildings: All accessory buildings
over one hundred twenty (120) square feet shall be sided with comparable
materials to the primary structure, however, masonry brick will not be required
to match the primary structure. Vinyl, vinyl lap, smart siding, cement board,
wood siding and plastic are all permissible for use as exterior materials. No
metal siding of any type shall be permitted on any accessory building. (Ord.
03-38, 4-19-2004, eff. 5-1-2004; amd. Ord. 14-05, 7-7-2014; Ord. 22-19, 3-6-
2023; Ord. 25-01, 5-5-5-2025)
8-1-15: ACCESSORY BUILDINGS:
   (A)   No accessory building shall be constructed or added onto without first
obtaining a building permit. Accessory buildings must have an approved floor,
concrete, wood, or other similar surface. A minimum two by two (2 x 2) framing
construction will be required for all accessory buildings. All accessory
buildings shall be built with a minimum four inch (4") gravel base or
manufactured floor kit of a moisture resistant nature and be built to avoid
rodent or varmint infestation. All accessory buildings shall be anchored to
avoid uplift from wind. Accessory buildings not framed on-site over a concrete
slab will be required to have at least two (2) attached ground anchors at
opposite corners of the building.
   (B)   No accessory building being a playhouse that is over 80 square feet
shall be constructed or added onto without first obtaining a building permit.
One playhouse being less than eighty (80) square feet and having a maximum
height no greater than eight feet (8') (ground to peak of structure) shall be
permitted in addition to another accessory building.
   (C)   The following shall be the maximum allowed dimensions for accessory
buildings:
      1.   No accessory building shall be more than two percent (2%) of the
total lot square footage. However, in no event shall an accessory shed exceed
three hundred fifty (350) square feet regardless of the total lot square
footage. For accessory buildings larger than three hundred fifty (350) square
feet, see requirements for garages.
      2.   The maximum height of the walls for any accessory building shall be
eight feet (8'). "Walls" shall mean the exterior face of the accessory building
as measured from ground level to the roof.
      3.   No accessory building shall exceed twelve feet (12') in height
measured from ground level.
   (D)   The following shall be the concrete and foundation anchorage
requirements for a stick building:
      1.   Turndown footing measuring a minimum of twelve inches deep and six
inches wide (12" x 6").
      2.   A minimum anchor bolt diameter of one-half inch (1/2").
      3.   No anchor bolt shall be spaced farther than six feet (6') on center
or twelve inches (12") from each plate section or corner of the structure.
      4.   Anchor bolts must be embedded at least seven inches (7").
      5.   Anchor bolts must be attached to a plate with washers and nuts.
   (E)   All accessory buildings must be placed behind the primary structure
(back yard) or in the case of a corner lot, placement in the side yard shall be
permitted. No accessory building shall be located closer than five feet (5')
from any property line. Accessory buildings shall not be permitted in any
easement or placed at a location so as to impede the drainage of a neighboring
property. Notwithstanding the above, prefabricated sheds not constructed or
placed on a concrete slab shall be allowed to be placed in a public utility
easement not considered an overland drainage easement, provided the owner
completes the easement waiver provided by the building department. The easement
waiver acknowledges owner notification that in the event the shed is placed in
a public utility easement, the owner shall assume all costs associated with the
removal or location modification by any utility company for access to the
easement. The village shall not be held liable for any subsequent damages to
said shed or its contents by permitting the shed to be placed in the easement.
The owner shall assume the responsibility to notify all utility companies of
the intent to place a shed in a public utility easement.
   (F)   Specific prohibitions:
      1.   No fabric, temporary, tent-style sheds/structures shall be
permitted.
      2.   No shipping containers of any size shall be permitted without the
approval of the Board of Trustees.
      3.   Accessory office sheds/buildings are prohibited.
      4.   A treehouse shall constitute an accessory building and shall not be
permitted.
      5.   A greenhouse shall constitute an accessory building and shall not be
permitted.
   (G)   For purposes of this section, all areas under roof are included in the
square footage requirements and calculations. (Ord. 10-03, 5-3-2010; amd. Ord.
12-37, 3-18-2013; Ord. 14-48, 4-6-2015; Ord. 16-11, 8-15-2016; Ord. 22-19, 3-6-
2023)
8-1-16: APPLICATION OF CHAPTER:
Nothing in this chapter or in the codes hereby adopted shall be construed to
affect any suit or proceeding pending in any court, or any rights acquired, or
liability incurred, or any cause or causes of action acquired or existing,
under any act or ordinance hereby repealed by this chapter; nor shall any just
or legal right or remedy of any character be lost, impaired or affected by this
chapter. (Ord. 03-38, 4-19-2004, eff. 5-1-2004)
8-1-17: CONFLICT OF ORDINANCES:
In any case where a provision of any code adopted by reference in this chapter
or any other provision of this chapter is found to be in conflict with a
provision of any other code or ordinance of the village existing on the
effective date hereof, the provision which established the higher standard for
the promotion and protection of the health and safety of the people shall
prevail. In any case where a provision of any other ordinance or code of the
village existing on the effective date hereof established a lower standard for
the promotion and protection of the health and safety of the people, the
provisions of this chapter or of any code adopted by reference in this chapter
shall be deemed to prevail and such other ordinances or codes are hereby
declared to be repealed to the extent that they may be found in conflict with
this chapter or code adopted by reference in this chapter. (Ord. 03-38, 4-19-
2004, eff. 5-1-2004)
8-1-18: PENALTIES:
Any person, firm or corporation violating any provision of this chapter shall
be fined not less than fifty dollars ($50.00) nor more than seven hundred fifty
dollars ($750.00) for each offense. A separate offense shall be deemed
committed on each day during or on which the violation occurs or continues. Any
work done, actions taken or projects completed without the required permit or
inspections shall, without exception, be subject to all application
requirements, fees, inspections and all penalties as provided for in this
chapter. (Ord. 07-29, 10-25-2007)
8-1-19: RESIDENTIAL GARAGES:
   (A)   Zoning Ordinance: All garages must be located and constructed in
compliance with the provisions of title 9 of this code. The regulations in this
section are in addition to any zoning regulations.
   (B)   Policy: Garages are allowed as accessory uses in the various
residential districts as provided for in each district and shall be compatible
with the principal use. Each residence shall be allowed garage space as set
forth in this section, whether attached or detached, and all residential
garages are subject to the requirements of this section. All garages in excess
of five hundred (500) square feet shall be constructed on a full foundation.
Only one curb cut per street is allowed. (Ord. 05-15, 8-15-2005)
   (C)   Definitions:
      ATTACHED GARAGE: A garage which is joined to the primary dwelling on the
lot. Such garage shall be on a full foundation, whether it is an integral part
of the structure, connected by a porch, or connected by a breezeway.
      DETACHED GARAGE: A garage which is entirely surrounded by open space on
the same lot as the primary dwelling. A garage attached by a porch or breezeway
which lacks a full foundation shall also be considered a detached garage. (Ord.
07-29, 10-15-2007)
   (D)   Detached Garages:
      1.   A detached garage may be built on a residential lot that also
contains an attached garage. Such a detached garage must be accessible via an
approved driveway, which meets the design requirements of section
9-12-5 of this code, which connects the garage to the street or alley access
apron.
      2.   Only one detached garage may be built per lot. The garage must be
built in a rear yard, and the area of the detached garage may not exceed thirty
percent (30%) of the rear yard area.
      3.   The construction of all detached garages shall require the
submission of a plat of survey for the lot which establishes lot lines,
easements and drainage issues.
      4.   No metal sided or pole type detached garages shall be allowed.
      5.   The maximum height of the walls of a detached garage shall not
exceed nine feet six inches (9'6").
      6.   The maximum pitch of the roof of a detached garage shall not exceed
the predominant pitch of the primary residence's roof, and the roof shall be no
higher than the primary residence's roof.
      7.   No detached garage shall be built in such a fashion that the garage
may be converted or used as a permanent residence. (Ord. 05-15, 8-15-2005)
   (E)   Maximum Size Of Garages:
      1.   E-1, R-1 And R-2 Zone Requirements: All residential structures shall
provide a garage having space for storage of a minimum of two (2) passenger
vehicles.
      2.   Maximum Area: The maximum area of all garages, whether attached,
detached, or both, shall not exceed eight hundred sixty (860) square feet or
forty eight percent (48%) of the total square footage of livable floor area,
whichever is greater.
      3.   Garage Doors:
         (a)   Garage overhead door openings shall not exceed eight feet (8')
in height.
         (b)   The maximum amount of a primary structure's front facade devoted
to garage overhead doors (and spaces between garage overhead doors) shall not
exceed sixty percent (60%). (Ord. 07-04, 6-4-2007)
8-1-20: STORAGE PODS:
   (A)   Upon application and payment of twenty dollars ($20.00), an applicant
is permitted to have on his property a storage pod, or any similar temporary
structure used by persons residing or moving into the property, for a period
not to exceed thirty (30) days. No extensions, above and beyond the thirty (30)
days provided for in this section, shall be permitted. No storage pod, or any
portion of that structure, shall be placed within any village right of way or
easement. For purposes of this section "storage pod" means any structure
purchased or leased that is employed for the storage of articles, goods or
other personal property which is not affixed to real property and does not
contain wheels which are inseparable from the structure itself.
   (B)   Any person who violates or refuses to comply with the provisions of
this section, shall be fined not less than twenty five dollars ($25.00) nor
more than five hundred dollars ($500.00) for each offense. Each day a person
violates or remains in violation of this section shall constitute a separate
offense. (Ord. 07-33, 11-5-2007)
CHAPTER 2
DEVELOPMENT IN FLOODPLAIN AREAS 1
(Rep. by Ord. 07-24, 9-17-2007)
 
Notes
1 1. See title 10, chapter 9 of this code.
CHAPTER 3
STORM WATER MANAGEMENT 1
(Rep. by Ord. 07-24, 9-17-2007)
 
Notes
1 1. See title 10, chapter 10 of this code.
CHAPTER 4
FENCE REGULATIONS
SECTION:
8-4-1: Definitions
8-4-2: Construction And Maintenance
8-4-3: Barbed Wire And Electrical Fences
8-4-4: Height And Location
8-4-5: Permits
8-4-6: Public Nuisance; Penalties And Remedies
8-4-1: DEFINITIONS:
CORNER LOT SIDE YARD: For buildings on corner lots, the side of residence that
abuts a street but is not used for the residential address. On a corner lot,
side yard shall be used to describe that side of the residence that does not
abut a street.
FENCE: Any structure, partition or enclosure, of wood, iron, metal, or other
material, enclosing or dividing a piece of land. Hedges, plantings, shrubbery,
etc., when used as a screen or a fence shall be maintained and trimmed to the
maximum height as set forth in this chapter. (Ord. 07-12, 8-6-2007)
8-4-2: CONSTRUCTION AND MAINTENANCE:
Fences shall be erected so that all supporting members shall be attached to and
located within the lot line fenced. All wooden fences shall be constructed in
such a manner that the finished side faces to the exterior of the lot fenced.
All fences shall be constructed in conformity with wind, stress, foundational,
structural, and other requirements of the building codes and ordinances of the
village of Manteno. All fences shall be maintained in a good and structurally
sound manner, and be capable of supporting imposed loads. All fence surfaces
shall be maintained in a good, clean and sanitary condition. Peeling, chipping,
flaked or abraded paint shall not be permitted. Rusted, corroded, decayed or
rotted fences, or parts of fences, shall not be permitted. All fences, or parts
of fences, shall be maintained free of holes and breaks and otherwise securely
fastened to any supporting member. (Ord. 07-12, 8-6-2007)
8-4-3: BARBED WIRE AND ELECTRICAL FENCES:
   (A)   No barbed wire or electrical fences shall be allowed on private
property in residential areas or zones. No barbed wire or electrical fences
shall be allowed on private property in a front yard of any commercial or
industrial zones or where the property lines of such property abut a
residential area or zone.
   (B)   The use of barbed wire is prohibited in industrial zones except that
the top one foot (1') of any fence along the side or rear lot lines in these
zones may be constructed of barbed wire. Barbed wire shall not be used,
installed or constructed on fences fronting on any street. (Ord. 07-12, 8-6-
2007)
8-4-4: HEIGHT AND LOCATION:
It shall be unlawful to maintain or construct any fence composed in whole or in
part in excess of the height as set forth below:
   (A)   Back And Side Yards: In all zones but industrial, the maximum height
of fences, in back and side yards, shall be six feet (6'). In industrial zones,
the maximum height of fences shall be ten feet (10').
   (B)   Front Yards: In front yards, the maximum height shall be thirty six
inches (36"). However, no fence shall exceed two feet (2') in height within
thirty feet (30') of a street intersection.
   (C)   Comer Lot Side Yards: For a determination of fence locations for a
comer lot, the street address will determine the front of the home. A fence may
continue into the side yard of the comer lot a maximum ten feet (10') from the
home with a maximum height of six feet (6'). Any fence located farther than ten
feet (10') from the home into the side yard of the comer lot may be installed
at a four foot (4') maximum height provided it is at least fifty percent (50%)
open. No fence may be located within five feet (5') of any sidewalk or located
closer than seventeen feet (17') from the edge of a curb line, whichever is
more restrictive.
   (D)   Lot Lines And Rights Of Way: Where allowed, fences may be constructed
on lot lines as long as the fence does not interfere with or obstruct a public
right of way or prevent access to any public utility apparatus. In the event
that the owner desires to construct a fence upon a public utility right of way,
the owner shall assume all costs associated with the removal, and the village
shall not be held liable for damages by permitting the fence to be constructed
on or over the right of way. The owner shall assume the responsibility to
notify all utility companies of the intent to erect a fence upon a public
utility right of way.
   (E)   Drainage Easements: Fences shall not be located in any drainage
easement, unless authorized by the village engineer and the building director.
   (F)   Vacant Lots: No Fence shall be installed or located on any vacant lot;
provided, however, a fence may be installed or located on a vacant lot that is
immediately adjacent to an improved lot under common ownership and use so long
as the fence does not, in whole or in part, separate the vacant lot from the
improved lot. For purposes herein, a vacant lot shall be a parcel of land
having no principal building or structure. (Ord. 14-05, 7-7-2014; amd. Ord. 25-
15, 9-15-2025)
8-4-5: PERMITS:
It shall be unlawful for any person to erect a fence in the village without
first obtaining a building permit from the director of building and zoning.
Before a permit is issued, the owner must show positive proof of the lot line
by survey or location of lot line stakes. All fences that enclose swimming
pools shall be governed by section
8-8-1 of this title. (Ord. 07-12, 8-6-2007)
8-4-6: PUBLIC NUISANCE; PENALTIES AND REMEDIES:
   (A)   Any fence found to be in violation of this chapter shall be declared a
public nuisance.
   (B)   If the director of building and zoning determines that any fence
constitutes a public nuisance, he shall notify the owner or occupier of the
premises of such a determination, by certified mail, and require the owner or
occupier to remove, obtain a permit or make any necessary repairs or
improvements to the fence within fifteen (15) days. Should the owner or
occupier fail to abate the nuisance within fifteen (15) days from the date of
notice, the director of building and zoning shall be authorized to issue a
citation for a violation of this chapter. Additionally, the director of
building and zoning may file a complaint in the circuit court of Kankakee
County for a court order to abate the nuisance.
   (C)   Any person found in violation of this chapter shall be fined no less
than seventy five dollars ($75.00) or more than seven hundred fifty dollars
($750.00). Each day a violation continues shall constitute a separate offense.
(Ord. 07-12, 8-6-2007)
CHAPTER 5
SIDEWALK REGULATIONS
SECTION:
8-5-1: Sidewalk Required
8-5-2: Sidewalk Construction Specifications
8-5-3: Conveyance Defined
8-5-4: Tract Of Land Defined
8-5-5: Corner Lots
8-5-6: Maintenance Of Sidewalks
8-5-7: Exemptions
8-5-8: Enforcement
8-5-9: Penalty
8-5-1: SIDEWALK REQUIRED:
Prior to conveyance of any tract of land on which a structure or building is in
existence, or prior to the occupancy or use of any new building or structure,
the seller as to conveyance and owner as to occupancy or use shall install
sidewalks according to the specifications as set forth in this chapter on that
portion of their premises fronting a public street in the village. (Ord. 95-09,
8-14-1995)
   (A)   Sidewalks shall be installed before transfer of ownership.
Circumstances such as weather or future village improvements plans may
necessitate escrow monies to be held by the village and construction of
sidewalks to be completed at a later date, as determined by the code
enforcement officer and under the direction of the village.
   (B)   The amount of escrow monies to be held by the village shall be
determined by the code enforcement officer using a prevailing rate (verified
annually) for such sidewalk construction and based on actual footage of
property involved plus the cost of a building permit. A contract signed by
sellers, buyers, and the village shall list all correct information regarding
the cost and placement of sidewalks. Once this contract is signed and the
escrow funds have been deposited with the village, the requirements of this
subsection and subsections (A) and (C) of this section shall be considered
fulfilled. The village shall assume responsibility for installation of said
sidewalk in a timely manner.
   (C)   All sidewalk construction shall require a permit as obtained through
the Manteno building department. (Ord. 98-23, 4-5-1999)
8-5-2: SIDEWALK CONSTRUCTION SPECIFICATIONS:
Sidewalks shall consist of concrete and shall be a minimum of five feet (5') in
width and four inches (4") in depth and shall be located parallel to the
property line; provided, however, if there is in existence a structure,
building, or tree, said sidewalks shall be installed in a manner which will
comply with the requirement of being as parallel to the property line as is
feasible; and said sidewalks shall be located one foot (1') outside the
property line, except in subdivisions where sidewalks have been constructed
otherwise, in which instance a sidewalk shall conform to such existing
sidewalks. (Ord. 05-46, 2-6-2006)
8-5-3: CONVEYANCE DEFINED:
As used in this chapter, a "conveyance" is hereby defined as including
transfers of ownership by deed or by assignment of beneficial interest in a
land trust, or by entering into an installment contract for deed, whether said
agreement is recorded or unrecorded. (Ord. 95-09, 8-14-1995)
8-5-4: TRACT OF LAND DEFINED:
As used in this chapter, "tract of land" is hereby defined to include any lot
or tract of land located within the village limits, and adjoining lots or
parcels of land owned by the same person and fronting the same public street
shall be considered one tract of land for purposes of this chapter. (Ord. 95-
09, 8-14-1995)
8-5-5: CORNER LOTS:
On corner lots in the village, sidewalks shall be installed on both frontages
abutting the public streets. (Ord. 95-09, 8-14-1995)
8-5-6: MAINTENANCE OF SIDEWALKS:
The owner of any lot on which a sidewalk is installed shall maintain said
sidewalk in a manner which ensures the safe and beneficial use of said sidewalk
by the residents of the village and the general public. No sidewalk shall be
removed by any person unless a replacement sidewalk is installed within thirty
(30) days of the date of such removal. (Ord. 95-09, 8-14-1995)
8-5-7: EXEMPTIONS:
The following shall be exempt from the provisions of this chapter:
   (A)   Unimproved lots or tracts of land not falling within the definition in
section
8-5-4 of this chapter. (Ord. 95-09, 8-14-1993)
   (B)   Any lot or tract of land, on which, in the opinion of the village code
enforcement officer, it is not structurally feasible for the placement of
sidewalks along the lot frontage of the public street due to the terrain or
placement of preexisting trees or other major improvements. (Ord. 98-23, 4-5-
1999)
8-5-8: ENFORCEMENT:
Enforcement of the provisions of this chapter shall rest with the local
building inspector. (Ord. 95-09, 8-14-1995)
8-5-9: PENALTY:
Any person violating any provisions of this chapter, upon conviction, shall be
subject to a fine according to section
1-4-1 of this code, and each day that said violation continues shall be
considered a separate offense. (Ord. 95-09, 8-14-1995)
CHAPTER 6
ANTIMONOTONY CODE
SECTION:
8-6-1: Purpose
8-6-2: Similarity In Appearance Prohibited In Residential Construction
8-6-3: Standards For Determining Similarity In Appearance
8-6-4: Administration And Enforcement; Appeals
8-6-1: PURPOSE:
The purpose of this chapter is to create an aesthetically pleasing character of
the single-family residential districts in the village in order to protect and
enhance property values. The construction of single-family residences which are
substantially similar in appearance to other nearby single-family residences
are prohibited in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 04-14,
8-16-2004)
8-6-2: SIMILARITY IN APPEARANCE PROHIBITED IN RESIDENTIAL CONSTRUCTION:
   (A)   No building permit shall be issued for any new detached single-family
dwelling units in the R-1 or R-2 zoning districts (the "subject lot") which is
similar in front facade appearance to any dwelling unit meeting the following
requirements:
      1.   The subject lot shall be dissimilar to dwelling units within two (2)
lots on either side on the same side of the street;
      2.   The subject lot shall be dissimilar to dwelling units directly
across the street and within one lot thereof;
      3.   With respect to lots with frontage on the bulb of a cul-de-sac, the
subject lot shall be dissimilar to dwelling units within one lot on either side
of the subject lot or directly across the cul-de-sac from the subject lot.
      4.   With respect to front yards, in the event the lot adjacent on either
side of the subject lot, the lot directly across the street or the lot adjacent
on either side of that lot directly across the street from the subject lot has
a different yard type (i.e., side, rear) adjacent to the shared street, then
the restrictions shall not apply to those lots.
      5.   When calculating lots for purposes of dissimilarity, an intervening
street shall be counted as one lot;
      6.   When calculating lots for purposes of dissimilarity, lots shall not
be restricted if separated from the subject lot by a collector road.
   (B)   On corner lots, no building permit shall be issued for any new
detached single-family dwelling unit in the R-1 and R-2 zoning districts which
are similar in side facades. On lots backing up to a public right of way or
secondary road, no building permit shall be issued for any new detached single-
family dwelling unit in the R-1 or R-2 zoning district which are similar in
rear facades; except when there is an approved landscape berm or plan, approved
by the board of trustees.
   (C)   A dwelling on a corner lot may be considered dissimilar to another if
the front of the two (2) dwelling units face different streets.
   (D)   Dwelling units must comply with the dissimilarity provisions which are
applicable to the front facade, side facades, and rear facade. (Ord. 04-14, 8-
16-2004)
8-6-3: STANDARDS FOR DETERMINING SIMILARITY IN APPEARANCE:
   (A)   Distinguishing Characteristics, Front Facade: For the purpose of this
chapter, the term "similar in appearance" shall mean a dwelling unit which is
identical, or substantially similar, to another in any three (3) of the
following characteristics with respect to the front facade:
      1.   Roof type (gable, hip, mansard, gambrel, flat or combination).
Mixtures of roof types and design are sufficient to render dwelling units
dissimilar.
      2.   Roof height or pitch shall be significantly different.
      3.   Approximate dimensions (height and length) of the front wall closest
to the front lot line.
      4.   Shape of the front elevation silhouette.
      5.   Relative locations, types and sizes of windows in the front
elevation. The addition or subtractions of muntin bars, small gable or hip
projections above windows, and window dormers are not sufficient to make
adjacent structures dissimilar.
      6.   Relative location, design and dimensions of garage door, if included
on the front elevation.
      7.   Type and color of front facade materials (e.g., brick veneer, lapped
horizontal siding, half timber, board and batten, shakes, etc.). Changes in
materials must occur throughout the front facade or elevation for a minimum of
one story in height. Color change shall be made by significant changes in
shades of color.
   (B)   Distinguishing Characteristics, Side And Rear Facades On Corner Lots,
And Rear Facades Fronting A Public Right Of Way: For the purpose of this
subsection, the term "similar in appearance" shall mean a dwelling which is
identical, or substantially similar, to another type and color of side and rear
facade (e.g., brick veneer, lapped horizontal siding, half timber, board and
batten, shakes, etc.). Changes in materials must occur throughout the entire
facade or elevation for a minimum of one story in height. Color change shall be
made by significant changes in shades of color.
   (C)   Housing Styles: Housing style is in and of itself a significant enough
characteristic to constitute dissimilarity with respect to the subject lot and
the similarity standards delineated in subsections (A) and (B) of this section
do not apply. Housing styles shall consist of the following: ranch, bilevel,
trilevel, one and one-half story, and two-story.
   (D)   Model Homes: Elevation designs must be provided for each type of
dwelling. For model designs, a minimum of three (3) alternate elevations for
each design shall be provided to the village and to prospective customers.
(Ord. 04-14, 8-16-2004)
8-6-4: ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT; APPEALS:
   (A)   Rules: The village administrator, or his/her designee, is authorized
to make rules regarding the interpretation of the provisions of this chapter.
   (B)   Determination: The code enforcement officer shall make the initial
determination as to similarity in appearance and shall not issue a building
permit for any dwelling unit which violates the provisions of this chapter. If
a permit is denied, written reasons shall be provided detailing why the
proposed dwelling unit is similar in appearance to another dwelling unit.
   (C)   Appeal: A decision by the code enforcement officer denying a permit
may be appealed in writing to the building and planning committee of the
village board, or such other committee as authorized thereby.
   (D)   Variations: The board of trustees reserves the right to waive the
provisions of this chapter by motion approved at a board meeting.
   (E)   Applicability: The provisions of this chapter apply only to the
issuance of building permits for a newly constructed dwelling unit and not to
remodeling or reconstruction. (Ord. 04-14, 8-16-2004)
CHAPTER 7
PLAN REVIEW FEES
SECTION:
8-7-1: Fees And Costs For Plan And Application Review
8-7-2: Fees For Outside Consultants; Notice
8-7-3: Fees For Staff Review
8-7-4: Final Action; Payment Of Fees
8-7-1: FEES AND COSTS FOR PLAN AND APPLICATION REVIEW:
In addition to any other fees provided for in this code, the village
administrator, department heads, the planning commission and the chairmen of
committees of the village board, along with other municipal officials who may
be authorized from time to time to do so, with prior written notice to the
administrator, may retain outside consultants with established expertise in
disciplines necessary to evaluate applications for annexation, zoning,
subdivision and construction to assist the officials of the village, its
committees and the corporate authorities in processing applications for
municipal action or permission. For purposes of this chapter, the terms
"necessary or desirable" do not mean only such measures as are absolutely and
indispensably necessary, but include all appropriate means which are conducive
or adaptable to the end to be accomplished and which, in the judgment of the
authorized official, will most advantageously permit the municipality to act
upon the application or request. (Ord. 04-17, 8-2-2004)
8-7-2: FEES FOR OUTSIDE CONSULTANTS; NOTICE:
The village shall disclose to the applicant or requesting party that it is
utilizing such consulting services, and that party must pay within thirty (30)
days after the submission of an invoice from the consultant for the services
provided. The services provided shall be reasonable and customary, and the
invoices shall be itemized and shall be within a range generally chargeable by
the consultants in performing similar services. It shall not be a defense to
the payment of such invoices that the applicant could obtain such consultant
services at a lower cost, so long as the fees charged by the village's
consultants are within the range typically charged for similar services by
outside consultants to municipalities within the Chicago metropolitan area. The
intention of the corporate authorities is to utilize experienced and competent
consultants to fairly assess the material they are asked to review with
adequate time to provide excellent reports to village officials, who will then
be able to reach fair decisions without prejudice or uncertainty. (Ord. 04-17,
8-2-2004)
8-7-3: FEES FOR STAFF REVIEW:
In addition to establishing a system for the invoicing of consultants' fees,
the village may charge the reasonable cost for its own employees to process,
analyze and report upon the application or request. The village administrator
may, from time to time, establish, subject to approval of the village board,
standardized fees for application, analysis or review processes. Where no
standard fee has been established, the provisions of section
8-7-1 of this chapter shall apply. Notice of standard fees shall be provided to
any applicant as part of the application information. (Ord. 04-17, 8-2-2004)
8-7-4: FINAL ACTION; PAYMENT OF FEES:
Final action on any application may be delayed until any amount due and payable
has been paid. The village may require the posting of an irrevocable letter of
credit to guarantee that payments will be promptly made. The municipality may
require a certified check or the posting of an irrevocable letter of credit to
guarantee fees and consultant costs already incurred, but not paid, at the time
the application or permit is acted upon. (Ord. 04-17, 8-2-2004)
CHAPTER 8
SWIMMING POOLS
SECTION:
8-8-1: Requirements
8-8-2: Penalties
8-8-1: REQUIREMENTS:
All swimming pools having a capable depth of two feet (2') or more shall
conform to the requirements and standards under the international building code
as adopted by the village. Included in those requirements are the following:
   (A)   A swimming pool or appurtenances thereto shall not be constructed,
installed, enlarged or altered until construction documents have been submitted
and a permit has been obtained from the code enforcement officer.
   (B)   At least one means of egress shall be provided from private pools.
   (C)   Outdoor private swimming pools shall be provided with a barrier which
shall comply with the following:
      1.   The top of the barrier shall be at least forty eight inches (48")
above finished ground level. Where the tip of the pool structure is above
finished ground level, such as an aboveground pool, the barrier shall be at
finished ground level, such as the pool structure, or shall be mounted on top
of the pool structure. Openings in the barrier shall not allow passage of a
four inch (4") diameter sphere.
      2.   Gates shall be equipped with self-closing and self-latching devices
designed to keep, and capable of keeping, such gate securely closed at all
times when not in actual use. Deck and stair gates should be installed at the
bottom of the stairs and should swing out away from the pool. However, if
design restrictions prevent the installation of the gate as described above,
and the gate must be installed at the top of the stairs, that gate should swing
in order to prevent potential stair accidents.
      3.   Where an aboveground pool structure is used as the barrier or where
the barrier is mounted on top of the pool structure and the means of access is
a ladder or steps, the ladder or steps shall be capable of being secured,
locked or removed to prevent access, or the ladder or steps shall be surrounded
by a barrier that meets international residential code requirements. (Ord. 14-
05, 7-7-2014)
   (D)   All outdoor swimming pools are considered accessory uses and shall
meet minimum yard requirements, however, no portion of any private swimming
pool or appurtenant equipment (including pumps, filters, and heaters) shall be
located at a distance less than five feet (5') from any side or rear property
line and may not be placed in any front yard. Corner lots will be considered as
having two (2) front yards. (Ord. 06-30, 8-21-2006)
   (E)   All electrical devices used in conjunction with or connected to all
pools must be grounded and protected by approved ground fault interrupt
circuits.
   (F)   An approved pool cover shall be installed during those periods when
use of the pool is discontinued. Unused pools on residential premises not
occupied or dwelt in for a period of thirty (30) days or more shall be
completely drained or equipped with an approved pool cover. Abandoned pools, as
determined by the code enforcement officer, shall be removed or filled to the
grade of adjacent land. (Ord. 99-06, 6-21-1999; amd. Ord. 06-23, 7-17-2006)
8-8-2: PENALTIES:
Any person, firm or corporation violating any provision of this chapter shall
be fined not less than fifty dollars ($50.00) nor more than seven hundred fifty
dollars ($750.00) for each offense. (Ord. 14-05, 7-7-2014)
CHAPTER 9
CARBON MONOXIDE ALARM DETECTORS
SECTION:
8-9-1: Definitions
8-9-2: Carbon Monoxide Detector
8-9-3: Prohibitions
8-9-4: Exemptions
8-9-1: DEFINITIONS:
The following words shall have the meanings ascribed to them for purposes of
this chapter:
APPROVED CARBON MONOXIDE ALARM: A carbon monoxide alarm that complies with all
the requirements of the rules and regulations of the Illinois state fire
marshal, bears the label of a nationally recognized testing laboratory, and
complies with the most recent standards of the Underwriters Laboratories or the
Canadian Standard Association.
DWELLING UNIT: A room or suite of rooms used for human habitation, and includes
a single-family residence as well as each living unit of a multi-family
residence and each living unit in a mixed use building. (Ord. 06-56, 1-2-2007)
8-9-2: CARBON MONOXIDE DETECTOR:
   (A)   Every dwelling unit shall be equipped with at least one approved
carbon monoxide alarm in an operating condition within fifteen feet (15') of
every room used for sleeping purposes. The carbon monoxide alarm may be
combined with smoke detecting devices provided that the combined unit is an
approved carbon monoxide alarm and provided that the combined unit emits a
warning in a manner that clearly differentiates the hazard.
   (B)   Every structure that contains more than one dwelling unit shall
contain at least one approved carbon monoxide alarm in operating condition
within fifteen feet (15') of every room used for sleeping purposes.
   (C)   It is the responsibility of the owner of a structure to supply and
install all required carbon monoxide alarms. It is the responsibility of a
tenant to test and to provide general maintenance for the carbon monoxide
alarms within the tenant's dwelling unit or rooming unit, and to notify the
owner or the authorized agent of the owner in writing of any deficiencies that
the tenant cannot correct. The owner is responsible for providing one tenant
per dwelling unit with written information regarding carbon monoxide alarm
testing and maintenance.
   (D)   The tenant is responsible for replacement of any required batteries in
the carbon monoxide alarms in the tenant's dwelling unit, except that the owner
shall ensure that the batteries are in operating condition at the time the
tenant takes possession of the dwelling unit. The tenant shall provide the
owner or the authorized agent of the owner with access to the dwelling unit to
correct any deficiencies in the carbon monoxide alarm that have been reported
in writing to the owner or the authorized agent of the owner.
   (E)   The carbon monoxide alarms required under this chapter may be either
battery powered, plug in with battery backup, or wired into the structure's AC
power line with secondary battery backup. (Ord. 06-56, 1-2-2007)
8-9-3: PROHIBITIONS:
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to fail to install or maintain a
carbon monoxide alarm as required by this chapter.
   (B)   It shall be unlawful for any person to tamper with, remove, destroy or
disconnect any installed carbon monoxide alarm.
   (C)   It shall be unlawful for any person to remove batteries from an
installed carbon monoxide alarm except for the purpose of contemporaneously
replacing such batteries. (Ord. 06-56, 1-2-2007)
8-9-4: EXEMPTIONS:
The following residential units shall not require carbon monoxide detectors:
   (A)   A residential unit in a building that: 1) does not rely on combustion
of fossil fuel for heat, ventilation, or hot water; 2) is not connected in any
way to a garage; and 3) is not sufficiently close to any ventilated source of
carbon monoxide, as determined by the building commissioner, to receive carbon
monoxide from that source.
   (B)   A residential unit that is not sufficiently close to any source of
carbon monoxide so as to be at risk of receiving carbon monoxide from that
source, as determined by the building commissioner. (Ord. 06-56, 1-2-2007)
CHAPTER 10
ADMINISTRATIVE ADJUDICATION OF BUILDING CODE VIOLATIONS
SECTION:
8-10-1: Code Hearing Unit Established
8-10-2: Hearing Officer; Appointment
8-10-3: Hearing Officer; Duties And Powers
8-10-4: Institution Of Administrative Proceedings
8-10-5: Representation
8-10-6: Default
8-10-7: Adjudication By Mail
8-10-8: Continuances
8-10-9: Rules And Regulations
8-10-10: Subpoenas
8-10-11: Defenses
8-10-12: Findings, Decision, And Order
8-10-13: Review Under Administrative Review Law
8-10-14: Judgment On Findings, Decision, And Order
8-10-15: Sanctions Applicable To Owner And Property
8-10-1: CODE HEARING UNIT ESTABLISHED:
There is hereby created a code hearing unit which shall be known as the
"village of Manteno building code hearing unit". The village of Manteno
building code hearing unit is established to provide a fair and efficient
method of enforcing any municipal law, housing or building code or zoning
ordinance that establishes construction or other health and safety standards of
the village of Manteno or any ordinance that requires, after notice, the
cutting of weeds, the removal of garbage and debris, the removal of inoperable
motor vehicles, or the abatement of nuisances from private property
(collectively "building code"). The village of Manteno reserves the right to
employ all other means and methods available under the law to enforce its
building code, including direct application to the courts. (Ord. 13-05, 5-6-
2013)
8-10-2: HEARING OFFICER; APPOINTMENT:
The hearing officer appointed to preside over the administrative adjudication
of ordinance violations pursuant to title 1, chapter 17, "Administrative
Adjudication", of this code for the village of Manteno shall be the hearing
officer and shall preside over the adjudication of building code violations
under this chapter. (Ord. 13-05, 5-6-2013)
8-10-3: HEARING OFFICER; DUTIES AND POWERS:
A hearing officer shall have the following duties and powers under this
chapter:
   (A)   All duties set forth by state statute including:
      1.   Preside at an administrative hearing called to determine whether or
not a building code violation exists;
      2.   Hear testimony and accept evidence from all interested parties
relevant to the existence of a building code violation;
      3.   Preserve and authenticate the transcript and record of the hearing
and all exhibits and evidence introduced at the hearing;
      4.   Issue and sign a written finding, decision, and order stating
whether a building code violation exists; and
      5.   Imposing penalties consistent with applicable code provisions.
   (B)   Hold preliminary conferences for the settlement or simplification of
issues.
   (C)   Administer oaths and affirmations.
   (D)   Rule upon motions, objections, and the admissibility of evidence.
   (E)   Issue subpoenas for the attendance of witnesses or the production of
documents or other tangible items.
   (F)   Exercise all powers and duties necessary and proper to the
administration of fair and impartial hearing under this chapter. (Ord. 13-05,
5-6-2013)
8-10-4: INSTITUTION OF ADMINISTRATIVE PROCEEDINGS:
The following shall govern the commencement of administrative adjudication
proceedings under this chapter:
   (A)   When the director of building and zoning or other individual
authorized to issue a building code violation finds a building code violation
to exist, he or she shall note the violation on a multiple copy violation
notice and report form that indicates: 1) the name and address of the owner of
the property; 2) the type and nature of the violation; 3) the date and time the
violation was observed; 4) the names of witnesses to the violation; and 5) the
address of the property where the violation is observed.
   (B)   The violation report form shall be forwarded to the village of Manteno
building code hearing unit where a docket number shall be stamped on all copies
of the report and a hearing date shall be noted in the blank spaces provided
for that purpose on the form. The hearing date shall not be less than thirty
(30) nor more than forty (40) days after the violation is reported.
   (C)   One copy of the violation report shall be maintained in the files of
the village of Manteno building code hearing unit and shall become a part of
the record. One copy of the report shall be returned to the individual
representing the municipality so that he/she may prepare evidence of the code
violation for presentation at the hearing. Finally, one copy of the report form
shall be served by first class mail to the owner of the structure, along with a
summons commanding the owner to appear at the hearing. If the name of the owner
of the structure cannot be ascertained or if service on the owner cannot be
made by mail, service may be made on the owner by posting or nailing a copy of
the violation report form on the front door of the structure where the
violation is found, not less than twenty (20) days before the hearing is
scheduled. (Ord. 13-05, 5-6-2013)
8-10-5: REPRESENTATION:
The village's case may be presented by an attorney or by any other municipal
employee that is not an employee of the village of Manteno building code
hearing unit. The case for the owner may be presented by the owner, his/her
attorney, or any other agent or representative of the owner. (Ord. 13-05, 5-6-
2013)
8-10-6: DEFAULT:
In the event an owner or his/her attorney fails to appear at a hearing, the
hearing officer shall find the owner in default and proceed with the hearing
and accept evidence relevant to the existence of a building code violation.
(Ord. 13-05, 5-6-2013)
8-10-7: ADJUDICATION BY MAIL:
An owner may elect to contest a violation without personally appearing at the
hearing. To do so, the owner must send a letter to the village of Manteno
building code hearing unit identifying his/her case, the date of the hearing,
his/her desire to proceed in absentia, and a short argument as to why a finding
of nonliability for the building code violation is appropriate. To be
considered, the letter must be received by the village of Manteno building code
hearing unit no later than five (5) days before the hearing date. A notarized
affidavit shall be submitted with the letter setting forth the facts that
support the owner's defense. The owner may also include any other evidence
which he/she believes supports a finding of nonliability. (Ord. 13-05, 5-6-
2013)
8-10-8: CONTINUANCES:
No continuances shall be authorized by the hearing officer unless it is
absolutely necessary to protect the rights of the owner. Lack of preparation
shall not be grounds for a continuance. Any continuance authorized by the
hearing officer shall not exceed twenty five (25) days. (Ord. 13-05, 5-6-2013)
8-10-9: RULES AND REGULATIONS:
Parties shall be provided with an opportunity to present witnesses, evidence
and to cross examine other witnesses. The formal and technical rules of
evidence shall not apply at the hearings authorized by this chapter. Provided,
however, evidence, including hearsay, shall only be admitted if it is of the
type commonly relied upon by reasonably prudent person in the conduct of their
affairs. Any other rules and regulations promulgated for the conduct of
administrative hearings shall be developed by the hearing officer and shall be
published and kept on file in the office of the village clerk where they shall
be available to the public for inspection and copying during normal business
hours. (Ord. 13-05, 5-6-2013)
8-10-10: SUBPOENAS:
The hearing officer may, at the request of either party, issue a subpoena
compelling the appearance of a witness to testify or for the production of
documents or other tangible items. Requests shall be made in writing to the
village of Manteno building code hearing unit. No subpoena issued pursuant to
this chapter shall be valid unless signed by the hearing officer. No subpoena
shall be issued by a hearing officer unless it is relevant to the contested
issues in the case. All subpoenas issued shall identify: a) the person or
entity to which it is directed; b) the documents or other items to be produced;
c) the person that is to appear; d) the date and time for the witness'
appearance or by which the production is to be made; and e) the location at
which the witness is to appear or at which the production is to be made. No
subpoenas issued under this chapter shall require the appearance of a witness,
or the production of documents or other tangible items, sooner than seven (7)
days after service of the subpoena. (Ord. 13-05, 5-6-2013)
8-10-11: DEFENSES:
It shall be a defense to a building code violation charged under this chapter
if the owner, his attorney, or other agent or representative proves to the
hearing officer's satisfaction that:
   (A)   The building code violation alleged in the notice does not in fact
exist, or at the time of the hearing the building code violation has been
remedied or removed;
   (B)   The building code violation has been caused by the current property
occupants and that in spite of reasonable attempts by the owner to maintain the
dwelling free of such building code violations, the current occupants continue
to cause the building code violations; or
   (C)   An occupant or resident of the dwelling has refused entry to the owner
or his agent to all or a part of the dwelling for the purpose of correcting the
building code violation. (Ord. 13-05, 5-6-2013)
8-10-12: FINDINGS, DECISION, AND ORDER:
At the conclusion of the hearing, the hearing officer shall make a
determination based on the evidence presented at the hearing as to whether or
not a building code violation exists. The determination shall be in writing and
shall be designated as findings, decision, and order. The findings, decision,
and order shall include: a) the hearing officer's findings of fact; b) a
decision of whether or not a building code violation exists based upon the
findings of fact; c) an order that requires the owner to correct the violation
or dismisses the case if a violation is not proved; and d) a monetary sanction.
A monetary sanction for a violation under this chapter shall not exceed seven
hundred fifty dollars ($750.00). A copy of the findings, decision, and order
shall be served on the owner within five (5) days after it is issued. Service
shall be in the same manner that the report form and summons are served under
section
8-10-4 of this chapter. Monies received by the village as payment for any
monetary sanction may be used for general corporate purposes. (Ord. 13-05, 5-6-
2013)
8-10-13: REVIEW UNDER ADMINISTRATIVE REVIEW LAW:
The findings, decision, and order of the hearing officer shall be subject to
review in the circuit court of Kankakee County. The provisions of the
administrative review law, and the rules adopted pursuant thereto, shall apply
to and govern every action for the judicial review of the findings, decision
and order of a hearing officer under this chapter. (Ord. 13-05, 5-6-2013)
8-10-14: JUDGMENT ON FINDINGS, DECISION, AND ORDER:
The owner shall pay the penalty assessed no later than five (5) business days
after the exhaustion of, or the failure to exhaust, judicial review procedures.
All penalties assessed shall be a debt due and owing the village and may be
collected in accordance with the law. Penalties not paid in a timely manner
shall accrue interest in the amount of five percent (5%) per annum. After
expiration of the period within which judicial review under the administrative
review law may be sought for a final determination of the building code
violation, the village may commence a proceeding in the circuit court of
Kankakee County for the purposes of obtaining a judgment on the findings,
decision, and order. (Ord. 13-05, 5-6-2013)
8-10-15: SANCTIONS APPLICABLE TO OWNER AND PROPERTY:
The order to correct a building code violation and the sanctions imposed by the
village as a result of a finding of a building code violation under this
chapter shall attach to the property as well as to the owner of the property,
so that a finding of a building code violation against one owner cannot be
avoided by conveying or transferring the property to another owner. Any
subsequent transferee or owner of property takes title subject to the findings,
decision and order of the hearing officer under this chapter. (Ord. 13-05, 5-6-
2013)
TITLE 9
ZONING
CHAPTER 1
PURPOSE AND INTERPRETATION
SECTION:
9-1-1: Title
9-1-2: Purpose
9-1-3: Authority
9-1-4: Interpretation
9-1-5: Separability
9-1-6: Scope Of Regulations
9-1-1: TITLE:
This title is a comprehensive amendment to the 1968 Manteno zoning ordinance
and its subsequent amendments, and shall be known and may be cited as the
MANTENO ZONING ORDINANCE. (Ord. 99-06, 6-21-1999)
9-1-2: PURPOSE:
This title is adopted pursuant to 65 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/11-13-1,
1996, for the following purposes:
   (A)   Promote the public health, safety, morals, comfort and general welfare
of the present and future inhabitants of the village by:
      1.   Requiring provisions for adherence to land use patterns deemed to
provide for development in the best interest of the entire village as
indicated, explained and substantiated in the official plans of the village and
requiring a division into zones or areas for such adherence.
      2.   Protecting ground water supplies by controlling inappropriate land
uses where soils and geological characteristics present the possibility of
diminishing supplies or contamination by pollutants.
      3.   Requiring provisions of adequate open space for sunlight, clean air,
privacy, noise abatement, recreation, convenience of access to property,
pedestrian circulation, and safe sight distances for operation of motor
vehicles.
      4.   Requiring provisions to prevent undue concentration of population
and structures within each zoning area.
      5.   Requiring provisions for adequate public services, facilities and
utilities such as transportation ways, water supply, sewage disposal, schools,
police and fire protection, open spaces and parks.
      6.   Requiring provisions for adequate control, operation and maintenance
of essential facilities necessary for public use.
      7.   Promoting use of land (under a time frame) consistent with the
ability of the village to furnish adequate public services and requirements.
      8.   Providing for the opportunity to create a variety of housing
opportunities and lifestyles, employment, industrial and commercial
enterprises.
      9.   Eliminating nonconforming uses of land, buildings and structures
which adversely affect the zoned area.
      10.   Prohibiting the intrusion of incompatible uses into residential,
commercial, industrial, agricultural, recreational and other necessary natural
and manmade areas.
   (B)   Conserve and enhance the character, stability and values of property
throughout the village by:
      1.   Requiring provisions for coordinated and harmonious land uses.
      2.   Requiring provisions for promoting adherence to land use patterns
deemed to provide for development in the best interest of the entire village.
      3.   Requiring adherence to building structure standards, which also
includes design, site plan, signage, lighting and landscape review.
      4.   Requiring provisions to regulate the use of land and buildings in
order to establish and conserve neighborhoods, while preventing blights and
slums.
      5.   Encouraging the preservation of areas of historical and
architectural significance.
      6.   Encouraging the aesthetic use of land and buildings.
   (C)   Lessen or avoid congestion in the public streets and highways of the
village by:
      1.   Requiring provisions for safe and adequate circulation of motor
vehicles, bicyclists and pedestrians, including adequate open space for safe
line of sight distances.
      2.   Requiring provisions for orderly and functional management of land
development and use.
      3.   Requiring the off street parking of motor vehicles and loading and
unloading of commercial vehicles.
   (D)   Lessen or avoid the perils to persons and damage to property resulting
from natural or manmade hazards in each zoning area by:
      1.   Requiring provisions for controlling development within floodplains
or areas historically known to flood.
      2.   Requiring provisions for storm or floodwater runoff through
drainage, curbing, detention, retention and sediment and erosion control.
      3.   Requiring provisions to isolate or control the location of
unavoidable nuisance producing uses such as fire, explosion, noxious fumes and
noise.
The standards and requirements contained in this title, and the district
mapping reflected on the Manteno zoning district map, are intended to implement
the objectives of the comprehensive plan for the village of Manteno. (Ord. 99-
06, 6-21-1999)
9-1-3: AUTHORITY:
In order to ensure that the above purposes are realized, the village has,
pursuant to the state of Illinois Compiled Statutes, the power to:
   (A)   Regulate and restrict the location and use of buildings, structures
and land.
   (B)   Regulate and restrict the intensity of use.
   (C)   Establish building or setback lines on or along any street, traffic
way, drive, parkway or storm or floodwater runoff channel or basin.
   (D)   Divide the entire village into zoning districts of such numbers,
shapes, areas and such different classes, according to the use of land and
building, the intensity of use (including the height of buildings and
structures and surrounding open space) and other classification as may be
deemed best suited to carry out the purpose.
   (E)   Prohibit uses, buildings or structures incompatible with the character
of such districts.
   (F)   Prevent additions to and alterations or remodeling of existing
buildings or structures which would result in avoiding the restrictions and
limitations lawfully imposed. (Ord. 99-06, 6-21-1999)
9-1-4: INTERPRETATION:
   (A)   Minimum Requirements: In their interpretation and application, the
provisions of this title shall be held to be the minimum requirements for the
promotion and protection of the public health, safety, morals and welfare.
   (B)   Conflicting Laws: Where the conditions imposed by any provisions of
the title upon the: 1) use of land or building; 2) bulk of buildings; 3) floor
area requirements; 4) lot area requirements; 5) yard requirements; 6) other
requirements, are either more restrictive or less restrictive than comparable
conditions imposed by other provisions of this title, or of any other law,
ordinance, resolution, rule or regulation of any kind, the regulations which
are more restrictive or which impose higher standards or requirements shall
govern.
   (C)   Existing Agreements: This title is not intended to abrogate any
easement, covenant or other private agreement; provided that where the
regulations of this title are more restrictive or impose higher standards or
requirements than such easements, covenants or other private agreements, the
requirements of this title shall govern.
   (D)   Existing Violations: No building, structure or use, not lawfully
existing at the time of the adoption of this title, shall become or be made
lawful solely by reason of the adoption of this title, and to the extent that,
and in any manner that, said unlawful building, structure or use is in conflict
with the requirements of this title, said building, structure or use remains
unlawful hereunder. (Ord. 99-06, 6-21-1999)
9-1-5: SEPARABILITY:
It is hereby to be the intention of the village president and board of trustees
that the several provisions of this title are separable, in accordance with the
following:
   (A)   Provisions Of Title: If any court of competent jurisdiction shall
adjudge provisions of this title to be invalid, such judgment shall not affect
any other provision of this title not specifically included in said judgment.
   (B)   Property Application: If any court of competent jurisdiction shall
adjudge invalid the application of any provisions of this title to a particular
property, building or other structure, such adjustment shall not affect the
application of said provision to any other property, building or structure not
specifically included in said judgment. (Ord. 99-06, 6-21-1999)
9-1-6: SCOPE OF REGULATIONS:
It is hereby declared that the provisions of this title shall apply to all
properties as hereinafter specifically provided:
   (A)   New Uses: No building or structure or part thereof shall hereafter be
erected, constructed, reconstructed, enlarged, moved or structurally altered,
and no building, structure or land shall hereafter be used, occupied or
arranged or designed for use or occupancy, nor shall any excavating or grading
be commenced in connection with any of the above matters, except as permitted
by the regulations herein which are applicable to the zoning district in which
such building, structure or land is located.
   (B)   Existing Uses: Except as otherwise provided, all structural
alterations or relocations of existing building occurring hereafter, and all
enlargements of or additions to existing uses occurring hereafter, shall be
subject to all regulations herein which are applicable to the zoning district
in which such buildings, uses or land shall be located.
   (C)   Existing Special Uses: Where a structure and use thereof of land
lawfully exists on the effective date of this title, and is classified by this
title as a special use in the district where it is located, such use for that
particular structure shall continue to be considered a lawful special use. A
special use permit issued in accordance with procedures herein set forth shall
be required only for any expansion or major alteration of such existing legal
special use. If the special use ceases for a period of more than six (6)
months, the special use permit shall be void and the special use may not again
be started.
   (D)   Nonconforming Uses: Any lawful building, structure or use existing at
the time of enactment of these zoning provisions may be continued, even though
such building, structure or use does not conform to the provisions herein for
the district in which it is located, and whenever a district shall be changed
hereafter, then the existing lawful use may be continued, subject to the
provisions of chapter 11 of this title. Any nonconforming uses at the time of
the adoption of this title which are identified herein as specific uses that
must be brought into compliance will not be allowed to continue past the time
frame specified for compliance. (Ord. 99-06, 6-21-1999)
   (E)   Individual Lots Of Record: An individual lot of record in existence at
the time of the adoption of this title which can fulfill at least eighty
percent (80%) of the required lot area and at least eighty percent (80%) of the
required lot width, may be developed for a use permitted within the zoning
district in which the lot is located, provided that it can be developed in full
compliance with the yard and setback requirements of this title. Otherwise, an
individual lot of record in existence at the time of the adoption of this
title, which is unable to meet the requirements of this title as to lot
coverage, lot area, lot width and yard requirements can be developed only after
a variance is granted by the planning commission. (Ord. 99-06, 6-21-1999; amd.
Ord. 05-01, 5-16-2005)
   (F)   Contiguous Parcels: Except as provided in chapter 11 of this title,
when two (2) or more parcels of land, each of which lacks adequate area and
dimension to qualify for a permitted use under the requirements of the district
in which they are located, are contiguous and are held in one ownership, at the
time or subsequent to the adoption of this title or amendment, they shall be
used as one zoning lot for such use, unless said parcels meet at least eighty
percent (80%) of the required lot width and lot area as described in this
title, in which case, the parcels may be developed pursuant to the requirements
of subsection (E) of this section.
   (G)   Special Permits: Where the code enforcement officer has issued a
special use permit, a temporary use permit, or a permit for a variance pursuant
to the provisions of this title, such permit shall become null and void unless
work thereon is substantially under way within six (6) months of the date of
the issuance of such permit by the code enforcement officer.
   (H)   Access: No land shall be used for public motor vehicle access to any
other lot or land unless that portion of the land has been officially approved
as a street, public or private, by the proper authorities. (Ord. 99-06, 6-21-
1999)
CHAPTER 2
RULES AND DEFINITIONS
SECTION:
9-2-1: General
9-2-2: Rules Of Word Construction
9-2-3: Definitions
9-2-1: GENERAL:
The rules and definitions contained in this chapter shall be observed and
applied in the interpretation of all other sections herein, except when the
context clearly indicates otherwise. (Ord. 99-06, 6-21-1999)
9-2-2: RULES OF WORD CONSTRUCTION:
   (A)   Words used in the present tense shall include the future; words used
in the singular number shall include the plural number and the plural the
singular.
   (B)   The word "shall" is mandatory and not discretionary.
   (C)   The word "may" is permissive.
   (D)   The word "lot" shall include the words "plot", "parcel", the word
"building" includes all other structures or improvements of every kind,
regardless of similarity to buildings; and the phrase "used for" shall include
the phrases "arranged for", "designed for", "intended for", "maintained for",
and "occupied for".
   (E)   The word "person" includes firm, association, organization,
partnership, trust, company, or corporation as well as an individual.
   (F)   The masculine gender includes feminine and neuter. (Ord. 99-06, 6-21-
1999)
9-2-3: DEFINITIONS:
The following words and terms, when used in this title, shall have the meanings
set forth, except where otherwise specifically indicated. Words and terms not
defined shall have the meanings indicated by the common dictionary definition.
ABATEMENT: Any action taken to reduce, relieve, or suppress another continuing
action.
ABUTTING: To have a common property line or district line.
ACCEPT: To acknowledge receipt of information presented to a commission. Here
the information is merely taken as given; it is neither verified nor validated.
ACCESS: Freedom of approach, action, or communication.
ACCESSORY BUILDING: Any covered structure that fits the definition of
"accessory use", including, but not limited to, garages, carports, sheds,
workshops, storage buildings, guesthouses, pool houses, gazebos and pergolas.
ACCESSORY STRUCTURE: Anything constructed or erected, or any piece of work
artificially built up or composed of parts joined together in some definite
manner that fits the definition of "accessory use", including, but not limited
to, buildings, pools, decks, patios, sidewalks, driveways and hard surface
athletic courts.
ACCESSORY USE: One which:
   (A)   In the case of a building, is a detached structure; and
   (B)   Is subordinate to and serves a principal building or principal use;
and
   (C)   Is subordinate in area, extent, or purpose to the principal building
or principal use served; and
   (D)   Contributes to the comfort, convenience, or necessity of occupants of
the principal building or principal use served; and
   (E)   Is located on the same zoning lot as the principal building or
potential use served with the single exception of such accessory off street
parking facilities as are permitted to locate elsewhere than on the same zoning
lot with the building or use served.
ACREAGE, GROSS: The overall total area of real property.
ACREAGE, NET: The remaining area after all deductions are made, with deductions
including streets, easements for access, detention facilities, street
dedications and similar areas.
ADJACENT: Lying near or in the immediate vicinity.
ADJOINING: Touching or contiguous, as distinguished from lying near.
ADULT ENTERTAINMENT/ADULT ORIENTED: See section
9-3-10 of this title.
AESTHETIC: Pertaining to the impression, perception or effect created by form,
symmetry, decoration or other aspects of physical sensibility. In relation to
structures, buildings, sites or developments: the tasteful application of the
principles of beauty and harmony, especially with sensitive regard to the
character of the area or neighborhood.
AGRICULTURE: Land including necessary buildings and structures, for the raising
of soil crops or the raising of domestic animals as the principal occupation of
the residents or users thereof. It shall also include truck farming,
beekeeping, the raising of fruit and berries, and selling the products thereof,
but shall not include mechanized industrial animal farms. Agriculture shall not
include the commercial feeding of garbage to swine or other animals.
AIR RIGHTS: The rights to the space above a property, granted through common
law and extending an unlimited distance vertically above the ground.
AIRPORT: An area of land or water which is used or intended for use for the
landing and taking off of aircraft, and any appurtenant areas which are used or
intended for use for airport buildings or other airport facilities or rights of
way, including all necessary taxiways, aircraft storage and tie down areas,
hangars and other necessary buildings and open spaces.
ALLEY: A public or private way, at the rear or side of property, permanently
reserved as a means of secondary vehicular access to abutting property.
ALTERATION: Any change, addition or modification in size, shape, character,
occupancy, or use of a building or structure.
AMEND: To improve; to change for the better by removing defects, faults, or
inappropriate or inoperable provisions.
AMUSEMENT CENTER: An establishment offering five (5) or more amusement devices,
including, but not limited to, coin operated electronic games, shooting
gallery, table games and similar recreational diversions within an enclosed
building.
ANIMAL HOSPITAL: A structure or portion thereof designed or used for the indoor
care, observation, or treatment of domestic animals by a registered
veterinarian.
ANNEX: To absorb by legal incorporation; to bring previously unincorporated
land into municipal incorporation.
ANTENNA STRUCTURE: Mast, pole, tripod or tower utilized for the purposes of
either transmission or reception purposes or both.
APARTMENT: One or more rooms in an apartment building, or combination apartment
and commercial building, arranged, intended or designed or occupied as a
dwelling unit of a single-family, an individual, or a group of individuals.
APARTMENT BUILDING: A multi-family dwelling originally constructed to
accommodate three (3) or more apartments, designed with more than one dwelling
unit connected to a common corridor or entranceway.
APPAREL STORES: Stores selling new clothing for men, women or children at
retail.
APPLIANCE SALES: The sale of common household appliances such as washing
machines, television sets, power tools, radios and refrigerators, and repair of
the same types of appliances as are sold on the premises when such repairs are
incidental or accessory to their sale.
APPOINT: To designate or to assign authority for a particular function,
position or office. Appointment is wholly separate from election.
ATTACHED DWELLING: See definition of Dwelling, Attached.
AUTHORIZE: To empower; to give right or authority to act. It can mean to permit
(where discretion remains with the authorized agent) or to command (where the
authorized agent is mandated to perform specified actions).
AUTOMOBILE ACCESSORY STORE: Store engaged primarily in the business of selling
tires, batteries, seat covers, and other automobile accessories.
AUTOMOBILE REPAIR, MAJOR: Complete repair, overhaul, and rebuilding of
automobile motors and bodies, including overall painting.
AUTOMOBILE REPAIR, MINOR: Incidental repairs, replacement of parts, and motor
service to automobiles, but excluding any operation specified under "automobile
repair, major".
AUTOMOBILE SALES: The sale of new and used automobiles and other motor vehicles
in operating condition; the storage of automobiles and other motor vehicles in
operating condition and the repair and servicing of such vehicles, including
bodywork, painting, motor rebuilding, where conducted within a completely
enclosed building, but not including storage of trucks of more than five (5)
tons in weight or buses.
AUTOMOBILE SERVICE STATION: That portion of property where flammable or
combustible liquids or gases used as fuel are stored only in underground tanks
and located wholly within the lot lines, and dispersed from fixed equipment
into the fuel tanks of motor vehicles.
AUTOMOBILE WASH: A building or portion thereof, containing facilities for
washing more than two (2) automobiles, using production line methods with a
chain conveyor, blower, steam cleaning device, or other mechanical devices; or
providing space, water and equipment for the hand washing of automobiles,
whether by the customer or the operator.
AUTOMOBILE WRECKING: The dismantling of used motor vehicles or trailers, or the
storage, sale or dumping of dismantled or wrecked motor vehicles or their
parts.
AWNING: A rooflike cover, temporary in nature, supported entirely from the
exterior wall of a building for the purpose of shielding a doorway or window
from the elements and, in some cases, overhangs a public way.
BABYSITTING: The occasional, nonregular care or scheduled, regular care of no
more than four (4) children that may or may not be related to the caregiver, in
addition to the caregiver's own children, whether this service is provided for
payment or not. Any service that must meet state specifications and obtain a
childcare license shall be considered a nursery or daycare center and not
babysitting.
BANKS AND FINANCIAL INSTITUTIONS: Commercial banks, savings and loan
associations, brokerage offices and other similar financial institutions, but
not including pawnshops.
BASEMENT: That portion of a building having more than one-half (1/2) of its
height below the average lot grade.
BILLBOARD: See definition of Sign, Advertising.
BLOCK: A tract of land bounded by streets, or by a combination of streets and
public parks, cemeteries, bulkhead lines, or shorelines of waterways, or
corporate lines of the village.
BOUNDARY LINE: A line on the zoning district map designating the edge of a use
district. Such a boundary line may be a boundary line for two (2) use districts
depending on the particular use districts located on each side of said line.
BUFFER STRIP OR ZONE: An area established to protect one type of land use from
the undesirable characteristics of another.
BUILDING: Any covered structure built for the support, shelter or enclosure of
persons, animals, chattels, or movable property of any kind.
BUILDING AREA: The space remaining on a zoning lot after the minimum yard
requirements of this title have been complied with.
BUILDING, CONFORMING: Any building which complies with all the regulations of
this title and of any amendment hereto governing land use in the zoning
district in which such building is located.
BUILDING, DETACHED: A building surrounded by an open space on the same lot.
BUILDING HEIGHT: The vertical distance above the average existing grade
measured to the highest point of the building.
BUILDING LINE: The line established, beyond which a building shall not extend,
but excluding open steps, terraces, cornices and other ornamental features
projecting from the walls of the building or structure.
BUILDING, NONCONFORMING: A building which exists upon the effective date of
adoption or amendment of this title and which does not comply with the
conditions, area requirements, lot width requirements, yard requirements,
height limitations, bulk regulations or off street parking and loading
requirements of the zoning district in which said building is located by reason
of the adoption or amendment of this title.
BUILDING, PRINCIPAL: A nonaccessory building in which a principal use of the
lot, on which it is located, is conducted.
BUILDING SETBACK LINE: The line parallel to the street identifying the minimum
distance between a street right of way or property line and the nearest
building foundation of any structure on the lot.
BUILDING, TEMPORARY: A building used temporarily for the storage of
construction materials and equipment incidental and necessary to on site
permitted construction of utilities, or other community facilities, or used
temporarily in conjunction with the sale of property within a subdivision under
construction.
BULK: The term to indicate the size and setbacks of buildings or structures and
location of same with respect to one another and including the following:
   (A)   Size and height of buildings.
   (B)   Location of exterior walls at all levels in relation to lot lines,
streets or to other buildings.
   (C)   Gross floor area of buildings in relation to lot lines, streets, or to
other buildings.
   (D)   All open spaces allocated to buildings.
   (E)   Amount of lot area per dwelling unit.
BULK REGULATIONS: The combination of controls establishing the maximum size of
a building and its location on the lot.
BULK STORAGE PLANT: Any place where flammable liquids of ten thousand (10,000)
gallons or more are received by tanker, pipeline, tank car or truck and are
stored or blended in bulk for the purpose of distributing such liquids by tank
trucks, pipeline, tank car or other container.
BUSINESS: The word "business" or the word "commerce" when used in this title
means the engaging in the purchase, sale, barter, or exchange of goods, wares,
or merchandise, or maintenance or operation of offices or recreational or
amusement enterprises.
BUSINESS DISTRICT: Any zoning district designated with a C classification.
BUSINESS OR PROFESSIONAL OFFICES: The office of an engineer, doctor, dentist,
attorney, real estate broker, insurance broker, architect, or other similar
professional person, and any office used primarily for accounting,
correspondence, research, editing or administration.
CANOPY: A roofed structure constructed of fabric or other material supported by
the building or by support extending to the ground directly under the canopy
placed so as to extend outward from the building providing a protective shield
for doors, windows and other openings.
CAPACITY IN PERSONS: The maximum number of persons that can avail themselves of
the services (or goods) of an establishment, at any one time, with reasonable
comfort and safety.
CARPORT: A roofed structure open on at least two (2) sides and used for the
storage of private or pleasure type vehicles.
CERTIFICATE OF COMPLIANCE (OCCUPANCY): A certificate issued by the code
enforcement officer to indicate that the building, structure or improvement has
been erected, structurally altered or completed in accordance with the approved
plans on the basis of which the building permit was issued.
CERTIFY OR CERTIFICATION: The specific inspection or tests where required have
been performed and that such tests or inspections verify compliance with the
applicable requirements of this title signed under oath and notarized.
CHANNEL: A depression formed in the topography of the earth's surface to carry
storm water runoff through a specific area.
CIRCUMSTANCES: The factual content of a situation, including both physical and
social aspects and sometimes possible, probable, and anticipated future
circumstances.
CLINIC, MEDICAL OR DENTAL: A building, structure or portion thereof in which
patients who are not lodged overnight are admitted for examination and
treatment by one or more medical or dental practitioners.
CLUB: A nonprofit corporation or association of persons for the promotion of
some common purpose, including, but not limited to, literature, science,
politics and good fellowship.
CODE ENFORCEMENT OFFICER: As referred to in this code shall be the director of
building and zoning as established in title 1, chapter 22 of this code.
COMMERCIAL, HEAVY: An establishment or business which generally uses open sales
yards, outside equipment storage, or outside activities that generate noise or
other impacts considered incompatible with less intense uses. Typical
businesses in this definition are lumberyards, construction specialty services,
heavy equipment suppliers or building contractors.
COMMERCIAL, LIGHT: An establishment or business which generally has retail or
wholesale sales, office uses or services that do not generate noise, or other
impacts considered incompatible with less intense uses. Typical businesses in
this definition are retail stores, offices, catering services or restaurants.
COMMERCIAL RETAIL SALES AND SERVICES: Establishments which engage in the sale
of general retail goods and accessory services. Businesses within this
definition include those which conduct sales and storage entirely within an
enclosed structure (with the exception of occasional outdoor "sidewalk"
promotions); businesses specializing in sale of either general merchandise or
convenience goods.
COMMERCIAL SHOPPING CENTER: A group of commercial establishments located under
one roof, not having interior access to each individual establishment.
COMMERCIAL SHOPPING MALL: A group of commercial establishments located under
one roof and having interior access to each individual establishment.
COMPLIANCE: An enforceable and effective inducement to secure action in accord
with some legally binding regulation.
COMPREHENSIVE PLAN: The extensively developed and evolving declaration of
purposes, policies and programs for the development of the village.
COMPREHENSIVE ZONING: A zoning ordinance and map, dealing with all aspects of
the community development, based on sound comprehensive studies and
investigations and supporting a master plan for the municipality.
CONDITIONAL USE: A use which would become harmonious or compatible with
neighboring uses through the application and maintenance of qualifying
conditions.
CONDOMINIUM: A single dwelling unit in a multiunit dwelling or structure, which
is separately owned and which may be combined with an undivided interest in the
common areas and facilities of the property.
CONGREGATE RESIDENCE: Any building or portion thereof which contains facilities
for living, sleeping and sanitation as required by this code, and may include
facilities for eating and cooking for occupancy by other than a family. A
congregate residence shall be permitted to be a shelter, convent, monastery,
dormitory, fraternity or sorority house, but does not include jails, hospitals,
nursing homes, hotels or lodging houses.
CONTIGUOUS: In contact, adjoining, or touching another object or item as
distinguished from being adjacent.
CONVALESCENT CENTER: A facility which is publicly or privately operated and
intended for long term patient care due to human illness or infirmity,
including the elderly and developmentally disabled, normally employing the
services of skilled and licensed practitioners, excluding hospitals.
CORNER LOT: See definition of Lot, Corner.
COUNTRY CLUB: A private recreational facility operated for bona fide members
paying annual dues for the use of a golf course and ancillary uses such as
restaurants (including the sale of alcoholic beverages), residential uses for
guests, managers and other employees, but not including commercially operated
driving ranges or miniature golf courses.
COURT: A space, open and unobstructed to the sky, located at or above grade
level on a lot and bounded on three (3) or more sides by walls of a building.
CROSSWALK: A public right of way located across a block to provide pedestrian
access to adjacent streets or areas.
CURB LEVEL: The level of the established curb in front of the building measured
at the center of such front. Where a building faces on more than one street,
the "curb level" shall be the average of the levels of the curbs at the center
front of each street. Where no curb elevation has been established, the level
of the centerline of the street shall be considered the curb level.
DAMAGE: A loss, deterioration, or reduction of interests of persons, usually
with reference to property.
DAYCARE CENTER: A facility which exclusively provides supplemental parental
care and supervision, recreation and/or educational instruction to children or
adults during the entire or any portion of the day. See definition of Nursery,
Childcare.
DECIBEL: A logarithmic unit of measurement which defines the range of sound
pressure levels (Lp) between the minimum audible value at one thousand (1,000)
cps and the maximum audible value of Lp, at which effects, other than hearing,
begin to appear.
DENSITY: The number of dwelling units which are allowed on an area of land,
which area of land shall be permitted to include dedicated streets contained
within the development.
DETACHED DWELLING: See definition of Dwelling, Detached.
DETENTION: Temporary on site restraining of storm water.
DISTRIBUTION CENTER: See definition of Warehouse, Distribution Center.
DISTRICT: A portion of the village within which certain uniform regulations and
requirements, or various combinations thereof, apply under the provisions of
this title.
DOWN ZONING: A change in the zoning classification of land to a classification
permitting development that is less intensive or dense. A change in the
opposite direction is called "up zoning".
DRIVEWAY: A private access road, the use of which is limited to persons
residing, employed, or otherwise using or visiting the parcel in which it is
located.
DWELLING, ATTACHED: A residential building which is joined to another dwelling
at one or more sides by a party wall or walls.
DWELLING, DETACHED: A residential building which is entirely surrounded by open
space on the same lot.
DWELLING, DUPLEX: A single owner building designed or arranged to be occupied
by two (2) families living independently, the structure having only two (2)
dwelling units separated by a vertical party wall without openings.
DWELLING, MULTIPLE-UNIT: A building or portion thereof designed for occupancy
by three (3) or more families living independently in which they may or may not
share common entrances and/or other spaces. Individual dwelling units may be
owned as condominiums, or offered for rent.
DWELLING, PLANNED GROUP: Two (2) or more detached buildings used as dwelling
units located on a lot that is in single ownership having yards, courts or
facilities in common.
DWELLING, SEMIATTACHED: A residential building which is partly joined to
another at a nonliving space wall.
DWELLING, SINGLE-FAMILY: A detached dwelling unit with kitchen and sleeping
facilities, designed for occupancy by one family.
DWELLING UNIT: Any building or portion thereof which contains living
facilities, including provisions for sleeping, eating, cooking and sanitation,
as required by this code, for not more than one family, or a congregate
residence for six (6) or less persons.
EASEMENT: That portion of land or property reserved for present or future use
by a person or agency other than the legal fee simple owner(s) of the property.
The easement shall be permitted to be for use under, on, or above said lot or
lots.
EDUCATIONAL INSTITUTION: A public, parochial, private or charitable, or
nonprofit school, junior college, or university, other than trade or business
school, including instructional and recreational uses, with or without living
quarters, dining rooms, restaurants, heating plants, and other incidental
facilities for students, teachers, and employees.
ENVIRONMENTAL IMPACT: Any consequences to the physical, economic, cultural,
aesthetic, or social environment that affect the quality of life in general and
the subsequent utility or value of real property.
ESSENTIAL SERVICES: Services provided by public and private utilities necessary
for the exercise of the principal use or service of the principal structure.
These services include underground, surface, or overhead gas, electrical,
steam, water, sanitary sewerage, storm water drainage, and communication
systems and accessories thereto, such as poles, towers, weirs, drains, vaults,
culverts, laterals, sewers, pipes, catch basins, water storage tanks, conduits,
cables, fire alarm boxes, police call boxes, traffic signals, pumps, lift
stations, hydrants, etc., but not including buildings that do not need to be in
the immediate area of the uses they service.
EVASION: Action taken to elude, impair, or defeat effective compliance with a
legally binding regulation.
EXCEPTION: Within the framework of the ordinance, an unusual circumstance is
anticipated and special provisions are set forth in the ordinance text which
state that, when certain things happen, an exception can occur.
FACE: To be situated so as to have the front of a structure or building or any
aspect of a use show toward or be directly visible from a specified direction.
FACT: An event, occurrence, or circumstance that is reported with accuracy.
FAIR: To be and appear free from prejudice, favoritism, and self- interest.
FAMILY: An individual, or two (2) or more persons related by blood, marriage,
or adoption, or a group not to exceed eight (8) unrelated persons living
together as a single household in a dwelling unit.
FARM: The use of land for agricultural purposes, including agriculture,
floriculture, forestry, grazing of dairy animals, greenhouses, hatcheries,
horticulture, nurseries, orchards, paddocks, truck farming, viticulture, and
raising of furbearing animals and poultry.
FARM ANIMALS: Animals other than household pets that shall be permitted to,
where permitted, be kept and maintained for commercial production and sale and/
or family food production, education, or recreation. Farm animals are
identified by these categories: large animals, e.g., horses and cattle; medium
animals, e.g., sheep, goats; or small animals, e.g., rabbits, chinchillas,
chickens, turkeys, pheasants, geese, ducks and pigeons.
FARM HOMESTEAD: The building located on a farm that is the residence of the
farm owner or tenant operator.
FENCE: A freestanding structure of metal, masonry composition, wood or any
combination thereof, resting on or partially buried in the ground and rising
above ground level, and used for confinement, screening, decorative or
partition purposes.
FILL: Any act by which earth, sand, gravel, rock, or any other material is
deposited, placed, replaced, pushed, dumped, pulled, transported, or moved by
man to a new location and shall include the conditions resulting therefrom.
FINDING: A determination of facts; an examination of circumstances beyond
immediate appearances; the relationship between facts that enables a decision.
FLOOD: A general and temporary condition of partial or complete inundation of
normally dry land area from the overflow of inland waters, or from the unusual
and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters from any source. The base
flood is the flood having a one percent (1%) probability of being equaled or
exceeded in any given year. The base flood is also known as the 100-year flood.
FLOOD PROTECTION ELEVATION: The elevation to which uses regulated by this title
are required to be elevated or floodproofed.
FLOOD, REGULATORY: The regulatory flood is a flood which is representative of
large floods known to have occurred generally in the area and reasonable
characteristic of what can be expected to occur on a particular stream. The
regulatory flood generally has an average frequency in the order of the 50-year
reoccurrence interval flood determined from an analysis of floods on a
particular stream and other streams in the same general region.
FLOODPLAIN: Those lands that are subject to inundation by the base flood. The
floodplains are generally identified on the FIRM (flood insurance rate map).
These maps are prepared by FEMA (federal emergency management agency). The
floodplain is also known as the flood fringe and the SFHA (special flood hazard
area).
FLOODPROOFING: A combination of structural provisions, changes or adjustments
to properties and structures subject to flooding primarily for the reduction or
elimination of flood damages to properties, water and sanitary facilities,
structures, and contents of buildings in a flood hazard area.
FLOODWAY: That portion of the floodplain, or SFHA, required to store and convey
the base flood. The floodway for rivers and creeks are delineated on the FBFM
(federal base flood map), prepared by FEMA. For those floodways not delineated
by the FBFM, the jurisdiction shall use the best available data from federal,
state, and/or other sources.
FLOOR AREA (For Determining Floor Area Ratio, FAR): The sum of the gross
horizontal areas of the several floors of the building measured from the
exterior faces of the exterior walls or from the centerline of walls separating
two (2) buildings. The "floor area of a building" shall include the basement
floor area when more than one-half (1/2) of the basement height is above the
established curb level, floor space for mechanical equipment, attic space
having headroom of seven feet ten inches (7'10"), enclosed porches, and floor
area devoted to accessory uses.
FLOOR AREA (For Determining Off Street Parking And Loading Requirements): The
gross floor area taken from the outside walls of the building and any basement
floor area devoted to retailing activities, and floor area devoted to the
production or processing of goods or to business or professional offices.
FLOOR AREA RATIO: The floor area ratio of the building or other structure on
any lot is determined by dividing the floor area of such building or structure
by the area of the lot on which the building or structure is located. When more
than one building or structure is located on a lot, then the floor area ratio
is determined by dividing the total floor area of all buildings or structures
by the area of the lot, or, in the case of planned unit development, by the net
site area. The floor area ratio requirements, as set forth under each zoning
district, shall determine the maximum floor area allowable for a building or
other structure (including accessory buildings) in direct ratio to the gross
area of the lot.
FOOD STORES: Stores which sell foods, fresh or frozen, and other items commonly
sold in connection therewith and including, but not limited to, stores commonly
referred to as dairy stores, delicatessens, fruit and vegetable markets,
grocery stores, health food stores, nut shops and supermarkets. Sales must be
made at retail on the premises, but not for consumption on the premises.
FOOT-CANDLE: A unit of illumination. Technically, the illumination at all
points one foot (1') distance from a uniform point source of one candle power.
FREIGHT TERMINAL: See definition of Truck Terminal.
FRONTAGE: The width of a lot or parcel abutting a public right of way measured
at the front property line.
GARAGE, APARTMENT: A building with area restrictions as determined by the
zoning district it exists in, detached from the principal dwelling (which is an
apartment building) and containing parking space for multiple tenants of the
building or buildings on the premises.
GARAGE, PRIVATE: A building or a portion of a building with area restrictions
as determined by the zoning district it exists in, either attached to or
detached from the principal dwelling, in which only private or pleasure type
motor vehicles used by the tenants of the building or buildings on the premises
are stored or kept.
GARAGE, PUBLIC: A building other than a private garage in which automobiles,
but not trucks, tractors, truck trailers or commercial vehicles exceeding one
and one-half (11/2) tons' capacity are parked, stored, or kept whether for a
fee or not.
GRADE (ADJACENT GROUND ELEVATION): The lowest point of elevation of the
existing surface of the ground, within the area between the building and a line
five feet (5') from the building.
GROSS ACRE OR ACRES: Real property containing forty three thousand five hundred
sixty (43,560) square feet or one hundred sixty (160) square rods with streets,
highways, roads, right of way easements.
GROUP CARE FACILITY: A facility, required to be licensed by the state, which
provides training, care, supervision, treatment and/or rehabilitation to the
aged, disabled, those convicted of crimes or those suffering the effects of
drugs or alcohol; this does not include daycare centers, family daycare homes,
foster homes, schools, hospitals, jails or prisons.
GROUP HOME: A dwelling to provide a socially dependent family environment for
developmentally or mentally disabled patients, as specified in the 1988 fair
housing act amendment of the civil rights act of 1968. For purposes of this
title, the definition shall not include "halfway houses", uses for the
recovering chemically dependent, prison work release programs, or any use that
does not house solely the developmentally disabled.
GROUP HOME, LARGE: A group home of nine (9) to fifteen (15) residents including
live in staff.
GROUP HOME, SMALL: A group home of eight (8) or fewer residents including live
in staff.
HARDSHIP: An unusual situation on the part of an individual property owner that
will not permit the full utilization of property that is given to others within
the community. A hardship exists only when it is not self-created or economic
in nature and when the literal interpretation of the requirements of the
ordinance would place an individual in an unusual circumstance that would deny
the right to use property for any purpose, or create an unnecessary burden,
unless relief is granted.
HEIGHT OF BUILDING: See definition of Building, Height.
HELIPORT: An area of land and/or structure or building which is used or
intended for use for the landing and taking off of helicopters and any
appurtenant areas which are used or intended for use for heliport buildings or
other heliport facilities or rights of way, including all necessary pads,
helicopter storage and tie down areas, hangars and other necessary buildings
and open spaces.
HOME OCCUPATION: The partial use of a dwelling unit for commercial or
nonresidential uses by a resident thereof which is subordinate and incidental
to the use of the dwelling for residential purposes. See section
9-3-9 of this title.
HOSPITAL: An institution designed for the diagnosis, treatment and care of
human illness or infirmity and providing health services, primarily for
inpatients, and including as related facilities, laboratories, outpatient
departments, training facilities and staff offices.
HOTEL: A building, structure or portion thereof which is used as a temporary
abiding place, for remuneration, with or without meals, containing five (5) or
more guestrooms or suites and which provides customary hotel services such as
maid service, the furnishing and laundering of linen, telephone and desk
service, the use and upkeep of furniture, and which maintains a hotel register.
HOUSEHOLD PETS: Dogs, cats, rabbits or birds for family use only
(noncommercial) with cages, pens, etc.
INCENTIVE: A provision within a development regulation that grants relief from
specific compliance upon condition that certain features of a proposal are
altered so as to secure some benefit, convenience, or use by the public.
INCOMBUSTIBLE: Refers to materials which do not in themselves constitute an
active fuel for the spread of combustion. A material which will not ignite nor
actively support combustion during an exposure for five (5) minutes at a
temperature of one thousand two hundred degrees Fahrenheit (1,200°F) shall be
designated incombustible.
INCOMPATIBLE USE: A use or service which is incapable of direct association
with certain other uses because it is contradictory, incongruous, or
discordant.
INDUSTRIAL ANIMAL FARM: A mechanized farm operation, confined to a limited
amount of space, to raise animals or poultry under controlled conditions of
food, water, and exercise.
INDUSTRIAL OR RESEARCH PARK: A tract of land developed according to a master
site plan for the use of a family of industries and their related commercial
uses, and that is of sufficient size and physical improvement to protect
surrounding areas and the general community and to assure a harmonious
integration into the neighborhood.
INORGANIC MATERIAL: Material made from substances composed of matter other than
plant, animal, or certain chemical compounds or carbon. Examples are metal and
glass.
INSTITUTION: An established society or corporation whether created for profit
or nonprofit.
INSTITUTION, RELIGIOUS: A building or structure which is occupied by a
religious nonprofit corporation or organization and which is operated for
public or semipublic use including, but not limited to, churches, synagogues,
rectories and convents.
JUNK VEHICLE: An automobile, truck, or other motor vehicle which has been
damaged to such an extent or is in such disrepair that it cannot be operated
under its own power and will require major repairs before being made usable or
such a vehicle which does not comply with state or village laws or ordinances.
JUNKYARD: Any parcel of land where waste, scrap metal, paper, rags, or similar
materials are brought, sold, exchanged, stored, baled, packed, disassembled, or
handled, including auto and building wrecking yards, but excluding similar uses
taking place entirely within a completely enclosed building.
JURISDICTION: As used in this code, jurisdiction is any political subdivision
which adopts this code for administrative regulations within its sphere of
authority.
KENNEL: Any lot or premises on which a combined total of four (4) or more dogs,
cats or other domestic animals or pets over six (6) months of age are kept, for
compensation or not.
KENNEL, COMMERCIAL: Any premises or portion thereof on which a combined total
of four (4) or more dogs, cats or other domestic animals or pets over six (6)
months of age are kept for the purpose of sale, or where any number of animals
are cared for in return for remuneration.
KITCHEN: Any room used, or intended or designed to be used, for cooking or the
preparation of food.
LABORATORY, COMMERCIAL: A use devoted to experimental study such as testing and
analyzing. Manufacturing, assembly, or packaging of products is not included
within this definition.
LABORATORY, MEDICAL: A use established for scientific experimentation, research
or testing in the field of human medicine.
LAKE: Any natural or manmade body of water surrounded by land.
LAND USE: The utilization of any piece of land whether it be lot, plat, tract,
or acreage.
LAND USE DEVELOPMENT MANAGEMENT (GROWTH MANAGEMENT): The use by a community of
a wide range of techniques in combination to permit it to determine its own
amount, type, and rate of growth and to channel it into designated areas.
LANDSCAPING: The finishing and adornment of unpaved yard areas. Materials and
treatment generally include naturally growing elements such as grass, trees,
shrubs and flowers. This treatment shall be permitted also to include the use
of logs, rocks, fountains, water features, walkways, or contouring of the
earth.
LAUNDRY EQUIPMENT, OUTDOOR: Pole and wire or line used to suspend items to
facilitate drying.
LEGAL: Permitted by, conforming to, or required by law, or with respect to
action that is neither forbidden nor restricted by law.
LIQUOR STORE, PACKAGE: Any establishment selling beer, wine or alcoholic liquor
at retail to the general public in sealed bottles or other sealed containers
for consumption or use away from the premises where paid establishment is
located.
LIVESTOCK: Includes, but is not limited to, horses, bovine animals, sheep,
goats, swine, reindeer, donkeys, mules and any other hoofed animals.
LOADING AND UNLOADING SPACE, OFF STREET: An open asphalt or concrete surfaced
area of land, other than a street or public way, the principal use of which is
for the standing, loading, and unloading of motor trucks, tractors, and
trailers, to avoid undue interference with the public use of the streets and
alleys. Such space shall be not less than twelve feet (12') in width, fifty
feet (50') in length, and fourteen feet (14') in height, exclusive of access
aisles and maneuvering space.
LODGE: A hall or meeting place of a local branch or the members composing a
branch of a fraternal order, or society, such as the Masons, Knights of
Columbus, Moose, American Legion and other similar organizations. It shall be
permissible to serve food and meals on such premises, providing adequate dining
room space and kitchen facilities are available. The sale of alcoholic
beverages to members and their guests shall be allowed provided it is secondary
and incidental to the promotion of some other common objective by the
organization, and further provided that such sale of alcoholic beverages is in
compliance with the applicable federal, state and village laws and ordinances.
LOT: A legally divided area or portion of land under single ownership or
control that is intended to be occupied by one use, group of uses, one main
building, or structure.
LOT AREA: The area of a horizontal plane bounded by the front, side, and rear
lot line.
LOT, CORNER: A lot abutting on two (2) intersecting or intercepting streets, or
on a curving street, where the interior angle of intersection or interception
does not exceed one hundred thirty five degrees (135°).
LOT COVERAGE: That percentage of a lot which, when viewed directly from above,
would be covered by a structure or structures, or any part thereof, excluding
projecting of roof areas.
LOT DEPTH: The distance between the midpoint of the front lot line and the
midpoint of the rear lot lines measured within the lot boundaries.
LOT, DOUBLE FRONTAGE: A lot other than a corner lot having frontage on two (2)
or more streets. An alley shall not be considered a street.
LOT, IRREGULAR: A lot whose opposing property lines are generally not parallel,
such as a pie shaped lot on a cul-de-sac, or where the side property lines are
not parallel to each other.
LOT LINE: The property boundary line of a lot.
LOT LINE, FRONT: The front property line of a zoning lot, abutting or within a
street. On a corner lot, the front lot line shall be the lot line as determined
by the code enforcement officer.
LOT LINE, INTERIOR: A lot line common with another lot.
LOT LINE, REAR: The boundary of a lot which is most distant from, and is most
nearly parallel to, the front lot line or front lot lines.
LOT LINE, SIDE: Lot lines other than front or rear lot lines.
LOT OF RECORD: A lot which is a part of a subdivision, the plat of which has
been legally recorded, or land which has a parcel index number within the
village at the time this title is adopted.
LOT, REVERSED CORNER: A corner lot at right angles or approximately right
angles to the general pattern of the area, the street side lot line of which is
substantially a continuation of the front lot line to the rear. The rear of the
corner lot is adjacent to the side of another lot, whether across an alley or
not.
LOT, THROUGH: A lot which has frontage on two (2) nonintersecting streets.
LOT WIDTH: The horizontal distance between side lot lines, or between the side
lot line and the lot line adjoining a street of a corner lot, measured along
the required minimum building setback line created by the front yard
requirement of the district in which the lot is located.
LOT, ZONING: A parcel of land, composed of one or more recorded lots or a
parcel of land described by metes and bounds that is of sufficient size to meet
the minimum requirements of this title concerning use, coverage, width, area,
yards, or other requirements of this title and having frontage on an improved
public street, and which is designated by its owner or developer as a tract of
land to be used, developed, or built upon as a unit, under single ownership and
control. A "zoning lot" may or may not coincide with the definition of a "lot
of record".
MAJOR HIGHWAYS: All roads, streets, avenues, thoroughfares or other types of
vehicular traveled ways designated by a United States or state of Illinois
route number.
MANDATORY: Constituting a command and imposing an obligation for performance.
MANUFACTURED HOUSING: A building assembly or system of building subassemblies,
designed for habitation as a dwelling for one or more persons, including the
necessary electrical, plumbing, heating, ventilating, and other service
systems, which is of closed or open construction and which is made or assembled
by a manufacturer, on or off the building site, with a permanent foundation.
MANUFACTURING, HEAVY: All other types of manufacturing not included in the
definitions of light manufacturing and medium manufacturing.
MANUFACTURING, LIGHT: The manufacturing, compounding, processing, assembling,
packaging or testing of goods or equipment, including research activities,
conducted entirely within an enclosed structure, with no outside storage,
serviced by a modest volume of trucks or vans and imposing a negligible impact
on the surrounding environment by noise, vibration, smoke, dust or pollutants.
MANUFACTURING, MEDIUM: The manufacturing, compounding, processing, assembling,
packaging or testing of goods or equipment within an enclosed structure or an
open yard that is capable of being screened from neighboring properties,
serviced by a modest volume of trucks or other vehicles.
MARQUEE: See definition of Canopy.
MEDICAL CANNABIS CULTIVATION CENTER: A facility operated by an organization or
business that is registered by the Illinois department of agriculture to
perform necessary activities to provide only registered medical cannabis
dispensing organizations with usable medical cannabis per the compassionate use
of medical cannabis pilot program act, enacted by the state of Illinois, as may
be amended from time to time.
MEDICAL CANNABIS DISPENSING ORGANIZATION: A facility operated by an
organization or business that is registered by the department of financial and
professional regulation to acquire medical cannabis from a registered
cultivation center for the purpose of dispensing cannabis, paraphernalia, or
related supplies and educational materials to registered qualifying patients,
per the compassionate use of medical cannabis pilot program act, enacted by the
state of Illinois, as may be amended from time to time.
MEDICAL CANNABIS FACILITIES: Both medical cannabis cultivation centers and
medical cannabis dispensing organizations.
MIXED USE ZONING: Zoning that permits a combination of usually separated uses
within a single development.
MOBILE HOME: A movable or portable unit, which is eight (8) body feet or more
in width and is thirty two feet (32') or more in length, and constructed to be
towed on its own chassis (comprised of frame and wheels) from the place of
construction to the location or subsequent locations, subject to the provisions
of chapter 15 of the Illinois vehicle code, designed to be used without a
permanent foundation and connected to utilities for year round occupancy with
or without a permanent foundation. The term shall include: a) units containing
parts that are folded, collapsed, or telescoped when being towed and that may
be expanded to provide additional cubic capacity, and b) units composed of two
(2) or more separately towable components designed to be joined into one
integral unit capable of being separated again into the components for repeated
towing. The term shall include units designed to be used for residential,
commercial, educational, or industrial purposes, excluding, however,
recreational vehicles.
MOBILE HOME PARK: A parcel or tract of land, at least ten (10) acres, developed
with facilities for locating twenty (20) or more "mobile homes", provided each
mobile home contains a kitchen, flush toilet, shower or bath and that such
mobile home park shall be for use only by nontransient dwellers remaining
continuously for more than one year, whether or not a charge is made. It shall
not include a sales lot in which motor vehicles or unoccupied trailers are
parked for the purpose of inspection or sale.
MODEL HOME: A dwelling temporarily used as a sales office for a residential
development under construction; said home being used for on site sales and not
for general real estate business, and is used as an example of the type of
dwelling unit which may be purchased or rented.
MODULAR HOME: A structure designed for permanent habitation, and is so
constructed as to permit its transport to the location at which it is intended
to remain as a permanent structure, and is so constructed as to be permanently
attached to a permanent foundation at said location.
MOTEL: A series of attached, semiattached or detached guestrooms or suites for
the accommodation primarily of automobile transient guests which does not
include individual cooking or kitchen facilities and which provides the unit
with convenient access to off street parking spaces for the exclusive use of
the guests or occupants of the premises.
MOTOR FREIGHT TERMINAL: See definition of Truck Terminal.
MOTOR HOME, MINI-MOTOR HOME, VAN CAMPER: A self-contained motor vehicle, not
used commercially, designed, or permanently converted to provide living
quarters for recreational, camping or travel use, with direct walk through
access to the living quarters from the driver's seat.
MOTOR VEHICLE: Any passenger vehicle, truck, tractor, tractor trailer, trailer,
or semitrailer propelled or drawn by mechanical power.
NATURAL WATERWAYS: Those areas, varying in width along streams, creeks,
springs, gullies or washes, which are natural drainage channels as determined
and identified by the village engineer.
NONCONFORMING LOT: A legal lot of record whose width, area or other dimension
did not conform to required regulations when this code became effective.
NONCONFORMING SIGN: A sign or sign structure or portion thereof lawfully
existing at the time this code became effective, which does not now conform.
NONCONFORMING STRUCTURE: A building or structure or portion thereof lawfully
existing at the time this code became effective, which was designed, erected or
structurally altered for a use that does not conform to the zoning regulations
of the zone in which it is located.
NONCONFORMING USE: See definition of Use, Nonconforming.
NONCONFORMITIES: Lots, structures, uses of land and structures, and
characteristics of uses, that are prohibited under the terms of the zoning
ordinance but were lawful at the date of the ordinance's enactment.
NOXIOUS MATTER: That which is capable of causing injury to living organisms by
chemical reaction or is capable of causing detrimental effects upon the
physical or economic well being of individuals.
NUISANCE: Any activity arising from unreasonable, unwarranted, or unlawful use
of property that causes substantial and continuing annoyance, inconvenience, or
damage to the property of others or to the public.
NURSERY, CHILDCARE: An establishment for the part time care of five (5) or more
children of preelementary school age in addition to the members of the family
residing therein. See definition of Daycare Center.
NURSERY SCHOOL: An instructional facility for preschool children.
NURSING HOME: An establishment or institution for the care of children or the
aged or infirm, or a place of rest for those suffering bodily disorders, but
not including facilities for surgical care or institutions for the care and
treatment of mental illness, alcoholism, or narcotics addiction.
OBJECTIVE: Associated with the dispassionate examination of circumstances.
Objective deliberation seeks to exclude all emotive factors.
ODOR THRESHOLD: The lowest concentration of odorous matter in air that will
produce an olfactory response in a human being.
ODOROUS MATTER: Any matter or material that yields an odor which is offensive
in any way.
OPACITY: The quality or state of an object that renders it impervious to the
rays of light; the degree of nontransparency.
OPEN SALES LOT: Land used or occupied for the purpose of buying or selling
merchandise stored or displayed out of doors prior to sale. (Such materials
include, but are not limited to, passenger cars, trucks, motor scooters,
motorcycles, boats, agricultural equipment, and monuments.)
OPEN SPACE: Land areas that are not occupied by buildings, structures, parking
areas, streets, alleys or required yards. Open space shall be permitted to be
devoted to landscaping, preservation of natural features, patios, and
recreational areas and facilities.
OWNER: Any individual, firm, or corporation having a possessory interest
entitled to exclusive possession in land, buildings, or possessions.
PARCEL: All contiguous land in one ownership.
PARK: A public or private area of land, with or without buildings, intended for
outdoor active or passive recreational uses.
PARK AND RIDE FACILITIES: Parking lots or structures located along public
transit routes designed to encourage transfer from private automobile to mass
transit or to encourage carpooling for purposes of commuting, or for access to
recreation areas.
PARKING AREA: An open, unoccupied space used or required for use for parking of
automobiles exclusively and in which no gasoline or automobile accessories are
sold or no other business is conducted and no fees are charged.
PARKING LOT, ACCESSORY: An open, hard surfaced area, other than a right of way,
which is accessory to the principal use of the lot and which is intended and
used for the storage of private motor vehicles owned by members of the family
or families residing upon the premises or by the owners, employees or patrons
of the business or industrial uses.
PARKING LOT, PRINCIPAL: An open, hard surfaced area, other than a right of way,
which is the principal use of the parcel of land and which is intended and used
for the storage of motor vehicles pursuant to previous arrangements or to
transients, and where no equipment, parts, fuel, grease or oil is sold and
vehicles are not equipped, serviced, repaired, hired or sold.
PARKING SPACE: An open asphalt or concrete surfaced space within a public or
private parking area meeting requirements under chapter 12 of this title.
PARTICULARS: The circumstances of a specific situation.
PARTICULATE MATTER: Material other than water which is suspended in or
discharged into the atmosphere in a finely divided form as a liquid or solid.
PARTY WALL: A solid, UL approved common wall which is a fire separation wall
and extends from its footing below grade to the underside of floor/roof and
divides the building to create separate dwelling units.
PERFORMANCE STANDARDS: Criteria established to control traffic, noise, odor,
glare, exterior lighting, visual impact, heat, vibration, smoke, particulate
matter, gases, fire and explosion hazards, wastes and so on, generated by or
inherent in uses of buildings, structures or land.
PERMANENT OPEN SPACE: A compact and contiguous land area that is designed for
educational, religious, recreational, or institutional purposes, or such land
which is recommended for such designation by the village at or before the time
of approval of a subdivision or planned development.
PERMISSIVE: Allowable; granting the option to exercise but in no way requiring.
PERMITTED USE: A use which may be lawfully established in a particular district
or districts, provided it conforms with all requirements, regulations, and
performance standards (if any) of such district.
PERMITTEE OR PURCHASER: Any person to whom a permit is issued.
PERSON: A natural person, heirs, executors, administrators or assigns, and
includes a firm, partnership or corporation, its or their successors or
assigns, or the agent of any of the aforesaid, whether public or private.
PETITION: A formal, written request for specific action from a group of
individuals to a governmental body. Each petition should specify the action
sought, give reasons, and clearly identify individual petitioners.
PLANNED DEVELOPMENT: A parcel or tract of land, initially under single
ownership or control to be developed as a unified project and single entity
which contains two (2) or more principal buildings and more than one principal
use, the plan for which does not correspond in lot size, bulk or type of
dwelling, density, lot coverage or required open space to the regulations in
any one district established by this zoning ordinance.
PLANNED DEVELOPMENT GROUP: A group of three (3) or more principal buildings
designed to be maintained and operated as a unit in single ownership or control
and which has certain facilities in common, such as yards and open spaces,
recreation areas, garages and parking areas.
PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT: A residential or commercial development guided by a
total design plan in which one or more of the zoning or subdivision
regulations, other than use regulations, shall be permitted to be waived or
varied to allow flexibility and creativity in site and building design and
location, in accordance with general guidelines 1 .
PLOT PLAN: A plat of a lot, drawn to scale, showing the actual measurements,
the size and location of any existing buildings or buildings to be erected, the
location of the lot in relation to abutting streets, and other such
information.
POLICY: An imperative or prescriptive principle that directs future action.
PORCH: A roofed over structure projecting out from the wall or walls of a main
structure and commonly open to the weather in part.
PRECEDENT: A guide to decision making that rests upon the recurrence of
applications relevantly similar in circumstances or in legal principles.
PREMISES: A parcel of land and all buildings and structures thereon.
PRINCIPAL STRUCTURE: A structure in which a principal use of the lot on which
the structure is located is conducted.
PRINCIPAL USE: The main use of land or structures as distinguished from a
subordinate or accessory use.
PROCEDURE: A rule governing the sequence of an activity.
PROFESSIONAL OFFICE: The office of an accountant, architect, chiropodist,
chiropractor, dentist, lawyer, minister, optometrist, osteopath, physician,
registered professional engineer, or member of another similar profession.
PUBLIC IMPROVEMENT: Any drainage ditch, storm sewer or drainage facility,
sanitary sewer, water main, roadway, parkway, sidewalk, pedestrianway, tree,
lawn, off street parking area, lot improvement or other facility for which the
local government may ultimately assume the responsibility for maintenance and
operation or for which the local government responsibility is established.
PUBLIC OPEN SPACE: A publicly owned area including, but not limited to, the
following: parks, playgrounds, forest preserves, waterways, parkways, and
streets.
PUBLIC RECORD: Records that a governmental body is required by law to maintain
in the discharging of its responsibilities.
PUBLIC SERVICES: Uses operated by a unit of government to serve public needs,
such as police (with or without jail), fire service, ambulance, judicial court
or government offices, but not including public utility stations or maintenance
facilities.
PUBLIC UTILITY: Any person, firm, or corporation duly authorized to furnish,
under regulation, to the public, cable television, electricity, gas, stream,
telephone, telegraph, transportation, water, or sewerage systems.
PUBLIC UTILITY STATION: A structure or facility used by a public or quasi-
public utility agency to store, distribute, generate electricity, gas,
telecommunications, and related equipment, or to pump or chemically treat
water. This does not include storage or treatment of sewage, solid waste or
hazardous waste.
PUBLIC WAY: Any street, alley, sidewalk, or similar parcel of land essentially
unobstructed from the ground to the sky which is deeded, dedicated or otherwise
permanently appropriated to the public for public use.
QUASI-PUBLIC: Essentially a public use, although under private ownership or
control.
RAILROAD RIGHT OF WAY: See definition of Right Of Way, Railroad.
RECOMMENDATION: A decision that may be either a positive (prescriptive)
statement for the approval of some action or a negative (proscriptive)
statement of disapproval of some action. Formal recommendations generally carry
a recitation of supporting reasons.
RECORDED: To officially record a document in the office of the county recorder.
RECREATION, INDOOR: An establishment providing completely enclosed recreation
activities. Accessory uses shall be permitted to include the preparation and
serving of food and/or the sale of equipment related to the enclosed uses.
Included in this definition shall be bowling, rollerskating or ice skating,
billiards, pool, motion picture theaters, and related amusements.
RECREATION, OUTDOOR: An area free of buildings except for restrooms, dressing
rooms, equipment storage, maintenance buildings, open air pavilions, and
similar structures primarily for recreational activities.
RECREATIONAL EQUIPMENT/VEHICLE: Travel trailer, pickup campers or coaches,
motorized dwellings, tent trailers, boats, snowmobiles, trailers, dune buggies
and other equipment designated for recreational use, including similar
accessory appurtenances.
RECYCLING FACILITY: Any location whose primary use is where waste or scrap
materials are stored, bought, sold, accumulated, exchanged, packaged,
disassembled or handled, including, but not limited to, scrap metals, paper,
rags, tires and bottles, and other such materials.
REHABILITATION CENTER (HALFWAY HOUSE): An establishment whose primary purpose
is the rehabilitation of persons. Such services include drug and alcohol
rehabilitation, assistance to emotionally and mentally disturbed persons, and
halfway houses for prison parolees and juveniles.
RELIGIOUS, CULTURAL AND FRATERNAL ACTIVITY: A use or building owned or
maintained by organized religious organizations or nonprofit associations for
social, civic or philanthropic purposes, or the purpose for which persons
regularly assemble for worship.
REMODELING: Any change in a structure, including a structural alteration (other
than incidental repairs and normal maintenance) which may prolong its useful
life, or the useful life of its supporting members such as bearing walls or
partitions, columns, beams, girders or foundations; or the construction of any
addition to, or enlargement of, a structure; or the removal of a structure.
RENOVATION: Interior or exterior remodeling of a structure, other than ordinary
repair.
REQUEST: An asking for a finding, review, advice, or action.
RESERVOIR: Commonly applied to waters held in storage in either artificial or
natural basins and impoundments primarily for a source of water for power,
municipal, industrial, domestic, or flood control uses.
RESIDENTIAL BUILDING: A building all or part of which contains one or more
dwelling units.
RESIDENTIAL CARE: Maintenance (room and board), oversight, general
watchfulness, and other appropriate services to meet the needs of residents
including, but not limited to, social, recreational, medical, employment,
educational, rehabilitative and other therapeutic services enhanced by being
provided to individuals with a common and related need for such services in a
family like environment in a residential care home.
RESIDENTIAL CARE HOME: Any dwelling unit or living quarters wherein individuals
are provided residential care. Where a sponsoring agency of the residential
care home is required to be licensed or certified by the state, that sponsoring
agency must maintain at all times a current and valid Illinois state license or
certification by the state to operate residential care homes. A residential
care home does not include a nursing home, hospital, adult daycare center,
child daycare center or a dwelling unit or living quarters which serves to
house persons as an alternative to incarceration for a criminal offense.
RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT: Any zoning district designated with an "R", for example,
R-2.
RESTAURANT: A business where the dispensing of edible foodstuffs and/or
beverages on the premises is the principal business operation, including a
cafeteria, coffee shop, lunchroom, and dining room.
RESTAURANT, CARRY OUT: An establishment which sells food only for consumption
off the premises.
RETAIL SALES: The sale of goods, merchandise and commodities for use or
consumption.
RETENTION: Permanent on site maintenance of storm water.
REZONING: Any change in the zoning ordinance through amendment or revision.
RIGHT OF WAY: Any existing or dedicated sidewalk, street, alley, highway or
other thoroughfare.
RIGHT OF WAY, RAILROAD: A strip of land with tracks and auxiliary facilities.
RULE: A statement that performs as a guide in directing actions.
SCHOOL: A public or private institution which offers instruction in any of the
branches of learning and study comparable to that taught in the public schools
under the Illinois school laws, including prekindergarten, elementary school,
and junior and senior high schools, but excluding trade, business, or
commercial schools.
SCREENING: Decorative fencing or evergreen vegetation maintained for the
purpose of concealing from view the area behind such structures or evergreen
vegetation.
SEMIATTACHED DWELLING: See definition of Dwelling, Semiattached.
SETBACK: The minimum required distance between the property line and the
building line. Setbacks may also be referred to as required yard.
SEWAGE TREATMENT PLANT: Includes any method, construction, device or appliance
appurtenant thereto, used for the purpose of treating, neutralizing,
stabilizing, disinfecting or disposing of sewage, industrial waste or other
wastes, or for the recovery of byproducts from such sewage, industrial wastes
or other wastes.
SIDEWALK: That portion of the street, walkway or crosswalk which is paved to
meet the current American disabilities act requirements and village regulations
and is intended for pedestrian use only.
SIGN: An advertising message, announcement, declaration, demonstration,
display, illustration, insignia, surface or space erected or maintained in view
of the observer thereof for identification, advertisement or promotion of the
interests of any person, entity, product or service, including the sign
structure, supports, lighting system and any attachments, ornaments or other
features used to draw the attention of observers. A sign is further described
as any writing (including letters, words, or numerals), pictorial
representation (including devices, symbols, or trademarks), flag, banner,
streamer, pennant, string of lights, or display calculated to attract the
attention of the public, or any other figure of similar character which is a
structure or any part thereof, or a portable display, or is attached to,
painted on or in any other manner represented on a building or other structure
or on the ground and is used to announce, direct attention to or advertise.
SIGN, ADVERTISING (BILLBOARD): A sign which directs attention to a business,
commodity, service, or entertainment conducted, sold, or offered elsewhere than
upon the premises where such sign is located or to which it is affixed.
SIGN, DOUBLE FACED: A double faced sign has two (2) faces with identical copy
on each face and with the maximum angle no greater than forty five degrees
(45°).
SIGN, FLASHING: Any illuminated sign on which the artificial light is not
maintained stationary and/or constant in intensity and color at all times when
such sign is in use. For the purpose of the title, any revolving, illuminated
sign shall be considered a "flashing sign".
SIGN, GROSS SURFACE AREA OF: The entire area within a single continuous
perimeter enclosing the extreme limits of a sign and in no case passing through
or between any adjacent elements of the same. However, such perimeter shall not
include any structural or framing elements lying outside the limits of such
sign. With two (2) visible surfaces, the gross surface area shall be the sum of
all sides of the sign.
SIGN, GROUND: A sign which is supported by one or more uprights or braces in or
upon the ground.
SIGN IDENTIFICATION: A sign indicating the name and address of a building, or
the name of an occupant thereof, and the practice of a permitted occupation
therein.
SIGN LOCATION: The sign location is determined by measuring from the
furthermost projecting point of the sign to the front lot line.
SIGN, PROJECTING: A sign which is suspended from or affixed to any building
wall or other structure and extends beyond the building wall or parts thereof
of a structure more than eighteen inches (18").
SIGN, ROOF: A sign erected, constructed, and maintained above the roof of any
building.
SIGN, TEMPORARY MOBILE: An advertising device of a nonpermanent type, used
principally for commercial purposes.
SIGN, WALL: A sign affixed, painted, posted, or placed on a building or
structure.
SMOKE: Small gas borne particles other than water that form a visible plume in
the air; for example, the visible discharge from a chimney, stack, vent,
exhaust or combustion process.
SOUND LEVEL METER: An electronic instrument which includes a microphone, an
amplifier, and an output meter which measures noise and sound pressure levels
in a specified manner. It may be used with the octave band analyzer that
permits measuring the sound pressure level in discrete octave bands.
SOUND PRESSURE LEVEL: The intensity of a sound measured in decibels
mathematically described as twenty (20) times the logarithm to the base 10 of
the ratio of the pressure of the sound to a reference pressure of 0.0002
microbar.
SPECIAL USE: A specific use of land or buildings, or both, described and
permitted herein, subject to special provisions and which, because of its
unique characteristics, cannot be properly classified as a permitted use.
STABLE, PRIVATE: A structure which is located on a lot on which a dwelling is
located, and which is designed, arranged, used, or intended to be used for
housing horses for the private use of occupant(s) of the dwelling, but in no
event for hire.
STABLE, PUBLIC: A building where horses are kept for remuneration, hire, or
sale.
STAFF: The collective designation of the employees of a governmental body or
agency.
STAFF REPORT: A report prepared for the village by staff regarding a matter to
be presented either formally or informally to a commission, usually including a
recommendation.
STORAGE BUILDING/SHED: A detached accessory building limited to no more than
three hundred fifty (350) square feet in area, used for storage of yard
equipment, tools and other items.
STORAGE, OUTDOOR: The outdoor accumulation of vehicles, equipment, or products,
or materials for permanent or temporary holding.
STORMWATER RUNOFF: Water that results from precipitation which is not absorbed
by the soil or plant material.
STORY: That portion of building included between the upper surface of any floor
and the upper surface of the floor next above, except that the topmost story
shall be that portion of a building included between the upper surface of the
topmost floor and the ceiling or roof above. If the finished floor level
directly above a usable or unused under floor space is more than six feet (6')
above grade as defined herein for more than fifty percent (50%) of the total
perimeter or is more than twelve feet (12') above grade as defined herein at
any point, such usable or unused under floor space shall be considered as a
story.
STREET: Any dedicated thoroughfare or public way meeting standards and
specifications of the village.
STREET, COLLECTOR: Those primary streets within the neighborhood unit which
will act to collect traffic from minor streets for travel to major streets and
highways.
STREET FRONTAGE: All of the property fronting on one side of a street between
two (2) intersecting streets, or in the cases of a dead end street, all of the
property along one side of a street between an intersecting street and the end
of such dead end streets.
STREET, HIGHWAY: Those state, county and village designated routes which
provide continuity of travel and freedom from hazards and congestion necessary
for interregional and village traffic movement.
STREET, LOCAL: Those streets whose prime function is to give access to abutting
property. They are not intended to carry heavy through traffic and are designed
to discourage such movement.
STREET, MAJOR: Those routes so designated by the village to be of importance in
intravillage traffic movement and necessary to provide easy access to
neighboring communities. (Locust, Division, Spruce, Sycamore, Maple, Cook,
Cypress, Ronnie Gray, Amberstone.)
STREET, MARGINAL ACCESS: Those local streets which serve to control access to
major thoroughfares and permit development of lands adjacent to high speed and
high capacity highways. Their prime function is property access.
STREET, PRIVATE: A right of way or easement in private ownership, not dedicated
or maintained as a public street, which affords the principal means of access
to two (2) or more sites.
STRUCTURAL ALTERATION: Any change, other than incidental repairs, such as the
addition, removal or modification of bearing walls, columns, beams, girders or
foundations.
STRUCTURE: Anything constructed or erected, or any piece of work artificially
built up or composed of parts joined together in some definite manner, the use
of which requires permanent location on the ground or attached to something
having a permanent location on the ground. With reference to the foregoing, a
structure shall include, but not be limited to, buildings, parking lots,
concrete or asphalt slabs and driveways, decks, patios, gazebos, sidewalks,
walls and signs. Unless otherwise provided, a fence shall not be considered a
structure for purposes of this title.
STRUCTURE, NONCONFORMING: A structure which exists upon the effective date of
the adoption or amendment of this title and which does not comply with the
conditions, area requirements, lot width requirements, yard requirements,
height limitations, bulk regulations or off street parking and loading
requirements of the zoning district in which said structure is located by
reason of the adoption or amendment of this title.
STRUCTURE, PRINCIPAL: A building or structure in which a principal use is
conducted.
STRUCTURE, TEMPORARY: A structure not designed or intended for permanent human
occupancy nor for the permanent protection of animals, chattels or property of
any kind.
SUBDIVISION: The division of a parcel of land into two (2) or more lots or
parcels for the purpose of transfer of ownership or development for any future
use, either residential, commercial or industrial. The term includes
resubdivision and, when appropriate to context, shall relate to the process of
subdividing or to the land subdivided.
SUBDIVISION PLAT: The formal instrument by which the division of land together
with the conditions of development are legally recorded.
SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS: Regulations governing the division and development of
land so as to assure definitive legal title and guarantee health, safety, and
welfare to both users and the public.
SUBSTANTIVE: Referring to the content of rationality. It includes statements of
fact and assertions of value, need, want, preference, desert, right, merit, and
interest.
SWIMMING POOL: Any structure, basin, chamber or tank that contains water over
twenty four inches (24") in depth and which is used, or intended to be used,
for swimming, wading or recreational bathing. This includes inground,
aboveground and on ground swimming pools, hot tubs and spas.
TAVERN: An establishment in which alcoholic beverages are sold or served to
customers for consumption on the premises, including establishments, commonly
known as key clubs, in which alcoholic beverages are served only to members and
their guests.
TEMPORARY USE: See definition of Use, Temporary.
THEATER: A building used primarily for the presentation of live stage
productions, performances or motion pictures.
THOROUGHFARE, PRIMARY: A street of considerable continuity which serves or is
intended to serve as a principal traffic artery between the various sections of
the Manteno area and is so designated as a primary thoroughfare in the
comprehensive plan.
THOROUGHFARE, SECONDARY: A street which carries traffic from minor streets to
the primary thoroughfare system, or between primary thoroughfares, and is so
designated as a secondary thoroughfare in the comprehensive plan.
TOWNHOUSE: A structure containing a number of dwelling units each separated by
vertical interior unpierced party walls.
TOXIC MATTER: Materials which are capable of causing injury to living organisms
by chemical means when present in relatively small amounts.
TRAFFIC WAY: A public way other than an alley, intended for vehicular traffic
and affording a primary means of access to abutting property.
TRAILER: A vehicle without motor power used or adaptable for living, sleeping,
business, or storage purposes, having no foundation other than wheels, blocks,
skids, jacks, horses, or skirting, and has been recently or may be equipped
with wheels or other devices for transporting the structure from place to
place. A permanent foundation shall not change its character nor allow
determination of meeting requirements within this title unless the entire
structure is erected in accordance with the village building code.
TRAILER, TRANSPORT: A vehicle standing on wheels or on rigid supports which is
used for transporting boats, cargo, or property.
TRUCK REPAIR/STORAGE: A building used for the care, incidental servicing and/or
interior storage of trucks, tractors, truck trailers, and commercial vehicles
exceeding one and one-half (11/2) tons' capacity.
TRUCK STOP: A building or area intended specifically to accommodate trucks and
semitrailers including facilities for eating, fueling and/or overnight parking.
TRUCK TERMINAL: A building or area in which freight brought by truck is
assembled and/or stored for rerouting in intrastate and interstate shipment by
truck or in which semitrailers, including tractor and/or trailer units and
other trucks are parked or stored.
TUTORING: The teaching or instruction of academic or business subjects to not
more than four (4) students simultaneously.
USE: The purpose or activity for which the land or building or structure
thereon is designed, arranged, or intended, or for which it is occupied,
maintained, let, or leased.
USE, CHANGE OF: The change within the classified use of a structure or
premises.
USE, CONDITIONAL: A use which, because of its unique characteristics, may be
allowed in a specified zoning district permitting it as a conditional use, only
after special consideration of its impact upon neighboring land and of public
need for the use at the particular location.
USE, NONCONFORMING: A use which lawfully occupied a building, structure or land
at the time this code became effective, which has been lawfully continued and
which does not now conform with the use regulations.
USE, PERMITTED: A use which may be lawfully established in a particular
district or districts, provided it conforms with all requirements, regulations,
and performance standards (if any) of such districts.
USE, PRINCIPAL: The main use of land or buildings as distinguished from a
subordinate or accessory use. A principal use may be either a permitted use or
a special use.
USE, REGULATIONS: The provisions of this title which identify permitted uses,
impose use limitations, require adherence to performance standards and regulate
home occupations and accessory and temporary uses.
USE, TEMPORARY: A use of a building, structure or parcel of land which is
impermanent in existence and that is authorized by this title to be conducted
for a fixed period of time. Temporary uses are characterized by such activities
as the sale of agricultural products, contractors' offices and equipment sheds,
fireworks, carnivals, flea markets, and garage sales.
VALUES: All assertions of goodness, merit, worth, desert, right, obligation,
duty, desire, or preference.
VARIANCE: A waiver or modification of the terms of the zoning regulations
where, due to conditions peculiar to the property, a literal enforcement of the
regulations would result in unnecessary and undue hardship, as distinguished
from a mere inconvenience or a desire to make more money.
VIBRATION: A periodic motion of the particles of an elastic body or medium in
alternately opposite directions from the position of equilibrium when that
equilibrium has been disturbed.
VIDEO STORE: A building or establishment that rents or sells video films for
entertainment, not to include however, such establishments that offer for rent,
sale or viewing any percent of product or business that could be classified
under the definition of "adult entertainment".
VILLAGE BOARD: The board of trustees of the village of Manteno.
VIOLATION: The act of disregarding, disobeying, neglecting, omitting, or
refusing to comply with the regulations or enforcement of this title.
WALKWAY: A right of way within a block, ten feet (10') or more in width,
dedicated for public use, intended primarily for pedestrians but which may
include utilities where necessary and from which motor and engine propelled
vehicles are excluded.
WAREHOUSE, DISTRIBUTION CENTER: A building or premises storing goods,
merchandise or equipment, with multiple, daily semitruck deliveries and
distributions contributing to the main function of the facility.
WAREHOUSE, STORAGE: A building or premises in which goods, merchandise or
equipment are stored either in support of and accessory to the main function of
the principal facility or in such building which exists as a long term storage
facility for private or public use.
WATERWAY: A natural or manmade drainage channel formed by the surface
topography of the earth to transport flow of storm water.
WHOLESALE SALES: Sale to retailers for resale and not for direct consumption.
YARD: An open, unoccupied space on a lot, other than a court, which is
unobstructed from the ground upward by buildings or structures, except as
otherwise provided in this title.
YARD, FRONT: A yard extending across the full width of the lot, the depth of
which is the minimum horizontal distance between the front lot line and any
building, measured perpendicular to the building at the closest point to the
front lot line. On a corner lot, each yard that abuts a street right of way
shall be considered a front yard.
YARD, REAR: A yard extending across the full width of the lot, the depth of
which is the minimum horizontal distance between the rear lot line and any
building, measured perpendicular to the building at the closest point to the
rear lot line.
YARD, SIDE: An open, unoccupied space on the same lot with the building and
measured from between the building line to the side lot line.
YARD, TRANSITIONAL: The required front, side, or rear yard, between a business
or manufacturing district and a residential district.
ZERO LOT LINE DEVELOPMENT: Single-family dwellings arranged on individual lots
as either detached structures with one or more side walls on a side property
line.
ZONING APPEAL: An appeal filed by an individual who has applied to the code
enforcement officer for a zoning permit and who has been turned down for
noncompliance with the requirements of this title.
ZONING DISTRICT: A geographic area in which the designation of the zoning
ordinance sets forth requirements dealing with all uses that may be conducted
therein.
ZONING MAP: The graphic depiction of the zones or districts within the village
incorporated into this title as a part hereof.
ZONING OFFICER: See definition of Code Enforcement Officer.
ZONING PERMIT: A permit issued by the code enforcement officer showing that the
plans submitted are in compliance with the zoning ordinance and that the use or
structure proposed is allowed by the ordinance or has been allowed by the
granting of a variance by the planning commission.
ZONING REGULATIONS: The division of land within the jurisdiction of a local
unit of government and the designation of permitted uses of land within those
divisions. Zoning regulations permit the lawful restraint of the right of use
of real property. They define residential, commercial, industrial, and other
uses; number of occupants; and height, coverage, and location of buildings. A
set of administrative procedures is included in zoning regulations. (Ord. 99-
06, 6-21-1999; amd. Ord. 04-45, 4-4-2005; Ord. 05-01, 5-16-2005; Ord. 07-09, 7-
16-2007; Ord. 13-29, 1-20-2014; Ord. 16-11, 8-15-2016)
 
Notes
1 1. See chapter 4 of this title.
CHAPTER 3
GENERAL PROVISIONS
SECTION:
9-3-1: Lots
9-3-2: Open Space On Lots
9-3-3: Fences 1  (Rep. by Ord. 07-09, 7-16-2007)
9-3-4: Open Storage
9-3-5: Screening
9-3-6: Accessory Buildings, Structures And Uses
9-3-7: Swimming Pools 2  (Rep. by Ord. 06-23, 7-17-2006)
9-3-8: Exemptions
9-3-9: Home Occupations
9-3-10: Adult Oriented Uses
9-3-11: Miscellaneous Provisions
 
Notes
1 1. See title 8, chapter 4 of this code.
2 2. See title 8, chapter 8 of this code.
9-3-1: LOTS:
   (A)   Definition: A legally divided area or portion of land under single
ownership or control that is intended to be occupied by one use or one main
building or structure. Within all districts, all lots shall be lots of record
when less than five (5) acres in size as required by and in conformance with
the village subdivision regulations and the state plat act. Legally divided
areas of land or lots in excess of five (5) acres shall be eligible for special
uses only in any zoning district, and as determined and accepted by the village
board. In addition, the village will recognize as legal only those lots that
have met all applicable regulations and fees of the subdivision ordinance.
   (B)   Permit Issuance: Under no circumstances shall a permit of any type be
issued for any parcel of land which has not been recognized as a legal lot by
the village.
   (C)   Number Of Buildings On A Lot: Not more than one principal building may
be located on a single lot of record or a single lot unless otherwise
authorized within each zoning district.
   (D)   Division Of Lots: No lot shall be divided into two (2) or more lots
for the purpose of transfer of ownership, unless the division shall conform
with all the applicable regulations of the village subdivision regulations and
this title. Any violation of this section will result in village refusal to
accept such divisions as legal lots until all requirements have been met and
applicable fees paid.
   (E)   Through Lots: On vacant through lots, the front lot lines shall be
along the street right of way designated by the code enforcement officer,
except that when a front lot line has been established on one or more lots in
the same block and all have front lot lines established along the same street
right of way, the street right of way line designated as the front lot line for
such lot or lots shall be the front line on all vacant through lots for such
block. Only such obstructions as herein permitted in front yards shall be
located in that part of a rear yard adjoining a street that is equivalent in
depth to a required front yard.
   (F)   Corner Lots: On a corner lot, the front lot line shall be the lot line
as determined by the code enforcement officer. The required front yard setback
on corner lots shall apply to each side of the lot facing a street.
   (G)   Two Uses On A Lot: Where two (2) or more permitted or special uses,
each requiring a minimum area and frontage, are provided in the same building
or on the same lot, the required area and frontages shall be the sum of the
areas and frontage required for each use individually.
   (H)   Street Frontage And Access: Every lot must have frontage on a public
street and must be provided with facilities for ingress and/or egress to and
from such public street conforming to such standards as to design and location
as meet the requirements set forth by the village and are approved by the road
authority onto whose road or street such ingress and/or egress is to be made.
Residential lots which abut upon major streets shall also abut upon a local
street. Vehicular access to such lots shall be to the local street only.
Frontage on any alley shall not be constructed as satisfying the requirements
of this title related to frontage on a dedicated street.
   (I)   Angular Lots: Angular lots in residential zones shall have a minimum
width of seventy feet (70') measured at the building setback line.
   (J)   Lot Dimensions: Lot dimensions shall conform to the requirements of
the appropriate zoning classification, but in no case shall a lot have an
average depth of less than one hundred twenty feet (120'). In the case of
double frontage or reverse frontage lots, the minimum average depth shall be
one hundred fifty feet (150').
   (K)   Existing Lots: Any lot in a single ownership, which was of record at
the time of the adoption hereof, that does not meet the requirements of this
title as to area and lot width which is located in a residential district, may
be utilized for single- family residence purposes, provided that it qualifies
under all other regulations. This shall not be interpreted to reduce the
buildable width of a corner lot, or a corner lot and adjoining lot in single
ownership, subdivided and recorded by law at the time of the passage hereof, to
less than one hundred feet (100'). (Ord. 99-06, 6-21-1999)
9-3-2: OPEN SPACE ON LOTS:
The following general provisions dealing with open space, lot coverage, yards,
setbacks, vision clearance, and permitted obstructions are provided for
herewith:
   (A)   Provisions Of Open Space: The provisions of yards, courts, and other
open spaces and minimum lot area legally required for a building shall be a
continuing obligation of the owner of such building or property on which it is
located, as long as the building is in existence. Furthermore, no legally
required yards, courts, or other open space, or minimum lot area allocated to
any building, shall by virtue of change of ownership, or for any other reason,
be used to satisfy yard, court, or other open space or minimum lot area
requirements for any other building.
   (B)   Location Of Open Space: All yards, courts, and other open space
allocated to a building or group of buildings shall be located on the same
zoning lots as such building or group of buildings.
   (C)   Yards For Existing Buildings: No yard now or hereafter provided for a
building existing on the effective date of the zoning ordinance shall
subsequently be reduced below, or further reduced if already less than, the
minimum yard requirement of the title for equivalent new construction. However,
a yard adjoining a street may be reduced to provide right of way for a street
widening.
   (D)   Required Setbacks: Notwithstanding any other provision of this title,
no building or structure shall be erected, constructed, structurally altered,
or enlarged within thirty feet (30') of a planned public right of way.
   (E)   Required Yard Applies To One Building Only: No part of a yard, or
other open space, or off street parking or loading space required for or in
connection with any building for the purpose of complying with this chapter
shall be included as part of a yard, open space, or off street parking or
loading space, similarly required for any other building.
   (F)   Exception For Established Setbacks:
      1.   Where fifty percent (50%) or more of the frontage of one side of a
street between two (2) intersecting streets is developed with buildings that
have observed (within a variance of 10 feet or less) a front yard greater in
depth than required herein, new buildings shall not be erected closer to the
street than the average front yard so established by the existing buildings.
      2.   Where fifty percent (50%) or more of the frontage on one side of a
street between two (2) intersecting streets is developed with buildings that
have not observed a front yard as herein required, then:
         (a)   Interior Lots:
            (1)   Where a building is to be erected within one hundred feet
(100') of existing buildings on both sides, the minimum front yard shall be a
line drawn between the closest front corners of the two (2) existing buildings.
            (2)   Where a building is to be erected within one hundred feet
(100') of an existing building on one side only, it may be erected as close to
the street as the existing building.
         (b)   Corner Lots: The depth of the setback lines shall be as normally
required in the district where the lot is located.
   (G)   Line Of Sight/Vision Clearance: In residence districts, the location
of buildings, structures and landscaping on corner lots shall be regulated so
as not to obstruct the vision of drivers of motor vehicles. No buildings or
structures shall be erected or maintained, nor any landscaping planted, grown
or maintained to a height of more than two feet (2') within a triangular area
determined by a diagonal line connecting two (2) points measured along the
property lines of the abutting streets thirty feet (30') equidistant from the
intersection of those property lines. (Ord. 99-06, 6-21-1999)
   (H)   Permitted Obstructions In Required Yards: The following shall not be
considered to be obstructions when located in the required yards specified:
      1.   All Yards: In all yards, except as limited below:
         (a)   Open terraces not over three feet (3') above the average level
of the adjoining ground, but not including a permanently roofed over terrace or
porch;
         (b)   Awnings and canopies, but not projecting more than five feet
(5') out in any residential district nor more than ten feet (10') out in any
commercial or industrial district, and at least seven feet (7') above the
average level of the adjoining ground;
         (c)   Steps, four feet (4') or less above grade which are necessary
for access to a permitted building or for access to a zoning lot from a street
or alley;
         (d)   Chimneys projecting eighteen inches (18") or less into the yard;
         (e)   Arbors, trellises, flagpoles, fountains, sculptures, plant
boxes, and other similar ornamental objects;
         (f)   Recreational devices, except in front yards; provided, however,
that freestanding basketball standards are not governed by this section;
         (g)   Walls in the side and rear yards only; and
         (h)   Overhanging eaves and gutters projecting three feet (3') or less
into the yard.
      2.   In Front Yards: One-story bay windows projecting two feet (2') or
less into the yard. (Ord. 07-09, 7-16-2007)
      3.   In Rear Yards:
         (a)   Enclosed, attached, or detached off street parking spaces;
         (b)   Accessory shed, toolroom, and similar buildings or structures
for domestic or agricultural storage;
         (c)   Balconies, breezeways, and open porches;
         (d)   One-story bay windows projecting two feet (2') or less into the
yard; and
         (e)   Nonmechanical laundry drying equipment.
   In a residential district, no accessory building shall be closer to the rear
lot line than five feet (5'). (Ord. 09-24, 2-1-2010)
      4.   In Side Yards: Open off street parking may be permitted in side
yards, subject to limits of subsection (G) of this section and subsection
9-12-2(G) of this title or other applicable ordinances. (Ord. 99-06, 6-21-1999)
9-3-3: FENCES 1 :
(Rep. by Ord. 07-09, 7-16-2007)
 
Notes
1 1. See title 8, chapter 4 of this code.
9-3-4: OPEN STORAGE:
   (A)   Screening: All open storage shall be landscaped or screened in
accordance with section
9-3-5 of this chapter.
   (B)   Deposit Of Wastes: No materials or wastes shall be deposited on any
premises in such form or manner that they may be transferred off such premises
by natural causes or forces. All materials or wastes which might cause fumes or
dust or which constitute a fire hazard or which may be edible by, or otherwise
be attractive to, rodents, insects or animals shall be stored outdoors only in
closed containers. (Ord. 99-06, 6-21-1999)
9-3-5: SCREENING:
   (A)   Where any business or industrial use, or any multiple-family dwelling
is located on a lot abutting an R-1 or R-2 residential lot, the following
regulations shall apply to the lot on which such business or industrial use or
such multiple-family dwelling is located:
      1.   There shall be a solid fence or natural screening, as determined by
the code enforcement officer, constructed in conformity with applicable village
ordinances, extending the full length of the abutting lot line, except that no
such solid fence or natural screening shall extend beyond the corner side yard
setback or beyond the front yard setback.
      2.   In all districts or special uses allowing outdoor storage, a six
foot (6') high hedge or screening shall be planted to enclose all areas which
are visually exposed to the front yard.
      3.   Garbage and refuse containers and collection areas shall be screened
from view from the abutting residential use and from the street.
      4.   Parking area lighting shall be screened, shrouded or of such type so
as not to interfere with the quiet enjoyment of the abutting residential use or
adjoining property. Specific lighting design and illumination shall be approved
by the code enforcement officer.
   (B)   When required by this title, screening shall be designed, planted, or
constructed and maintained in such a way as to comply with the intent of the
several zoning districts. Plans for such screening shall be approved by the
village as well as being developed in terms of the following general
guidelines:
      1.   Type: The use of natural vegetation and grasses on earth berms
should be used whenever possible.
         (a)   No screening should interfere with sight requirements for safe
ingress and egress.
         (b)   Earthen berms shall have a side slope not less than three feet
(3') horizontal to one foot (1') vertical.
         (c)   Visual screens consisting of evergreen, or evergreen type hedges
or shrubs, shall be six feet (6') high, and spaced at intervals of not more
than six feet (6'), located and maintained in good condition.
      2.   Height:
         (a)   Screening: Screening should be of sufficient height to
adequately screen areas from adjacent property lines, but may not be higher
than six feet (6') without a variance, excluding natural vegetation growth.
         (b)   Maximum Height: No fence or wall for screening shall be erected,
placed, or maintained along a lot line of any nonresidential zoned property,
adjacent to residential zoned property to a height exceeding six feet (6').
         (c)   Minimum Height: Screening between rear and side lot lines of
commercial, industrial, or other uses and not adjacent to residential
properties shall be minimum of six feet (6') high. Proper screening materials
shall be approved by the code enforcement officer. (Ord. 99-06, 6-21-1999)
9-3-6: ACCESSORY BUILDINGS, STRUCTURES AND USES:
   (A)   Policy: Accessory buildings, structures and uses are allowed in the
various districts as prescribed in each district and shall be compatible with
the principal use. Refer to section
8-1-15 of this code for accessory buildings and structures building
requirements.
   (B)   Time Of Construction: No accessory building or structure shall be
constructed or occupied prior to the completion of the principal building to
which it is accessory.
   (C)   Lots, Reverse Corner: On a reverse corner lot in a residential
district, which is a lot of record prior to the adoption hereof, no accessory
building or portion thereof located in a required rear yard shall be closer to
the side lot line abutting the street than the required front yard on the
adjacent lot to the rear. Further, in the above instance, no such accessory
building shall be located within five feet (5') of any part of a rear lot line
which coincides with a side lot line or portion thereof in a residential
district.
   (D)   Number Of Accessory Buildings: No more than one storage building shall
be allowed on any lot within a residential area. (Ord. 09-25, 2-1-2010)
9-3-7: SWIMMING POOLS 1 :
(Rep. by Ord. 06-23, 7-17-2006)
 
Notes
1 1. See title 8, chapter 8 of this code.
9-3-8: EXEMPTIONS:
   (A)   Existing Agricultural Exemptions: The provisions of this title shall
not be exercised so as to impose regulations or require permits with respect to
land used or to be used for existing agricultural purposes. However, with
respect to the erections, maintenance, repair, alterations, remodeling, or
extension of buildings or structures used or to be used for existing
agricultural purposes, these shall conform to building or setback lines, and
shall be subject to the building permit requirements of subsection
9-1-6(G) of this title. Also, in the interest of public health, a residence and
its water supply and sewage disposal facilities in connection with an
agricultural use, shall not be exempt. In the event that the land ceases to be
used solely for agricultural purposes, then and only then shall all provisions
of this title apply.
   (B)   Public Utility Exemption: Where federal or state statutes supersede
local ordinance, as required by such statute, the type or location of any
poles, towers, wires, cables, conduits, vaults, laterals, or any other similar
distribution equipment of a public utility is exempt from the requirements of
this title.
   (C)   Underground Installations Exemption: Pipelines and other underground
installations, to the extent that the same are completely buried beneath the
surface of the soil, are exempt from the requirements of this title, provided,
that any incidental or associated structures, installations, or equipment,
except markers, used in connection with such pipeline or other underground
installations, and which protrude or are extended above the surface of the
soil, shall, to the extent of such protrusion or extension, be subject to all
of the applicable provisions hereof. (Ord. 99-06, 6-21-1999)
9-3-9: HOME OCCUPATIONS:
   (A)   Definition: A "home occupation" is a business, profession, occupation
or trade conducted for gain entirely within a residential building and
secondary in nature to the primary use of the zoning lot, buildings, and/or
structures.
   (B)   Purposes: It is the intent of this section to allow as home
occupations only those uses that conform to the standards of this section. A
home occupation is a clearly accessory use so located and conducted that the
average neighbor, under normal circumstances, would not be aware of its
existence except for a sign as provided for below. Standards for home
occupations are intended to ensure compatibility with other permitted uses and
the residential character of the neighborhood and to maintain the subordinance
and incidental status of the home occupation.
   (C)   Prohibited Activities: Activities which do not come within the
definition of home occupation as provided in this section shall be considered
business uses and are prohibited in any residential district.
   (D)   Restrictions: In addition to all of the use limitations applicable in
the district in which a home occupation is located, no home occupation shall be
permitted unless it complies with the following restrictions in all residential
districts:
      1.   No more than one person other than permanent residents of the
dwelling unit shall be employed in the home occupation.
      2.   There shall be no manufacturing or processing of any sort.
      3.   One sign, either attached to the dwelling or displayed from a
window, having an area of not more than one square foot shall be permitted.
      4.   No wholesale, jobbing or retail business shall be permitted unless
it is conducted entirely by mail or telephone and does not involve the receipt,
sale, shipment, delivery, or storage of merchandise on or from the premises,
provided, however, that articles produced by members of the immediate family
residing on the premises may be sold from and stored upon the premises.
      5.   There shall be no alteration of the principal residential building
which changes the character thereof as a dwelling. Exclusive entrances/exits
shall be prohibited.
      6.   No more than twenty five percent (25%) of the area of one story of a
single-family dwelling nor more than twenty percent (20%) of the area of any
other dwelling unit shall be devoted to the home occupation.
      7.   No mechanical or electrical equipment may be used except such types
as are customary for purely domestic, household or hobby purposes.
      8.   There shall be no exterior display or storage of goods, equipment,
materials or motor vehicles utilized in the home occupation.
      9.   The home occupation shall be conducted entirely within the principal
residential building.
      10.   Sales and services to patrons shall be arranged by appointment and
scheduled so that not more than one patron vehicle is on the premises at the
same time.
      11.   An increase in traffic, including parking demand, shall not be
generated beyond what would be normally expected in a residential neighborhood.
The home occupation shall not prevent vehicles intended to be parked in a
private garage or driveway from doing so.
      12.   The home occupation shall not generate noise, vibration, glare,
fumes, odors, or electrical interference beyond that which normally occurs in
the zoning district in which located.
   (E)   Particular Home Occupations Permitted: Permitted home occupations
include, but are not limited to, the following list of occupations, provided,
however, that each listed occupation shall be subject to the requirements of
this section:
      1.   Beauty shops and barbershops, limited to a single chair, operated by
a resident of the dwelling unit in which this home occupation is permitted.
      2.   Babysitting services, but not a nursery school or daycare center.
      3.   Dressmakers, seamstresses, and tailors.
      4.   Instruction, but not recitals, programs or displays, in music,
dance, home crafts and art.
      5.   Artists, sculptors, and authors or composers.
      6.   Office facilities for architects, engineers, lawyers, insurance
agents and members of similar professions.
      7.   Office facilities for real estate and other salesmen, sales
representatives and manufacturer's representatives, when no retail or wholesale
transactions are conducted on the premises.
      8.   Secretarial or computer related services.
      9.   Home crafts, such as model making, rug weaving, lapidary work and
craft or woodworking, provided, however, that no machinery or equipment shall
be used or employed, other than that which would customarily be incidental to
residential occupancy. Such machinery or equipment shall include that which
would customarily be employed in connection with a hobby or a vocation not
conducted for gain or profit.
   (F)   Particular Home Occupations Prohibited: Prohibited home occupations
include, but are not limited to, the following list of occupations:
      1.   The sale of weapons of any kind.
      2.   General retail.
      3.   Tanning salons.
      4.   Funeral homes.
      5.   Nursery schools and daycare centers, unless specifically permitted
by the district regulations as a special use.
      6.   Restaurants.
      7.   Stables.
      8.   Tourist homes and lodging houses, unless specifically permitted by
the district regulations.
      9.   Renting of trailers.
      10.   Medical or dental offices, clinics or hospitals.
      11.   Animal kennels or hospitals.
      12.   Engine repair shops.
      13.   Welding shops.
      14.   Any activity which produces or involves the storage of noxious
matter, or employs, produces or involves the storage of flammable matter. (Ord.
99-06, 6-21-1999)
9-3-10: ADULT ORIENTED USES:
   (A)   Definition: Any establishment, business, building or structure from
which, under the laws of the state of Illinois, minors are excluded by virtue
of age unless accompanied by a consenting parent, guardian or spouse. This
shall include, but not be limited to, all adult oriented definitions:
   ADULT BOOKSTORE: An establishment having as a substantial or significant
portion of its sales or stock in trade, books, magazines, films for sale or for
viewing on premises by use of motion picture devices or by coin operated means,
and periodicals which are distinguished or characterized by their emphasis on
matter depicting, describing or relating to "specified sexual activities", or
"specified anatomical areas"; or an establishment with a significant section
devoted to the sale or display or such materials; or an establishment that
holds itself out to the public as a purveyor of such materials based upon its
signage, advertising, displays, actual sales, presence of video preview or coin
operated booths, exclusion of minors from the establishment's premises or any
other factors showing the establishment's primary purpose is to purvey such
material.
   ADULT ENTERTAINMENT CABARET: A public or private establishment which: 1)
features topless dancers, strippers, "go go" dancers, male or female
impersonators, lingerie or bathing suit fashion shows; 2) not infrequently
features entertainers who display "specified anatomical areas"; or 3) features
entertainers who by reason of their appearance or conduct perform in a manner
which is designed primarily to appeal to the prurient interest of the patron or
features entertainers who engage in, or are engaged explicit simulation of,
"specified sexual activities".
   ADULT MOTION PICTURE THEATER: A building or area used for presenting
materials distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on matter depicting,
describing or relating to "specified sexual activities" or "specified
anatomical areas" for observation by patrons therein.
   ADULT NOVELTY STORE: An establishment having a substantial or significant
portion of its sales or stock in trade consisting of toys, devices, clothing
"novelties", lotions and other items distinguished or characterized by their
emphasis on or use for "specified sexual activities" or "specified anatomical
areas" or an establishment that holds itself out to the public as a purveyor of
such materials based upon its signage, advertising displays, actual sales,
exclusion of minors from the establishment's premises or any other factors
showing the establishment's primary purpose is to purvey such material.
   ADULT USE: Adult bookstores, adult motion picture theaters, adult
entertainment cabarets, adult novelty stores and other similar uses.
   SPECIFIED ANATOMICAL AREAS: For the purpose of this title, "specified
anatomical areas" means:
      1.   Less than completely and opaquely covered:
          (a)   Human genitals,
          (b)   Pubic region,
          (c)   Female breasts below a point immediately above the top of the
areola; and
      2.   Human male genitals in a discernibly turgid state, even if
completely and opaquely covered.
   SPECIFIED SEXUAL ACTIVITIES: For the purpose of this title "specified sexual
activities" means: 1) human genitals in the state of sexual stimulation or
arousal; 2) acts of human masturbation, sexual intercourse or sodomy; and 3)
fondling or other erotic touching of human genitals, pubic region, buttock or
female breasts.
   (B)   Purposes: It has been determined in numerous communities that the
presence of adult oriented businesses, as herein defined, by their very nature,
have certain objectionable characteristics unrelated to the content of
materials available for sale or viewing on such premises. The regulation of
such businesses is necessary to ensure the health, safety and welfare of the
citizens of the village and to prevent the adverse effects of such businesses
by enforcing the location and distancing requirements for such uses. It is
necessary to ensure that such businesses do not violate legitimate criminal
laws, such as those prohibiting obscenity, employment of minors, prostitution,
drug offenses, or building code regulations.
   (C)   Location: Adult oriented uses may be allowed as a special use in a C-
2 or industrial district provided:
      1.   The establishment is not located within six hundred feet (600') of
any property zoned A-1, E-1, R-1, R-2, or R-3.
      2.   The establishment is not located within six hundred feet (600') of
any residential building.
      3.   The establishment is not located within one thousand feet (1,000')
of any church, religious institution, daycare center, library, teen center,
school, public park or playground, or recreational facility where minors
congregate. "Minors" means persons under eighteen (18) years of age.
      4.   The establishment is not located within one thousand feet (1,000')
of another adult establishment.
   (D)   Restrictions: Adult oriented uses shall be regulated, but not limited
to, the following restrictions:
      1.   No adult use shall be conducted in any manner that permits the
observation of any material depicting, describing or relating to "specified
anatomical area" or "specified sexual activities" from any public way. This
shall apply to any display, decoration, sign, show window or other opening. No
person shall operate or cause to be operated an adult use within any premises
wherein alcoholic beverages are served, sold or consumed.
      2.   No person under the age of twenty one (21) shall be allowed on the
premises.
      3.   All "viewing areas", which shall be defined as the area where a
patron or customer would ordinarily be positioned while watching a film or
viewing device, shall be visible from a continuous main aisle or public room
and shall not be obscured by any curtain, door, wall or other enclosure.
      4.   There shall be no aperture whatsoever in any wall or partition
between viewing areas.
      5.   Each viewing area shall be lighted at a minimum level of ten (10)
foot-candles in all parts thereof.
      6.   All performers shall be at least twenty one (21) years of age.
      7.   All performances, exhibitions or displays shall take place on a
platform raised at least two feet (2') from the level of the floor, and located
at least ten feet (10') from any patron.
      8.   No performer shall fondle or caress any patron or other performer,
and no patron shall fondle or caress any performer.
      9.   No patron shall be permitted to pay or give any gratuity to any
performer, and no performer shall solicit any pay or gratuity from any patron.
   (E)   Adult Section: Within an establishment selling or renting books,
magazines, or films to the general public, a nonsubstantial section may
display, rent or offer for sale items distinguished or characterized by their
emphasis on matter depicting, describing or relating to "specified sexual
activities" or "specified anatomical areas" with the following restrictions:
      1.   The establishment shall be located within a C-2 or industrial
district and is not located within one thousand feet (1,000') of any existing
church, religious institution, daycare center, library, teen center, school,
public park or playground, or recreational facility where minors congregate.
"Minors" means persons under eighteen (18) years of age.
      2.   The area shall be set aside, blocked off or of limited access to
adults only, with clearly marked signs indicating that this area contains adult
only items.
      3.   The area shall be arranged in such manner that the display is not
visible to the general public.
      4.   There shall be suitable measures installed to ensure that adults
only have access.
      5.   A special use permit shall be obtained. Conforming businesses
existing at the time of adoption of this title shall be allowed to continue
such conforming practices and shall be granted a special use permit after
review and determination by the code enforcement officer and approval by the
village board.
   (F)   Special Use Permit Required: No adult oriented use shall operate even
at those locations where they may be allowed under subsection (C) of this
section without first having obtained a special use permit in the manner set
forth in chapter 14 of this title.
   (G)   Existing Adult Oriented Uses: Any adult oriented use which existed
lawfully, but which became nonconforming upon the adoption of this section to
this title shall be given until January 1, 2001, to either become conforming or
shall be discontinued. (Ord. 99-06, 6-21-1999)
9-3-11: MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS:
   (A)   Kennel Restrictions: No person shall keep a combined total of more
than four (4) adult dogs, cats or other domestic animals or pets over six (6)
months of age, unless they are kept on a property specifically zoned to allow a
veterinary clinic, animal hospital, or kennel. For purposes of this title, when
an animal reaches six (6) months, it shall be considered an adult animal.
   (B)   Parking Of Mobile Homes: It shall be unlawful, within the limits of
the village or within the zoning jurisdiction of the village, for any person to
park any mobile home on any street or other public place, or on any tract of
land owned by any person, occupied or unoccupied within the village except as
provided in chapter 5 of this title. Emergency or temporary stopping or parking
of a mobile home is permitted on any street for not longer than two and one-
half (21/2) hours, subject to any other and further prohibitions, regulations
or limitations imposed by the traffic and parking regulations of that street or
of the village. (Ord. 99-06, 6-21-1999)
CHAPTER 4
PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENTS
SECTION:
9-4-1: Intent
9-4-2: Purpose
9-4-3: Application And Review Fee
9-4-4: Application Procedure
9-4-5: Pre-Application Conference
9-4-6: Sketch Development Plan And Special Use Permit Application
9-4-7: Preliminary Development Plan
9-4-8: Final Development Plan
9-4-9: Standards
9-4-10: Legal Status Of Plans And Covenants; Changes
9-4-11: Use Conceptions
9-4-12: Bulk Regulation; Exceptions
9-4-13: Minimum Lot Area In Residential Planned Developments
9-4-14: Spacing Between Detached Residential Buildings
9-4-15: Designation Of Recreational Space And Permanent Common Open Space
9-4-16: Permits
9-4-17: Effect Of Denial Of A Special Use
9-4-1: INTENT:
This chapter is intended to provide the means and the guidelines through which
tracts of land may be developed through an overall approach, rather than the
traditional lot by lot treatment afforded by other districts in this chapter.
It is intended to provide a maximum of design freedom by permitting the
developer an opportunity to utilize the physical characteristics of the site
more fully through the reduction of lot sizes, yard, height and bulk
restrictions and the planned mixing of uses. Through the requirements of a
development plan, it is the intent that property under this chapter will be
developed through a unified design providing contiguity between the various
elements and ultimately leading to a better environment. Increased residential
densities may be permitted under this chapter if such increases can be
substantiated on the basis that the superior design makes greater densities
possible with no reduction of amenities. This chapter is not intended as a
panacea and should not be utilized as a device for making increased densities
more palatable, or as a means of circumventing the village’s development
regulations. This chapter should only be employed in instances where there is
truly some benefit for the community to be derived from its use. (Ord. 99-06,
6-21-1999; amd. Ord. 22-01, 5-2-2022; Ord. passed 9-19-2022)
9-4-2: PURPOSE:
In addition to the general purpose of this chapter, the purpose of this section
is to establish standards and procedures for planned unit developments, in
order that the following objectives may be obtained:
   (A)   Variety and flexibility in land development that is necessary to meet
with the best interests of the entire village.
   (B)   The allocation, maintenance, and permanent preservation of common open
space, recreation areas and facilities; to offer recreational opportunities
close to home, to enhance the appearance of neighborhoods by the conservation
of natural resources.
   (C)   A maximum choice in the types of environments available to the public
by allowing a development that would not be possible under the strict
application of the other sections of this chapter, as well as the subdivision
regulations.
   (D)   A pattern of development to preserve natural vegetation, topographic
and geologic features, air and water quality, and other natural resources and
amenities.
   (E)   A creative approach to the use of land and related physical facilities
that result in better development and design, and the construction of aesthetic
amenities.
   (F)   An efficient use of the land resulting in more economic networks of
utilities, streets, schools, public grounds and buildings and other facilities.
   (G)   Land use which promotes the public health, safety, comfort and
welfare.
   (H)   Innovations in residential, commercial, and industrial development so
that growing demands of the population may be met by greater variety in type,
design, and layout of space ancillary to said buildings. (Ord. 99-06, 6-21-
1999; amd. Ord. 22-01, 5-2-2022; Ord. passed 9-19-2022)
9-4-3: APPLICATION AND REVIEW FEE:
Prior to village review of a sketch development plan, preliminary development
plan or a final development plan, the developer shall have remitted all
required fees and review expenses to the village clerk. (Ord. 22-01, 5-2-2022;
Ord. passed 9-19-2022)
9-4-4: APPLICATION PROCEDURE:
A planned unit development shall be granted as a special use permit, in
accordance with standards and procedures of the Manteno zoning ordinance and
may depart from the normal procedures and requirements of this chapter and the
subdivision regulations. Applications shall be accompanied by the required
plats, documents, and other data as required. Before applying for a planned
unit development, an applicant may confer with the village administrator and/or
the director of building and zoning to obtain information and guidance before
entering into binding commitments or incurring substantial materials; provided
however, that no such preapplication conference shall result in any binding
commitments on behalf of the applicant or the village. (Ord. 99-06, 6-21-1999;
amd. Ord. 22-01, 5-2-2022; Ord. passed 9-19-2022)
9-4-5: PRE-APPLICATION CONFERENCE:
   (A)   Prior to the developer’s filing of an application for sketch
development plan review, it is recommended that the owner or subdivider consult
with the village administrator and/or the director of building and zoning to
secure information relative to the land use and zoning requirements,
development regulations and standards, and other applicable regulations and
standards. The purpose of the preapplication conference is to afford the
subdivider the opportunity to obtain the advice and assistance of village
officials, staff and other advisors and to discuss the proposed development
informally prior to the preparation of the sketch plan to process approvals in
a cost effective and time efficient manner.
   (B)   Before the meeting, it is suggested that the subdivider prepare a site
plan of the proposed planned unit development on a topographic survey of the
area showing the proposed layout of streets, arrangement of lots, and other
features in relation to the existing conditions. Upon receipt of any request
for a preapplication conference, the village administrator shall schedule a
conference meeting with the developer and village representatives as deemed
necessary by the village administrator.(Ord. 22-01, 5-2-2022; Ord. passed 9-19-
2022)
9-4-6: SKETCH DEVELOPMENT PLAN AND SPECIAL USE PERMIT APPLICATION:
   (A)   Application: In order to discuss the general purpose of the planned
unit development in the context of establishing planning policies and practices
of the Village of Manteno and to ensure that the required data is properly
prepared and presented before expending the time and money in preparation and
review of a engineered preliminary plan, any person desiring to develop land
subject to this title, before filing a final plan, shall file an application
and sketch development plan of the planned development with the village clerk.
After review of the application and sketch plan by village staff and within
thirty (30) days of submittal, the sketch plan shall be placed on the agenda of
a regular planning commission meeting.
   (B)   A Special Use Permit request shall be included as part of the sketch
development plan application in accordance with the provisions as defined in
Section
9-14-12 “Special Use Permits” of the zoning ordinance, including the required
public hearing and proper notifications.
   (C)   Sketch Plan Copies: Five (5) full size twenty-four inch by thirty-six
inch (24" x 36") sets and twenty (20) eleven inch by seventeen inch (11" x 17")
sets of the sketch plan(s) shall be submitted to the village clerk along with a
completed sketch development plan/special use permit application and the
required application and escrow fees.
   (D)   Development Escrow:
      1.   Concurrently with the submission of request for sketch plan review
as provided herein, the applicant shall deposit with the village treasurer, in
escrow, a sum of money that shall be used by the village to defray the cost
and/or expense billed for staff, infrastructure mapping, modeling, GIS and
database updates, court reporters for appearance and transcript fees, and such
other consultants or professionals as are hired by the village during the
technical, preliminary and final plan review process and through the village’s
final acceptance of all public improvements. Said escrow shall also be used to
pay the cost of all special planning commission or village board meetings
required in the planned unit development process.
      2.   The amount to be deposited by the applicant shall be not less than
ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00). Said escrow funds shall be deposited and
held by the village in an interest-bearing account with the interest payable to
the village of Manteno. The village shall make disbursements from said escrow
funds upon the receipt of billing statements, provided said statements have
been reviewed and approved by the village board. Notice to the applicant shall
not be a prerequisite to the village making said disbursements. If at any time
after commencement of the review process the amount deposited has been reduced
to a balance of three thousand dollars ($3,000.00) or less, the applicant shall
be required to deposit an additional amount with the village so that the escrow
balance is not less than the amount the applicant was originally required to
deposit. Said additional amount shall be deposited with the village treasurer
within fifteen (15) days after the applicant has been so notified. Notice shall
be deemed given as of the date that a written notice requesting an additional
amount is deposited by certified U.S. mail addressed to the applicant.
      3.   Any funds on deposit at the conclusion of the staff’s involvement
with the development, provided all disbursements have been made, shall be
returned to the applicant. However, notwithstanding anything herein to the
contrary, no final village board approval shall be granted until all the
aforesaid costs have been paid. All funds disbursed from the escrow fund shall
be itemized and only the remaining balance of the escrow account will be
returned to the applicant. There will be no refund of escrow funds already
allocated for expenses associated with the development if the development fails
to complete the planned unit development process.
   (E)   Application Fee: The sketch development plan application fee of seven
hundred fifty dollars ($750.00) shall be submitted with all other required
documents prior to review by the village.
   (F)   Planning Commission Recommendation: The planning commission, in
reviewing the sketch development plan, shall discuss with the developer the
proposed plan and any requirements the village may want to have incorporated
into a preliminary development plan, provided however that the village and
planning commission shall not in any way be subsequently prejudiced from making
any future recommendations or decisions on account of their review and comment
on the sketch development plan. A sketch development plan approval
recommendation does not grant the developer relief or variance from the planned
unit development, subdivision and zoning standards and requirements.
   (G)   Requirements: Application for a planned unit development shall be
executed by, or on behalf of, the landowner, accompanied by the following
supporting documents:
      1.   Ownership: The entire site of the planned unit development shall be
under single ownership, and/or unified control as demonstrated by a description
of legal responsibility as necessary to effectuate and maintain the plan.
      2.   Minimum Size: The site of the planned unit development shall be
determined on a case-by-case basis by recommendation of the planning commission
and approval of the village board during the sketch development plan phase of
the approval process. The developer/property owner shall provide sufficient
evidence to show the size of the property is sufficient for the proposed use(s)
and type of development.
      3.   Use(s): The planned unit development may include any or all uses
permitted within any of the existing zoning districts or a mixture thereof;
provided that the uses permitted in the planned development shall be of a type
and so located as to exercise no undue detrimental influence upon the
surrounding properties and shall be compatible each with the other within the
planned unit development.
      4.   Land Use Plan: A land use plan for the entire planned unit
development, which shows the boundaries of the proposed development, sets forth
the present plans of the developer of the planned development of the area into
the types of land uses and the location of such land uses. Any residential use
area shown on the plan shall also show the proposed number of dwelling units
and densities by type of residential unit proposed to be constructed, within
each phase of the planned development. Conceptual sketches shall be provided,
demonstrating the land planning concept for each proposed residential type of
housing unit. Similar, but more specific information should be provided for the
area of the plan intended for initial development.
      5.   Legal Description: A legal description of the property proposed to
be included in the total planned development.
      6.   General Character: A written explanation of the general character of
the proposed development including:
         (a)   The description and quantity of all land uses to be included in
the development, with maximum and minimum percentage limitations for each use
as well as the proposed number of acres to be devoted to recreational areas,
schools, and municipal purposes;
         (b)   The projected type, location and number of dwelling units and
densities to be constructed in each phase of the total development;
         (c)   A description of each type of residential, commercial or
industrial unit proposed to be constructed (i.e., single-family, commercial,
industrial, etc.);
      7.   General Description: A preliminary engineering study providing a
general description of existing sanitary and storm facilities and service water
facilities, on and adjacent to the proposed development and the proposed
improvements necessary to properly handle the sanitary and storm water and
service needs upon development and any additional information as may be
requested by the village engineer.
      8.   Traffic Study: A traffic study prepared by a qualified expert,
providing a general description of existing roads on and adjacent to the
proposed development, and the proposed road improvements necessary to properly
handle the traffic anticipated to be generated upon development. A circulation
diagram indicating the proposed movement of vehicles, goods and pedestrians
within the planned development, and to and from existing thoroughfares. Any
special engineering features and traffic regulation devices needed to
facilitate or ensure the safety of this circulation pattern must be shown.
      9.   Construction Schedule: A proposed construction schedule showing the
anticipated beginning and completion dates of the project as a whole, or for
each phase, if the project will be developed in phases.
      10.   Modification, Exceptions and Variances: A description of the
modifications, exceptions, and variances from this chapter or the village’s
subdivision regulations which are being requested as part of the application
for establishment of the planned unit development.
      11.   Front Elevation: Architects’ rendering of front elevation of
primary and accessory buildings. Such renderings should be of sufficient detail
to permit an understanding of the proposed character of development.
      12.   Feasibility: Adequate evidence, in the form of a market research
report or other appropriate evidence to establish the need for and feasibility
of the proposed development.
      13.   Resources: A preliminary statement identifying existing natural and
environmental resources, including a policy statement by the applicant
expressing basic plans and procedures, which will be utilized to ensure
protection of the total physical setting of the development and related
environs.
      14.   Land Use: A written statement signed by the applicant outlining and
describing in detail as the planning commission deems appropriate, the
arrangement by which the applicant proposes to regulate land use and otherwise
ensure development of the proposed planned unit development, in accordance with
the recommendation of the planning commission and approval by the village
board. Such statement may, but need not, include a draft of proposed covenants
and/or deed restrictions intended to be included and filed in the office of the
recorder of deeds of Kankakee County prior to disposition of any land in the
planned development (which covenants and/or deed restrictions may include
adequate provisions to assure proper maintenance and repair of all areas and
facilities under common ownership, including payment thereof, and
enforceability thereof by, or on behalf of, the village), proposed character
and bylaws of an association, if any, for homeowners, merchants, or industrial
owners within the proposed planned development.
   (C)   Public Hearing: The planning commission shall hold a public hearing on
the application for a sketch development plan / special use permit giving
notice of the time and place not more than thirty (30) nor less than fifteen
(15) days before the date of the hearing by publishing a notice thereof at
least once in the local newspaper.
   (D)   Planning Commission Action: Within sixty (60) days after the close of
the public hearing, the planning commission shall provide a written
communication to the village board recommending approval, modification, or
disapproval of the sketch and/or preliminary plan of the planned development
and the reasons thereof:
      1.   In what respects the proposed plan is, or is not, consistent with
the stated purpose of the planned unit development regulations.
      2.   The extent to which the proposed plan meets the requirements and
standards of the planned unit development regulations.
      3.   The extent to which the proposed plan departs from the zoning and
subdivision regulations, otherwise applicable to the subject property,
including, but not limited to, the density, dimension, area, bulk and use, and
the reasons why such departures are or are not deemed to be in the public
interest.
      4.   The nature and extent of the common open space and recreational
space in the planned unit development, the reliability of the proposals for
maintenance and conservation of the common open space and recreational space,
and the adequacy or inadequacy of the amount and function of the open space in
terms of the densities and dwelling types proposed in the plan.
      5.   The way said plan does or does not make adequate provision for
public services, provide adequate control over vehicle traffic, and further the
amenities of light and air, recreation and visual enjoyment.
      6.   The relationship and compatibility, beneficial or adverse, of the
proposed plan to the adjacent properties and neighborhood.
      7.   The desirability of the proposed plan to physical development, tax
base and economic well-being of the entire community.
      8.   The conformity with the recommendations of the comprehensive plan of
the village.
      9.   In case of a plan which proposes development over a period of years,
the sufficiency of the terms and conditions proposed to protect the interests
of the public and residents of the planned unit development in the integrity of
the plan.
   (E)   Action by the Village Board of Trustees: The village board, after
receipt of the sketch development plan and recommendation from the planning
commission shall approve, modify or disapprove such sketch development plan.
The village board may require such special conditions in the approval of the
sketch development plan, as it may deem necessary to ensure conformity with the
intent of all comprehensive plan elements and the stated purpose of the planned
development.
      1.   Upon approval by the village board of the sketch development plan by
resolution, a record shall be prepared including findings of fact and setting
forth the terms of relief and/or variances granted from existing ordinances in
general, and specifically from the subdivision regulations. No building permit
shall be issued for any structure until a final planned unit development plan
has been filed and approved.
      2.   Approval of a sketch development plan shall not constitute approval
of the final plan, rather it shall be deemed an expression of the approval of
the layout submitted on the sketch development plan, as a guide to the
preparation of the final plans. The final plan for a portion of the planned
unit development or the entire planned development, shall be submitted by the
developer, not later than one year (or such additional time, as may be
authorized by resolution of the village board), after approval of the sketch
development plan, for approval by the corporate authorities of the village and
subsequent recording upon the fulfillment of the requirements of these
regulations and conditions, if any, of the sketch development plan approval.
The final plan shall be approved as the final land use and zoning plan if it
conforms substantially with the preliminary plan. (Ord. 99-06, 6-21-1999; amd.
Ord. 22-01, 5-2-2022; Ord. passed 9-19-2022)
9-4-7: PRELIMINARY DEVELOPMENT PLAN:
   (A)   Purpose And Intent: The purpose of the preliminary development plan is
to provide a transitional phase between sketch and final plan approval and a
logical sequence of events.
It is intended to permit the applicant the opportunity to provide specific
information pertaining to that portion of the planned unit development, which
is the subject of the preliminary plan.
   (B)   Requirements:
      1.   Application Fee: The preliminary development plan application fee of
seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00) shall be submitted to the village clerk
with all other required documents prior to review by the village.
      2.   Preliminary Plan Copies: Five (5) full size twenty-four inch by
thirty-six inch (24" x 36") sets and twenty (20) eleven inch by seventeen inch
(11" x 17") sets of the preliminary plan(s) shall be submitted to the village
clerk with a completed preliminary development plan application and the
required fee.
      3.   Preliminary plans for all or specified development phases of the
planned development shall be submitted for approval. There shall be no minimum
acreage requirement with respect to preliminary plans. In considering the
approval of a preliminary plan, no further public hearing shall be required to
approve changes from the sketch development which are not “major changes” as
defined in subsection 9-4-10(B) of this chapter.
      4.   The following information shall be required for all preliminary
development plans:
         (a)   Legal Description: A boundary survey and legal description of
the area covered by such preliminary plan, prepared and certified by a
registered Illinois surveyor, including the total acreage therein certified to
the nearest one-hundredth (1/100) of an acre, and the date of the preparation.
         (b)   Topographic Survey: A topographic survey of the area covered by
such preliminary plan at two-foot (2') contour intervals as such as exists at
that time.
         (c)   Map: A map showing the existing zoning and land use of the
property covered by the preliminary plan and the area within five hundred feet
(500') thereof, as well as of the boundaries of the total planned unit
development.
         (d)   Drawing: A detailed drawing of the area covered by such plan
prepared at a scale of not less than one inch to two hundred feet (1" = 200')
and shall show such designations as proposed streets (public and private) for
the area covered by such preliminary plan and the area within five hundred feet
(500') thereof, all buildings, their height and use, common open space,
recreational areas and facilities, parking areas, sidewalks, service areas, and
other facilities related to the proposed development. The submission may be
composed of one or more sheets and drawings and shall include:
            (1)   Public Roads: Existing and proposed public roads including
classifications, width of rights of way, width of pavement, and construction
details.
            (2)   Easements: Existing easements and proposed easements to be
granted in lieu of rights of way.
            (3)   Density: Provide information on the density of residential
uses, including dwelling units per acre, the number of dwelling units by type
and the number of buildings by type.
         (e)   Public Utilities Plan: A schematic public utilities plan of
existing and proposed utilities drawn at a scale of not less than one inch to
two hundred feet (1" = 200') for the area covered by such preliminary plan and
the area within three hundred feet (300') thereof indicating the following, and
any additional documentation:
            (1)   Schematic sanitary and storm sewer systems.
            (2)   Schematic water supply systems.
            (3)   Schematic street lighting and public area lighting systems.
            (4)   A landscape plan.
         (f)   Time Schedule: A time schedule of the proposed development of
the area covered by such preliminary plan.
         (g)   Character: Explanation of the character of the area covered by
the preliminary plan and the reasons why it has been planned to take advantage
of the flexibility of these regulations.
         (h)   Covenants: Proposed agreements, provisions, or covenants which
will govern the use, maintenance, and continued protection of the planned
development and any of its common open space, and recreational areas and
facilities, in the area covered by the preliminary plan.
         (i)   Nonresidential Use: Provide information on the type and amount
of ancillary and nonresidential uses in a residential development, including
the amount of common open space, and recreational areas and facilities.
         (j)   Subsurface Conditions: Subsurface conditions on the tract (if
required by the village engineer); location and results of tests made to
ascertain subsurface soil, rock, and ground water conditions; depth to ground
water, unless test pits are dry at a depth of five feet (5').
         (k)   Title And Certificates: Present tract designation according to
official records in the office of the recorder of deeds; title under which the
proposed development is to be recorded, with names and addresses of owners; and
notation stating acreage.
         (l)   Open Space and Recreation Areas and Facilities: All parcels of
land intended to be dedicated for public use or reserved for the use of all
property owners with the purpose indicated, and the improvements which will be
made to each area and facility.
         (m)   Architectural Renderings: Architectural renderings of the
proposed structures within only the area which is the subject of the
preliminary plan.
   (C)   Time Limitations for Submission of Preliminary Development Plans: The
first preliminary plan of the proposed planned unit development shall be
submitted for approval within six (6) months after approval by the village
board of the sketch development plan, provided, that upon request in writing of
the developer, the village board may, by resolution duly adopted at any meeting
of the village board, extend the period of time for the submission of a first
preliminary plan.
If the first preliminary plan shall cover less than all of the planned unit
development, preliminary plans for additional areas of the planned development
may be submitted to the village board within such period of time as shall have
been prescribed in the approval of the application for establishment of the
planned development; provided, further, that upon request in writing of the
developer, the village board may extend the period of time for submission of
preliminary plans covering all of the planned development.
   (D)   Status Of Approved Preliminary Development Plan: Approval of a
preliminary plan shall not constitute approval of the final plat nor qualify a
plat of the planned unit development for recording, rather it shall be deemed
an expression of approval of the preliminary plan as a guide to preparation of
the final plat. A preliminary plan which has been granted approval as submitted
for approval with conditions or modifications shall not be modified or revoked
nor otherwise impaired by action of the village pending an application for
final approval without the consent of the landowners, provided that application
for final approval is filed within the time or times specified in the
resolution granting preliminary approval and thereafter, but prior to final
approval, the landowner shall choose to abandon such plan and shall so notify
the planning commission in writing, or shall fail to file application for final
plat approval within the required time period, the preliminary plan approval
shall be deemed to be revoked and all that portion of the area included in the
plan for which final approval has not been given shall be subject to those
local ordinances applicable thereto. No building permit shall be issued for any
structure until final plat approval has been given by the village board.
   (E)   Submission Of Updated Land Use Plans:
      1.   Submission With Preliminary Development Plans: At any time and from
time to time when a preliminary plan for a portion of the planned unit
development is submitted for approval, it shall be an obligation of the
developer of such portion to cause the developer of the planned development to
prepare and submit to the village with such preliminary plan, an updated land
use plan for those areas in the planned development for which preliminary plans
shall not then have been submitted for approval.
      2.   Annual Submissions: When no updated land use plan of the planned
unit development shall have been prepared for one year, the developer of the
planned development shall, unless the village waives such obligation, prepare
and submit to the village a land use plan for those areas in the planned
development for which preliminary plans shall not then have been submitted for
approval. (Ord. passed 9-19-2022
9-4-8: FINAL DEVELOPMENT PLAN:
   (A)   Purpose: The purpose of the final development plan is to designate
with particularity the land subdivided into conventional lots as well as the
division of other lands, not so treated, into common open areas and building
areas, and to designate and limit the specific internal uses of each building
or structure, as well as the land in general.
   (B)   Requirements: The final development plan of the planned unit
development shall conform substantially to the preliminary development plan as
approved, and if desired by the developer, it may be submitted in stages with
each stage reflecting a portion of the approved preliminary plan which is
proposed to be recorded and developed; provided however, that such portion
conforms to all requirements of these regulations. The required procedure for
approval of the final development plan of a planned unit development shall
require the following:
      1.   Application: Application for final development plan approval shall
be filed with the village clerk, accompanied by five (5) full size, twenty-four
inch by thirty-six inch (24" x 36") sets and twenty (20) eleven inch by
seventeen inch (11" x 17") sets of the preliminary plan(s) along with a
completed final development plan application. The final development plan and
supporting data shall be forwarded to the planning commission for certification
that the final plan is in conformity with these regulations and in agreement
with the approved preliminary and sketch development plans.
      2.   Final Development Plan Submission: Final plans for all or specified
development phases of the planned unit development shall be submitted for
approval. There shall be no minimum acreage requirement with respect to final
plans. Approval of final plans may not be withheld for reasons that would be
inconsistent with the approved preliminary development plans. In considering
the approval of the final plan, no further public hearings shall be required to
approve changes from the preliminary development plans which are not “major
changes” as defined in subsection
9-4-10(B) of this chapter.
      3.   Final Development Plan Approval: Within twelve (12) months after
approval of the sketch development plan by the village board, the applicant
shall submit a final development plan for recommendation by the planning
commission and approval by the village board.
      4.   Subdivision Plat: If the planned unit development constitutes a
subdivision, a final subdivision plat shall be submitted according to the
provisions of section
10-4-6 “Final Plat”, including plat fees as defined in
10-4-6-(D)1. Any such final subdivision plat shall set forth on the face
thereof suitable dedications of permanent open space and recreational space to
be owned in common easements, rights of way, and all other criteria in form and
substance conforming to the requirements of the village’s subdivision
regulations, as the same may be amended and in force from time to time.
      5.   Final Version: The final version of the site plan of the planned
unit development shall be filed indicating the locations of all buildings, all
parking and loading spaces, and any other special structure, facility, or
feature approved or required by the village board.
      6.   Covenants/Deed Restrictions: The final version of the covenants and/
or deed restrictions, if any, by which the applicant proposes to regulate land
use and otherwise protect the proposed development, accompanied by the written
representation and warranty of the applicant, in form and substance
satisfactory to the village attorney to the effect that the owner of the real
property which is the subject of the proposed planned unit development has not
sold or otherwise disposed of any interest in said property and will not sell,
or otherwise dispose of any such interest, prior to the filing for record of
said covenants and/or deed restrictions in the office of the recorder of deeds
of Kankakee County, Illinois.
      7.    Deeds or Easement Agreement: Such deeds or easement agreements, if
any, as area required or approved by the village board, shall be filed in form
and substance approved by the village attorney, conveying a suitable ownership
interest in the parcels within the proposed planned unit development which are
to be subject to public or common ownership.
      8.   Articles Of Incorporation: Filing a copy of the articles of
incorporation of the homeowners’, merchants’, or industrial owners’
association, if any, required or approved by the village board, certified by
the secretary of state of Illinois, not more than thirty (30) days prior to the
filing of the final plan; a certificate of good standing for such corporation
certified by the secretary as being true, correct, and complete copy of such
bylaws, as of the date not more than thirty (30) days prior to the filing of
such final plan.
      9.   Planning Commission Recommendation: After review of the final
development plan and supporting data, the planning commission shall recommend
approval of the final plan within sixty (60) days after filing by the
developer. Recommendation of disapproval of the final plan of the planned unit
development shall include a clear statement of the reasons thereof.
      10.   Board Approval: Approval by the village board of the final
development plan for any proposed planned unit development shall be effective
only for a period of sixty (60) days after the date of such approval, unless
within such sixty (60) day period the applicant shall record or cause the
recordation of the final plan including any final subdivision plan, the final
restrictive covenants and/or deed restrictions, and the deeds and/or easement
agreements required or approved by the village board in the office of the
recorder of deeds of Kankakee County, Illinois.
      11.   Drawings and Specifications: Engineering drawings and
specifications for:
         (a)    Sanitary and storm sewer systems.
         (b)    Water supply systems.
         (c)    Street lighting and public area lighting systems.
         (d)    Sidewalks, trails, and paths.
Such engineering drawings and any other drawings required by any other
ordinance of the village shall be prepared in such detail as may be required by
the village engineer.
      12.   Cost Estimate: Estimate of the cost of installations of all
proposed public improvements confirmed by a registered Illinois engineer.
      13.   Impact Report: A plan or report shall be prepared by the developer
and shall evaluate in general terms the impact of the proposed development on
the natural environment. The report shall identify:
         (a)    The final version of the developer’s policy toward maintaining
the natural environment.
         (b)    An analysis of the existing environment prior to the proposed
action. Consideration should be given to the following factors:
            (1)   Unique physical features of the land such as soil stability,
erosion, and ground contours.
            (2)   Scenic views.
            (3)   Drainage, runoff surface water, ground water and floodplains.
            (4)   Air quality.
            (5)   Areas underlain by sand and gravel aquifers.
            (6)   Vegetation.
            (7)   Wildlife.
         (c)    A general listing of the effects on the environment which would
be caused by the proposed development, and the actions which the developer
proposes to undertake to resolve any adverse conditions resulting from
development of the land.
      14.    Final Renderings: Final architectural renderings and facades of
all proposed primary structures.
      15.    Delinquent Taxes: A certificate shall be furnished from the county
collector that they find no delinquent taxes and that all special assessments
constituting a lien on the whole or any part of the property of the planned
unit development have been paid.
      16.   Time Limitations for Submission of Final Development Plans: Final
plans for all of the area covered by the planned unit development shall be
submitted to the village board for approval within one year after approval of
the sketch development plan by the village board, provided, that upon request
in writing of the developer, the village board may, by resolution duly adopted
at any meeting of the village board, extend the period of time for the
submission of such final plans. Final plans covering all the planned unit
development shall be submitted to the village board for approval within such
period of time as shall have been prescribed in the approval of the application
for establishment of the planned development provided that upon request in
writing of the developer, the village board may, by resolution duly adopted at
any board meeting, extend the period of time for submission of final
development plans covering all of the planned unit development. (Ord. 99-06, 6-
21-1999; amd. Ord. 22-01, 5-2-2022; Ord. passed 9-19-2022)
9-4-9: STANDARDS:
In granting or withholding approval of the sketch development plan, preliminary
development plan or final development plan, the planning commission and the
village board shall be guided by the requirements of this chapter and the
following standards:
   (A)   Public Good: All plans shall be so designed that the public health,
welfare, and safety will be protected.
   (B)   Property Value: The proposed development shall be such that it does
not cause substantial injury to the value of other property in the immediate
area.
   (C)   Protection Of Conditions: All plans shall provide for protection of
both aesthetics and function of the natural environment, which shall include,
but not be limited to, conditions pertaining to floodplains, soil, and geologic
characteristics, air quality, and preservation of vegetation.
   (D)   Common Open Space: All plans shall provide for and ensure the
preservation of adequate recreational facilities and common open space.
   (E)   Balanced Neighborhood: Residential use areas shall have a variety of
housing types and densities necessary to achieve a balanced neighborhood.
   (F)   Public Activities: The planned development shall include land area
necessary to accommodate cultural, educational, recreational, and other public
and quasi-public activities necessary to serve the needs of the residents
thereof.
   (G)   Creative Land Uses: The proposed development shall provide for the
orderly and creative arrangement of all land uses with respect to each other
and to the entire village.
   (H)   Ways For Pedestrians and Cyclists: Walkways shall form a logical, safe
and convenient system for pedestrian access to all dwelling units and to all
project facilities and off-site destinations likely to attract substantial
pedestrian traffic. Walkways to be used by substantial numbers of children as
play areas or routes to schools or other principal destinations shall be so
located and safeguarded as to minimize contacts with normal automobile traffic.
Street crossings shall be held to a minimum on such walkways, located and
designed to promote safety, appropriately marked and otherwise safeguarded. If
substantial bicycle traffic is anticipated, bicycle paths shall be incorporated
in the walkway system. Pedestrian ways appropriately located, designed, and
constructed may be combined with other easements and uses by emergency or
service vehicles, but shall not be used by other automotive traffic.
      1.    Access: Access for pedestrians and cyclists shall be arranged to
provide safe, convenient routes, and need not be limited to the vehicular
access points. When pedestrian access points do not occur at street
intersections, they shall be marked and controlled, and when such ways are
exposed to substantial vehicular traffic at the edges of a district, fences or
other barriers shall be erected and maintained to prevent crossings except at
designated points. Bicycle paths, if provided, shall be so related to the
pedestrian way system that street crossings are combined.
      2.    Screening at Edges of The Planned Unit Development: Fences, walls
or vegetation screening shall be provided along the edges of the planned
development where needed to protect residents from undesirable views, lighting,
noise, or other off-site influences or to protect occupants of adjoining
residential districts from similar adverse influences within the planned
development. In both cases, screening shall be designed to control the existing
or potential first floor residential windows in the planned development or
other residential district. Screening requirements may be waived where terrain
makes protection overview impractical. (Ord. 99-06, 6-21-1999; amd. Ord. 22-01,
5-2-2022; Ord. passed 9-19-2022)
9-4-10: LEGAL STATUS OF PLANS AND COVENANTS; CHANGES:
   (A)   Compliance: All planned unit developments shall be developed in strict
compliance with the recorded final development plan and supporting data. All
final plans and covenants and/or deed restrictions filed and recorded hereunder
shall be contractual undertakings by, and shall be binding upon, the
applicants; therefore, the owners of the land covered by such planned
development and their successors and assigns shall limit and control the
construction location and use and operation of all land in such planned
development, and all improvements and structures to be located thereon.
      1.   Schedule: The village board shall consider the planned unit
development subject to revocation if construction falls more than two (2) years
behind the filed and approved schedule. The developer shall be notified at
least ninety (90) days prior to any revocation hearing.
      2.   Changes in Final Approved Plan During Development: Upon issuance of
a special use permit and the necessary building permits, no changes may be made
during or after the development of the final development plan as approved and
recorded unless such changes are made pursuant to a new and separate
application for a planned unit development.
      3.   Occupancy: No planned unit development, or any portion thereof, may
be occupied until such time as a certificate of occupancy has been issued by
the building department certifying that the development of a stage of the
planned development, if applicable, has been completed in compliance with the
final development plan as approved and recorded.
   (B)   Major Changes: Any of the following changes shall be deemed to be a
“major change”:
      1.   A change which alters the concept, character or intent of the
preliminary development plan.
      2.   A change which increases residential density.
      3.   A change which significantly increases the height of any building or
structure; or alters the uses and design standards set forth as a minimum in
this chapter.
      4.   A change which significantly increases nonresidential floor area by
more than ten percent (10%).
      5.   A change which reduces the amount of common open space of
recreational land.
      6.   A change in the land use plan.
      7.   A change in the transportation plan.
   (C)   Minor Changes: The planning commission may recommend approval of minor
changes in the planned unit development which do not change the concept or
intent of the development. “Minor changes” are defined as any change not
defined as a major change. (Ord. 99-06, 6-21-1999; amd. Ord. 22-01, 5-2-2022;
Ord. passed 9-19-2022)
9-4-11: USE CONCEPTIONS:
The planning commission may recommend, and the village board may authorize,
that there be permitted in part of the area of a proposed planned unit
development, and for the duration of such development, specified uses not
permitted by the use regulation of the district in which said development is
located, provided that the planning commission shall find:
   (A)   That the use permitted by such exceptions are necessary or desirable
and are appropriate with respect to the primary purpose of the planned unit
development.
   (B)   That the uses permitted by such exceptions are not of such a nature or
so located as to exercise a detrimental influence on the surrounding
neighborhood.
   (C)   That no more than twenty percent (20%) of the ground area of the
planned unit development shall be devoted to such specified use exceptions;
provided, however, that in a residential planned unit development not more than
eight percent (8%) of the total ground area in the planned development which is
zoned for residential purposes shall be devoted to uses first permitted within
the commercial zoning district; and no ground area in the residential planned
development shall be devoted to uses first permitted within the industrial
zoning district.
   (D)   That in an industrial planned unit development, such specified use
exceptions shall comply with any performance standards contained within the
zoning district in which the proposed planned development is located. (Ord. 99-
06, 6-21-1999; amd. Ord. 22-01, 5-2-2022; Ord. passed 9-19-2022)
9-4-12: BULK REGULATION; EXCEPTIONS:
In the case of any planned unit development, the planning commission may
recommend, and the village board may authorize, exceptions to the bulk
regulations of this chapter within the boundaries of such planned development,
provided that the planning commission shall find:
   (A)   That such exception shall be solely for the purpose of promoting an
integrated site plan no less beneficial to the residents or occupants of such
development as well as the neighboring property, that would be obtained under
the bulk regulations of the district in which said development is located.
   (B)   That along the periphery of such planned unit developments, yard shall
be provided as required by the regulations of the district in which said
development is located.
   (C)   That in a residential planned unit development the maximum number of
dwelling units per gross residential acre shall not exceed five (5) units per
acre. (Ord. 99-06, 6-21-1999; amd. Ord. 22-01, 5-2-2022; Ord. passed 9-19-2022)
9-4-13: MINIMUM LOT AREA IN RESIDENTIAL PLANNED DEVELOPMENTS:
Provided the overall number of dwelling units per acre (density) is not
increased beyond the provisions of section
9-4-12 of this chapter and provided that the common open space and recreational
area are in accord with section
9-4-15 of this chapter the planned development may include minimum lot areas
per dwelling unit smaller than those normally required in the zoning district.
(Ord. 99-06, 6-21-1999; amd. Ord. 22-01, 5-2-2022)
9-4-14:  SPACING BETWEEN DETACHED RESIDENTIAL BUILDINGS:
In a residential planned development, the minimum distance between the walls of
any two (2) separate buildings over one story in height shall be as follows:
   (A)   Thirty feet (30'), if either wall contains bedroom windows.
   (B)   Forty feet (40'), if either wall contains living room windows.
   (C)   Thirty feet (30') in all other circumstances, except that the minimum
distance between walls, which are parallel or substantially parallel in the
portions thereof, which are directly opposite one another (measured
perpendicularly) and do not exceed fifteen feet (15') in length and contain no
windows, shall be:
      1.    Fifteen feet (15') for all structures below a horizontal plane
thirty-five feet (35') above grade; and
      2.    Thirty feet (30') for all structures above said plane. (Ord. 99-06,
6-21-1999; amd. Ord. 22-01, 5-2-2022; Ord. passed 9-19-2022)
9-4-15:  DESIGNATION OF RECREATIONAL SPACE AND PERMANENT COMMON OPEN SPACE:
Residential planned unit development areas shall include recreational areas
equivalent to at least thirty percent (30%) of the total residential area; and
industrial and commercial areas shall include permanent common open space in an
amount equivalent to ten percent (10%) of the total commercial and/or
industrial areas of the planned development.
   (A)   Definitions:
 
                             Large active and passive recreational areas
                             generally located on or near thoroughfares and
                             within two (2) miles of each residence intended to
DISTRICT PARKS:              be served. District parks generally adjoin junior
                             and senior high schools and often include such
                             facilities as swimming pools, tennis complexes,
                             recreational building and adequate off-street
                             parking.
                             Active and passive recreational areas which
                             usually serve children and adults in an urban area
                             within a radius of approximately one-half (1/2)
                             mile. Neighborhood parks generally adjoin public
NEIGHBORHOOD PARKS:          elementary schools and may include such features
                             as ball diamonds and play area toward the interior
                             of the site so the perimeter can be landscaped to
                             buffer sound and provide a measure of safety to
                             the public.
                             Parkways, medians, landscaped green space, or
PERMANENT COMMON OPEN SPACE: other similar areas, defined as recreational
                             areas.
                             Active recreational areas intended for children up
                             to six (6) or seven (7) years of age. Play lots
                             generally feature play apparatuses, benches, sand
PLAY LOTS:                   areas and landscaping. Play lots should be located
                             near the center of the housing areas generating
                             children of such ages so that children need not
                             cross arterial streets to reach play lots.
                             Land specifically designed and intended for the
                             active or passive recreational use of the
                             residents of the planned unit development and
                             shall include, but not be limited to public or
RECREATION AREA:             private play lots and parks; school sites; storm
                             water detention or retention areas if the planning
                             commission determines that such areas are capable
                             of being utilized for multipurpose recreational
                             activities; pedestrian corridors; bicycle trails;
                             greenbelts; and open space networks.
 
   (B)   Designation:
      1.   The planning commission shall determine, in its reasonable
discretion, whether land is designated and intended for the recreational use of
residents of the planned development and in so doing shall consider the
following factors:
         (a)   The relationship of the location of the land being considered to
the residential use area which it is intended to serve.
         (b)   The size and usability of the land being considered.
         (c)   Other existing or proposed recreational facilities capable of
fulfilling recreational needs of the residents.
   (C)   Maintenance Of Common Open Space And Recreation Areas: In the event
that the organization established to own and maintain common open space and
recreation areas and related facilities or any successory organization, shall,
at any time after establishment of the planned unit development, fail to
maintain the common open space and recreation areas and related facilities in
reasonable order and condition in accordance with the plan, the village may
serve written notice upon such organization or upon the residents of the
planned development setting forth the manner in which the organization has
failed to maintain the space in reasonable condition, and said notice shall
include a demand that such deficiencies of maintenance be cured within thirty
(30) days thereof, and shall state the date and place of a hearing thereon
which shall be held within fourteen (14) days of the notice. At such hearing
the village may modify the terms of the original notice as to the deficiencies
and may give an extension of time within which they shall be cured. If the
deficiencies set forth in the original notice or in the modifications thereof
shall not be cured within said thirty (30) days or any extension thereof, the
village, to preserve the taxable values of the properties within the planned
development and to prevent the common open space from becoming a public
nuisance, may enter upon said property and maintain the same for a period of
one year.
Said entry and maintenance shall not vest in the public any rights to use the
common open space or recreation areas when the same is voluntarily dedicated to
the public by the owners. Before the expiration of said year, the village
shall, upon its initiative or upon the request of the organization theretofore
responsible for the maintenance of the common open space, call a public hearing
upon notice to such organization, or to the residents of the planned unit
development show cause why such maintenance by the village shall not, at the
election of the village, continue for a succeeding year. If the village board
shall determine that such organization is ready and able to maintain said
common open space and recreation areas at the end of said year, then such
matter shall be discontinued. If the village board shall determine that such
organization is not ready and able to maintain said common open space and
recreation areas in a reasonable condition, the village may, in its discretion,
continue to maintain said common open space during the next succeeding year and
subject to a similar hearing and determination, in each year thereafter. The
decision of the village board in any such case shall constitute a final
administrative decision subject to review in accordance with appropriate
provisions of this chapter.
The cost of such maintenance by the village shall be assessed ratably against
the properties within the planned unit development that have a right of
enjoyment of the common open space and recreation space and shall become a tax
lien on said properties. The village at the time of entering upon said property
for the purpose of maintenance, shall file an appropriate notice of such lien
upon the properties affected by such lien within the planned development. (Ord.
99-06, 6-21-1999; amd. Ord. 22-01, 5-2-2022; Ord. passed 9-19-2022)
9-4-16: PERMITS:
Building, zoning and occupancy permits shall be required for each structure in
a planned unit development. No building permit relating to any part of a
planned development shall be issued prior to the approval of a final plan or
such part of the planned development; provided, however, that subject to the
approval of the village, excavation operations (construction of sewer, water
and other utility improvements) may proceed at any time following approval of
the preliminary development plan. (Ord. 99-06, 6-21-1999; amd. Ord. 22-01, 5-2-
2022; Ord. passed 9-19-2022)
9-4-17: EFFECT OF DENIAL OF A SPECIAL USE:
No application for a special use, which has been denied wholly or in part by
the village board shall be resubmitted for a period of one year from the date
of said order of denial except on the grounds of new evidence or proof of
change of conditions found to be valid by the planning commission and the
village board. (Ord. 99-06, 6-21-1999; amd. Ord. 22-01, 5-2-2022; Ord. passed
9-19-2022)
CHAPTER 5
MOBILE HOME PARKS
SECTION:
9-5-1: Permitted Districts
9-5-2: Permitted Uses
9-5-3: Site And Structure Requirements
9-5-4: Mobile Home Park License
9-5-5: Zoning Of Mobile Home Parks
9-5-6: Development Standards
9-5-7: Water Supply And Sewage Disposal
9-5-8: Mobile Home Stand
9-5-9: Storage
9-5-10: Fences 1  (Rep. by Ord. 07-09, 7-16-2007)
9-5-11: Garbage And Waste
9-5-12: Health, Safety, And General Welfare Of Residents
9-5-13: Management
9-5-14: Applicability Of Village Ordinances And Regulations
9-5-15: Streets, Sidewalks And Lighting
9-5-16: Mobile Home Sales
9-5-17: Register Of Occupants
9-5-18: Permit For Existing Park
9-5-19: Penalty
 
Notes
1 1. See title 8, chapter 4 of this code.
9-5-1: PERMITTED DISTRICTS:
Mobile home parks shall be allowed as a special use within an R-1 single-family
residential district and only if specifically authorized by the village board
as allowed in chapter 14 of this title. (Ord. 99-06, 6-21-1999)
9-5-2: PERMITTED USES:
The following accessory uses are permitted accessory uses provided they are
constructed as per all applicable ordinances, and separated from the side or
rear lot lines a minimum distance of five feet (5'):
   One private garage or carport per site not to exceed five hundred (500)
square feet.
   Storage shed not to exceed one hundred twenty (120) square feet. No side
dimension shall be greater than twelve feet (12'). Reference section
9-3-6 of this title for additional requirements.
   Clubhouses and management offices.
   Mobile homes, manufactured homes, factory built homes or any other similar
homes including movable or portable dwellings constructed for towing on its own
chassis and connection to utilities without use of a permanent foundation for
purposes of single-family permanent habitation.
   Public safety facilities, for use exclusively by the residents and guests of
the development.
   Recreation facilities, for use exclusively by the residents and guests of
the development. (Ord. 07-60, 2-19-2008)
9-5-3: SITE AND STRUCTURE REQUIREMENTS:
   (A)   Size And Density: No mobile home park shall contain an area of less
than ten (10) acres nor less than twenty (20) mobile home sites provided,
however, that mobile home parks in existence on the effective date of this
title having a total area or number of mobile home sites less than herein
prescribed may continue to operate. Existing mobile home parks may be altered
to bring such parks into conformity with this title. However, no additions or
alterations may be made to any existing mobile home park unless such additions
or alterations are in conformity with this title.
   (B)   Setbacks And Screening For Exterior Boundary:
      1.   All mobile home stands shall maintain the following setbacks from
mobile home park boundaries facing public streets:
         (a)   State or U.S. highways or major streets: Fifty feet (50').
         (b)   County highways or collector streets: Fifty feet (50').
         (c)   Township roads or minor streets: Forty feet (40').
      2.   There shall be minimum side and rear yards of forty feet (40').
      3.   All mobile home parks shall be provided with visual screening such
as fences or berming, as approved by the code enforcement officer, along all
boundary lines abutting existing public rights of ways, residential, commercial
or industrial development. Such fences or berming shall be of sufficient height
and density to adequately filter from view the mobile homes, accessory
structures and other uses in the mobile home park.
   (C)   Lot Size Requirements:
      1.   Minimum lot area: Seven thousand two hundred (7,200) square feet.
      2.   Minimum lot width: Sixty feet (60').
      3.   Minimum lot area for corner lots: Nine thousand (9,000) square feet.
      4.   Minimum corner lot width: Seventy five feet (75').
      5.   Minimum home size: Nine hundred twenty four (924) square feet.
   (D)   Yard Setback Requirements:
      1.   Front setback: Twenty five feet (25').
      2.   Side yard setbacks: Ten feet (10').
      3.   Rear yard setback: Twenty feet (20').
      4.   Corner lot setback: Twenty five feet (25').
      5.   Maximum structure height: Twelve feet (12').
      6.   Maximum lot coverage: Thirty percent (30%). (Ord. 99-06, 6-21-1999)
9-5-4: MOBILE HOME PARK LICENSE:
   (A)   License Fee: The village shall assess a license fee for owner's
maintenance and operation of any mobile home park located within the zoning
limits of the village in accordance with the Illinois state statutes and
applicable law of the state of Illinois.
   (B)   License Required: It shall be unlawful for any person to establish,
operate or maintain upon any property owned or controlled by him, a mobile home
park within the zoning limits of the village, without having first secured such
license therefor from the village, granted and existing in compliance with the
terms of this chapter. Such license shall automatically renew each year based
on the date of issuance and may be revoked only after a public hearing.
   (C)   Application: The application for such license shall be made on forms
furnished by the village and shall be filed with the village clerk. The
application shall be accompanied by a copy of the mobile home park plan showing
the following, either existing or as proposed:
      1.   Name and address of the owner of the park and applicant, if
different.
      2.   Location and legal description of the park.
      3.   Plans and specifications of the proposed mobile home park
development including, but not limited to, the following:
         (a)   A map indicating the area and dimensions of the tract of land.
         (b)   The number, location and size of all manufactured home sites.
         (c)   The location and width of all public and private streets,
roadways and walks.
         (d)   The location of all water, storm sewer and sanitary sewer
facilities.
         (e)   All building existing or to be constructed within the mobile
home park.
         (f)   The location of internal lighting and electrical systems.
         (g)   Location of recreational and retention facilities.
         (h)   Proper conformance with village building, zoning and plumbing
regulations.
         (i)   As built plan showing the location and depth of all underground
utilities.
         (j)   Such further information as may be requested by the village to
enable it to determine if the proposed park will comply with legal
requirements.
   (D)   Annexation Fee: Commencing upon final plat approval of the first phase
of any mobile home park, a monthly annexation fee, as determined at time of
annexation through the agreement, shall be assessed per unit (any mobile home
hooked up to village sewer and water utilities and located within the park,
whether sold and occupied or not).
   (E)   Revocation And Suspension: The village board of trustees is hereby
authorized to revoke any license issued pursuant to the terms of this chapter
if after due investigation and public hearing they determine that the holder
thereof has violated any of the provisions of this chapter, or that any mobile
home, or mobile home park, is being maintained in an unsanitary or unsafe
manner or is a nuisance. Said hearing shall be conducted in accordance with
procedure to be adopted by said board of trustees.
   (F)   Single Ownership: Each licensed mobile home park shall be licensed and
maintained as a single unit and the entire tract shall remain in single
ownership.
   (G)   Special Assessments: All special assessments levied by the village
shall be levied against the entire tract comprising the mobile home park.
   (H)   Restriction: Licenses issued under the terms of this chapter convey no
right to erect any building, to do any plumbing or electrical work without
first obtaining a permit and having proper inspection to meet all codes of the
village. (Ord. 99-06, 6-21-1999)
9-5-5: ZONING OF MOBILE HOME PARKS:
   (A)   No mobile home park or extension thereof shall be allowed until and
unless a special use permit has been granted therefor, in accordance with the
zoning regulations of the village as specified under section
9-14-11 of this title. The planning commission may, in conformance with the
zoning regulations, recommend, and the board of trustees may issue, through the
code enforcement officer, a license for the location of a mobile home park.
   (B)   No mobile home park shall be located within the village limits unless
village water and sewer connections and fire protection facilities are
available. (Ord. 99-06, 6-21-1999)
9-5-6: DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS:
   (A)   All utilities, including, but not limited to, water, sewer, electric,
gas, telephone, and cable television must be located in underground
unobstructable locations including individual connections to each dwelling unit
pad. Each dwelling unit shall be individually metered for utility service.
   (B)   No mobile home park shall be located in an area where the conditions
of soil, ground water level, drainage or topography may cause hazard to the
property, health or safety of the occupants. The park shall be located on a
well drained site, properly graded to ensure rapid drainage and freedom from
stagnant pools of water. The development shall be laid out to avoid adversely
affecting ground water and aquifer recharge, to reduce cut and fill, to avoid
unnecessary impervious cover, to prevent flooding, to provide adequate access
to lots and sites, and to mitigate adverse effects of shadow, noise, odor,
traffic, drainage, and utilities on neighboring properties. An underground
storm sewer system shall be provided, in accordance with village standards, to
serve any mobile home development.
   (C)   No mobile home park shall be located such that it is exposed to
objectionable smoke, dust, noise, odors, vibrations or other adverse
influences.
   (D)   Ingress and egress to a mobile home park shall be provided in such a
manner to facilitate access by emergency vehicles, and should be designed to
provide efficient and safe traffic circulation in the vicinity.
   (E)   No part of any mobile home park shall be used for nonresidential
purposes except accessory uses that are required to directly serve mobile home
park residents and for management and maintenance of the mobile home park.
   (F)   Due to the unique nature of mobile home construction and installation,
all mobile home parks shall have safety buildings available for park residents
during severe weather or other emergencies.
   (G)   All developments shall be required to provide at least twenty five
percent (25%) of the buildable land area as open space. Developed open space
shall be designed to provide active recreational facilities to serve the
residents of the area. Such facilities shall be centrally located on the site
and readily accessible to all mobile home occupants. Undeveloped open space
shall be designed to preserve important site amenities or environmentally
sensitive areas. Retention and detention areas shall not be considered as
fulfilling any portion of open space requirements.
   (H)   Landscaping shall be provided as part of the site plan and subdivision
design. It shall be provided comprehensively throughout the site, integrating
the various elements of site design, preserving and enhancing the particular
identity of the site, and creating a pleasing site character. Landscaping shall
include plant materials such as trees, shrubs, ground covers, perennials, and
annuals, and other materials such as rocks, water, sculpture, art, walls,
fences and paving materials.
   (I)   A landscape plan prepared by a qualified expert shall be submitted
with each subdivision development request. The plan shall identify existing and
proposed trees, shrubs, and ground covers, natural features such as rock
outcroppings, and other landscaping elements. The plan shall show where they
are or will be located and planting and/or construction details. Special
attention shall be paid so as to substantially screen the development from all
adjoining zoning districts and land uses as outlined in section 
9-3-5 of this title.
   (J)   Lot layout shall provide for clustering or various angle arrangements
of the lots, as opposed to a grid pattern.
   (K)   Petitioners and owners of the development shall comply with any and
all ordinances of the village in constructing any improvements within the park,
including, but not limited to, all of the building, plumbing, electrical, as
well as the zoning ordinances, subdivision ordinances and storm water ordinance
of the village. Specific fees applicable to the development will include the
current plat fee, annexation fee, cost allocation recapture fee and water and
sewer tap on fees for each home.
   (L)   The construction of public and private streets and all extensions of
existing sanitary, storm and water mains necessary to serve the property shall
be constructed and installed in accordance with plans and specifications
approved by the village, but at the expense of the owners. (Ord. 99-06, 6-21-
1999)
9-5-7: WATER SUPPLY AND SEWAGE DISPOSAL:
   (A)   The water and sanitary sewer systems within the limits of the park
property, with the exception of the certain water and sewer mains as identified
by the village, shall be owned and maintained by the park.
   (B)   The village shall identify, own and maintain the water and sewer mains
within the park. The park shall provide a perpetual easement of access to the
village for the repair and maintenance of said water and sewer mains. Said
easement shall be recorded with the Kankakee County recorder of deeds. No
structures shall be placed on the village's utility easements.
   (C)   The park is responsible for providing properly working and accessible
water service related portions of their system, keeping the same maintained and
repaired at all times. These portions shall include, but are not limited to,
private mains, curb stops, water shut off boxes and service lines to individual
homes.
   (D)   If the village determines that certain measures are required for the
maintenance of the water or sanitary sewer system within the park, excepting
those owned and maintained by the village, the village shall notify the park.
The park shall undertake such measures at the park's expense. If, after
notification, the park fails to perform said measures, the village shall be
granted total access to perform or have performed the necessary measures and
bill the expense to the park.
   (E)   The village shall have the right to set water and sewer rates, to read
individual water meters, and to collect water usage fees from the individual
residents and/or other uses at the park. Said rates shall be the same as rates
set within the village for single-family detached housing.
   (F)   The village shall have access to any of the residential water meters
located within the park for the purpose of maintenance, repair and/or
replacements. This access shall be provided at any time that the village
requests it, utilizing the maintenance personnel of said park. Any maintenance
and/or removal of water meters shall be performed by the park personnel, but
only at the request of and under the direct supervision of the Manteno water
department. The village shall incur no financial obligation as a result of any
of the aforesaid maintenance and/or replacement work.
   (G)   All water meters shall be installed in a weather protected environment
to ensure proper and accurate registration. The village shall incur no
financial obligations in the event that a frozen or abused water meter
replacement is deemed necessary. (Ord. 99-06, 6-21-1999)
9-5-8: MOBILE HOME STAND:
   (A)   Placements: The mobile home stand shall be so placed as to provide for
the practical placement on the site of both the manufactured home and its
appurtenant structures and the retention of the mobile home on the site in a
stable condition and in satisfactory relationship to its surroundings.
   (B)   Location: The location of each mobile home stand shall be at such
elevation, distance, and angle in relation to the access street and the mobile
home lot driveway that placement and removal of the mobile home is practical.
   (C)   Construction: Concrete slab with full continuous perimeter foundation.
   (D)   Gradient: There shall be a minimum of two percent (2%) longitudinal
and adequate crown or cross gradient and surface drainage.
   (E)   Undercarriage: Each mobile home unit shall be skirted via a structural
treatment similar to that of the home unit or a landscaping treatment
conforming to the subdivision landscaping plan in such a manner so as not to
permit the undercarriage of the unit to be visible. Each unit shall have its
wheels removed and appropriate means of anchoring the units shall be provided
so as to reduce the potential for damage during periods of high winds.
   (F)   Additions To Mobile Homes: The maximum lot coverage of the mobile home
and any additions thereto shall not exceed thirty percent (30%) of the total
lot area. (Ord. 99-06, 6-21-1999)
9-5-9: STORAGE:
   (A)   Storage facilities shall be provided for the active storage of outdoor
equipment, furniture or tools, and for the inactive storage for such materials
which are used only seasonally or infrequently, and can not be stored in the
manufactured home.
   (B)   Storage facilities shall be designed to enhance the appearance of the
park, constructed out of materials similar to the manufactured home,
coordinated with appropriate landscaping plan, provide for hazardous weather
protection, and must be maintained in coordination with other features of the
manufactured home. (Ord. 99-06, 6-21-1999)
9-5-10: FENCES 1 :
(Rep. by Ord. 07-09, 7-16-2007)
 
Notes
1 1. See title 8, chapter 4 of this code.
9-5-11: GARBAGE AND WASTE:
   (A)   A sufficient number of adequate flyproof and watertight containers
shall be supplied for the storage of garbage and shall be kept in sanitary
condition at all times. Garbage and rubbish shall be collected and disposed of
as frequently as may be necessary to ensure that the garbage cans shall not
overflow. Garbage containers shall be disposed of in a village approved manner
which creates neither a nuisance nor a menace to health.
   (B)   Garbage and waste areas shall be fenced in and completely screened
from public rights of way. (Ord. 99-06, 6-21-1999)
9-5-12: HEALTH, SAFETY, AND GENERAL WELFARE OF RESIDENTS:
   (A)   Mobile home parks shall be kept free of all litter, rubbish or other
accumulated flammable materials. All buildings and the grounds of the park
shall be maintained in a clean, sightly condition and kept free of any
condition that will menace the health of any occupant or the public or
constitute a nuisance.
   (B)   Approved fire hydrants shall be located throughout the mobile home
park and shall be located not more than five hundred feet (500') from any
mobile home. The hydrants shall deliver a minimum of seventy five (75) gallons
of water per minute at a pressure of twenty (20) pounds per square inch at the
highest elevation point of the mobile home park.
   (C)   Every park shall be equipped at all times with fire extinguishers of a
type approved by the state fire marshal for use at mobile home parks in good
working order of such number and so located in the park as to satisfy
applicable reasonable regulations of the fire departments. No open fires shall
be permitted.
   (D)   No owner or person in charge of any dog, cat or other pet or animal
shall permit it to run at large or commit any nuisance within the limits of any
mobile home park.
   (E)   A public safety facility shall be provided to serve the residents of
the mobile home park. Adequate provisions or plans shall be in place to protect
or shelter the residents of the park during severe weather, emergencies, or
other situations which potentially threaten health, safety or welfare.
   (F)   Adequate insect and rodent control measures shall be employed. All
buildings shall be fly and rodent proof and rodent harborages shall not be
permitted to exist in the park. (Ord. 99-06, 6-21-1999)
9-5-13: MANAGEMENT:
   (A)   Each development shall have a responsible attendant or manager in
charge and present at all times. Duties of the attendant or manager will
include the maintenance of the park, its facilities and equipment, in a clean,
orderly and sanitary condition, and be answerable for any violation of the
provisions of this chapter.
   (B)   Each development shall have a building in which shall be located the
office of the person in charge of said park. Within this office, a copy of the
park license and of this chapter shall be posted and the park register shall at
all times be kept.
   (C)   It is the duty of the person in charge, together with the licensee, to
see that the provisions of this chapter are complied with and enforced and to
report promptly to the proper authorities any violation of the chapter or any
other violations of law which may come to his attention. (Ord. 99-06, 6-21-
1999)
9-5-14: APPLICABILITY OF VILLAGE ORDINANCES AND REGULATIONS:
   (A)   All ordinances of the village relating to subdivision controls,
zoning, official plans and buildings, housing and related construction shall be
in effect for all aspects of the development unless provisions are specifically
amended within this chapter.
   (B)   Residents of the park are required to comply with all village codes
and ordinances unless provisions are specifically amended within this chapter
or pursuant to conditions of the special use permit. All plumbing, electrical,
building and other work on or at any mobile home park licensed under this
chapter shall be in accordance with the provisions of this title regulating
such work unless said provisions are specifically made inapplicable under the
terms of this chapter. (Ord. 99-06, 6-21-1999)
9-5-15: STREETS, SIDEWALKS AND LIGHTING:
   (A)   The road system shall be designed to permit the safe, efficient, and
orderly movement of traffic; to meet, but not exceed the needs of the present
and future population served; to have a simple and logical pattern; to respect
natural features and topography; to meet the needs of snow plows, fire trucks,
school buses (if necessary), ambulances, and other emergency vehicles; and to
present an attractive streetscape. The road system shall be designed to serve
the needs of the development and to discourage use by through traffic.
   (B)   A separate, secondary private drive shall be provided for emergency
use only. The location and construction of such drive shall be approved by the
code enforcement officer, the Manteno police department, and the Manteno fire
department.
   (C)   Entrance drive into mobile home parks shall have direct access to a
public street and shall be designed to have free traffic flow onto such public
streets. No parking or mobile home lot access driveway shall be permitted off
an entrance drive for a distance of fifty feet (50') from a public right of
way.
   (D)   All lots shall front on residential access or subcollector streets,
not on collector streets. The right of way of residential streets shall be in
accordance with the subdivision regulations and recommended by the village
engineer. All streets shall have paving materials, curbs, gutters, grading,
intersections, off sets, radii of curvature, streetlights, street trees, storm
sewers, and sidewalks accompanying same in accordance with village design
standards.
   (E)   The internal private street system serving mobile home sites shall
provide convenient circulation by means of minor streets and properly located
collector public streets. Cul-de-sac streets shall be limited to a length of
three hundred feet (300').
   (F)   There will be no dedicated streets within the park. The responsibility
of said roads and their maintenance shall belong to the developer, with the
village having access and final determinations during special use process.
   (G)   All residential parking will be off street. No on street parking is
allowed.
   (H)   Off street parking shall be provided in front and side yards only. Two
(2) off street parking spaces shall be provided per dwelling unit. The off
street parking surface shall be covered with a concrete surface. Each space
shall not be less than ten feet (10') wide by twenty feet (20') deep. Enclosed
garage space shall not count toward the required off street parking
requirements. Such parking shall be located on the mobile home space rather
than in roadways or accessways and under no circumstances shall such parking be
permitted in public rights of way.
   (I)   All sidewalks and driveways shall be concrete and meet village
standards.
   (J)   All driveways and walkways within the park shall be lighted at night
with electric lamps of not less than 50 watts each (equivalent in gas
lighting), spaced at intervals of not more than one hundred feet (100').
   (K)   Individual walks to each mobile home stand from paved streets or
parking areas are required and shall be a minimum of two feet (2') in width.
   (L)   Common sidewalks are required throughout the mobile home park and
shall be a minimum of four feet (4') in width.
   (M)   No walk shall be used as a drainageway. Sudden changes in alignment
and gradient shall be avoided.
   (N)   Streetlights shall be designed to produce illumination consistent with
village standards, as approved by the village engineer. Potentially hazardous
locations such as intersections, major pedestrian crossings, and portions of
streets abutting service buildings and recreation areas shall be illuminated to
standards as set by the village engineer. (Ord. 99-06, 6-21-1999)
9-5-16: MOBILE HOME SALES:
Mobile home sales are permitted on a limited basis. One home may be used for a
model, and one model is allowed for each park. This model must follow all
structural and aesthetic guidelines as outlined for a manufactured residence.
(Ord. 99-06, 6-21-1999)
9-5-17: REGISTER OF OCCUPANTS:
It shall be the duty of each licensee and permittee to keep a register
containing a record of all mobile home owners and occupants located within the
park. The register shall contain the following information:
   (A)   The name and address of each mobile home occupant.
   (B)   The name and address of the owner of each mobile home.
   (C)   The make, model, year and license number of each mobile home or motor
vehicle.
   (D)   The state, territory or country issuing such licenses.
   (E)   The date of arrival and of departure of each mobile home.
The park shall keep a current register available for inspection at all times by
law enforcement officers, public health officials and other village officials
whose duties necessitate acquisition of the information contained in the
register. The register record for each occupant registered shall not be
destroyed for a period of six (6) years following the date of registration.
(Ord. 99-06, 6-21-1999)
9-5-18: PERMIT FOR EXISTING PARK:
   (A)   Existing parks shall file an application for a mobile home park permit
in conformity with this chapter within ninety (90) days after the effective
date of this chapter. The complete plan submitted shall show compliance with
all applicable provisions of this chapter except where compliance would
constitute an unreasonable hardship or a special permit annexation specifies
otherwise. A mobile home park permit shall be issued at such time as the
village board determines that the existing park conforms fully to the complete
plan submitted with the application.
   (B)   Mobile home parks in existence on the effective date of this chapter
which provide mobile home spaces having a width or area less than that required
may continue to operate with spaces of the existing width and area, provided
that any expansion or reorganization of an existing mobile home park shall in
all respects comply with the terms of this chapter. (Ord. 99-06, 6-21-1999)
9-5-19: PENALTY:
Any person who either intentionally or unintentionally violates, disobeys,
omits, neglects or refuses to comply with, or resists enforcement of any
provisions of this chapter, shall be subject to a fine of not less than fifty
dollars ($50.00) nor more than five thousand dollars ($5,000.00) for each
offense and suffer the penalties herein provided. (Ord. 99-06, 6-21-1999)
CHAPTER 6
ZONING DISTRICTS AND MAP
SECTION:
9-6-1: Districts Established
9-6-2: Zoning Map
9-6-3: Entire Area Zoned
9-6-4: Annexations
9-6-1: DISTRICTS ESTABLISHED:
The village of Manteno, for the purpose of this title, is hereby divided into
the following zoning districts:
Residential districts:
E-1  Estate residential district
R-1  Single-family residential district
R-2  Two-family attached residential district
R-3  Multiple-family residential district
Commercial districts:
C-1  Downtown commercial district
C-2  Commercial district
Industrial districts:
I-1  Light industrial district
I-2  Heavy industrial district
Specialty districts:
A-1  Agricultural district
OS-1 Open space district
FB-1 Route 50 corridor district
 
(Ord. 99-06, 6-21-1999; amd. Ord. 12-34, 2-19-2013)
9-6-2: ZONING MAP:
   (A)   Authorization: The location and boundaries of the districts
established by this title are indicated upon the map entitled, "Official Zoning
Map, Village Of Manteno, Illinois", which, together with all explanatory matter
thereon, is hereby adopted by reference and declared to be part of this title.
   (B)   Location Of Map: The official zoning map shall be located in the
office of the village clerk and shall be the final authority as to the current
zoning status of land and buildings, subject to such authorized amendments
which be in effect.
   (C)   Interpretation Of District Boundaries: Where uncertainty exists as to
the boundaries of districts as shown on the official zoning map, the following
rules shall apply:
      1.   Boundaries indicated as approximately following the centerline of
streets, highways or alleys shall be construed to follow such centerlines.
      2.   Boundaries indicated as approximately following platted lot lines
shall be construed as following such lot lines.
      3.   Boundary lines which follow or approximately follow plotted lot
lines of other property lines as identified by the "tax identification number"
of the parcel assigned by the county of Kankakee shall be construed as
following such lines.
      4.   Boundaries indicated as following railroad lines shall be construed
to be midway between the main tracks.
      5.   Boundaries indicated as following shorelines shall be construed to
follow such shorelines, and in the event of change in the shoreline, shall be
construed as moving with the actual shoreline boundaries indicated as
approximately following the centerline of streams, or other bodies of water
shall be construed to follow such centerlines.
      6.   Boundaries indicated as parallel to or extensions of features
indicated in subsections (C)1 through (C)3 of this section shall be so
construed. Distances not specifically indicated on the official zoning map
shall be determined by dimensions shown on the map, or in the absence of
dimensions, by the scale of the map.
      7.   Where a zoning district boundary line divides a lot in single
ownership on the effective date of this title, the regulations of this title
for either portion of such lot may, at the owner's discretion, apply to the
entire area of the lot or twenty five feet (25') beyond the zoning district
boundary lines, whichever is the lesser distance.
      8.   All streets, alleys, public ways and railroad rights of way, if not
otherwise specifically designated, shall be deemed to be in the same zone as
the property immediately abutting upon such alleys, streets, public ways and
railroad rights of way, unless otherwise specifically designated, shall be
deemed to be the district boundary.
      9.   Where physical or cultural features existing on the ground are at
variance with those shown on the official zoning map, or in other circumstances
not covered by subsections (C)1 through (C)8 of this section, the planning
commission's decision may be presented to the village board in the same matter
as an amendment to the zoning ordinance as outlined in chapter 14 of this
title.
   (D)   Vacation Of Public Ways: Whenever any street, alley, or other public
way is vacated in the manner authorized by the law, the zone adjoining each
side of such street, alley, or public way, shall be automatically extended to
the center of such vacation and all areas included in the vacation shall then
and henceforth be subject to all regulations of the extended zone.
   (E)   Changes: If, by amendment to this title, any change is made in any
district boundary, it shall be shown on the official zoning map. The date of
the latest updating of the official zoning map shall be shown on the face of
the map. (Ord. 99-06, 6-21-1999)
9-6-3: ENTIRE AREA ZONED:
It is the intent that the entire area of zoning jurisdiction, including all
land and water areas, streets, alleys, railroads and other rights of way, be
included in the districts established by this title. If any area is not shown
on the official zoning map as being included in any district, it shall be
deemed to be in the R-1 residential district. (Ord. 99-06, 6-21-1999)
9-6-4: ANNEXATIONS:
   (A)   Whenever territory is added to the village by annexation, the zoning
for such territory (including, but not limited to, its zoning district
classification, special uses, and variations) may be established by means of a
preannexation agreement, as provided by law; provided that all otherwise
applicable regulations and procedures of this title have been complied with
prior to the execution of said preannexation agreement.
   (B)   Whenever any parcel of land is hereafter annexed to the village, in
any manner whatsoever, such territory, upon annexation, shall be classified or
zoned under this title as an R-1 district, except as may be provided for by a
preannexation agreement or an annexation agreement after public hearing by the
planning commission. (Ord. 99-06, 6-21-1999)
CHAPTER 7
RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS
ARTICLE A. E-1 ESTATE RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT
SECTION:
9-7A-1: Purpose
9-7A-2: Policy
9-7A-3: Uses Permitted
9-7A-4: Special Uses Permitted
9-7A-5: Temporary Uses Permitted
9-7A-6: Accessory Uses
9-7A-7: Prohibited Uses
9-7A-8: Site And Structure Requirements
9-7A-9: Special Provisions
9-7A-1: PURPOSE:
The residential zoning district E-1 is hereby established to further the use of
lands optimally suited to neither prime agricultural nor high density urban
uses because of location, topography, soil characteristics, wetness,
vegetation, or other natural or man induced factors and where portions of the
land may be kept open to protect and conserve hilly areas, wetlands, prairies,
wooded regions, and other unique areas for the public benefit and perpetuation
of the diversity of natural ecosystems.
   (A)   To provide lands for large lot, single-family residential uses which
are the optimum use due to topography, soils, natural characteristics, manmade
features, and/or location and existing uses.
   (B)   To provide the opportunity to keep horses, or other large animals, and
the right to practice in a limited manner agriculture, floriculture,
horticulture, cultivation of field or garden crops, and similar related
activities, but within the limits of smaller lots. (Ord. 99-06, 6-21-1999)
9-7A-2: POLICY:
To achieve the purpose of the E-1 estate residential district, it shall be the
policy of the village to:
   (A)   Foster uses where adequate police and fire protection are available.
   (B)   Allow a minimum one acre lot and maximum two (2) acre lot for single-
family residential use and other permitted compatible uses where each domicile
may be served by an on site sewage disposal system until such time as municipal
services are available.
   (C)   Zone E-1 lands least adaptable for sustained long term agriculture
uses and/or least suitable for dense urbanized development because of location,
topography, geology, soil types, hydrologic characteristics, or other natural
features of the land. (Ord. 99-06, 6-21-1999)
9-7A-3: USES PERMITTED:
No land shall be used or occupied and no building, structure, or premises shall
be erected, altered, enlarged, occupied, or used, except as otherwise provided
in this title for other than one or more of the following specified uses:
   Agricultural uses:
   Gardening and general farming, for private use only, but not including
poultry and livestock.
   Greenhouses for private use only.
   Nurseries for private use only.
   Public, quasi-public, and governmental buildings and facilities:
      Churches and other places of worship.
      Municipal buildings.
      Public and parochial schools.
   Public parks, public playgrounds and public community center buildings.
   Residential uses:
      Single-family detached dwellings. (Ord. 99-06, 6-21-1999)
9-7A-4: SPECIAL USES PERMITTED:
The following uses shall be permitted only if specifically authorized by the
village board as allowed in section
9-14-12 of this title:
   Cemeteries.
   Clubhouses, country clubs, public or private golf courses, tennis clubs,
swimming pools, and similar recreational uses.
   Horses, but not more than one per acre, and housed in a barn at least one
hundred feet (100') from any property line. Horses shall not be grazed in a
front or side yard, and overgrazing is prohibited. Approval of the construction
of said barn shall also be part of the special use application. Adequate
trailways or exercise facilities must be demonstrated.
   Larger dimensions for the one allowed, detached accessory shed, toolroom, or
similar building or structure used for domestic storage or shelter of horses,
per principal building with approval by the planning commission and village
board.
   Larger dimensions for the one allowed, detached garage or portion of
principal building designed, arranged, used, or to be used for the storage of
automobiles of the occupants of the premises, per principal building, but not
to exceed the regulations set forth in section
8-1-19 of this code unless approved by the planning commission and village
board.
   Nursery schools, day schools, and childcare centers.
   Public utility buildings and structures. (Ord. 99-06, 6-21-1999; amd. Ord.
02-39, 5-19-2003)
9-7A-5: TEMPORARY USES PERMITTED:
Upon application to and issuance by the code enforcement officer of a permit,
the following uses may be operated as temporary uses:
   Temporary building, trailer, or yard for construction materials and/or
equipment, both incidental and necessary to construction in the zoning
district. Each permit shall specify the location of both building or yard and
the area of permitted operation. Within any development, each such permit shall
be valid for a period of six (6) calendar months and shall not be renewed for
more than one additional period.
   Temporary office, both incidental and necessary for the sale or rental of
real property. Each permit shall specify the location of the office and the
area of permitted operation. Each such permit shall be valid for a period of
not more than one year and shall not be renewed for more than two (2)
successive periods at the same location. (Ord. 99-06, 6-21-1999)
9-7A-6: ACCESSORY USES:
Accessory uses, buildings or other structures customarily incidental to and
commonly associated with a principal or conditioned permitted use may be
permitted, provided they are operated and maintained under the same ownership
and on the same lot as the permitted use, do not include structural features
inconsistent with the permitted use, and do not involve the conduct of any
business, trade, or industry.
Garages, carports, or other parking areas for the exclusive use of the resident
occupants of the premises, but subject to the requirements of section
8-1-19 of this code.
Gardening, greenhouse, and other facilities for raising of plant materials,
fruits, and vegetables.
Home occupations in accordance with section
9-3-9 of this title.
Real estate signs in accordance with the applicable regulations of chapter 13
of this title.
Swimming pools, exclusively for the use of the residents and their guests and
set back from every property line at least twenty feet (20'). (Ord. 99-06, 6-
21-1999; amd. Ord. 02-39, 5-19-2003)
9-7A-7: PROHIBITED USES:
All uses not expressly authorized in sections
9-7A-3 through
9-7A-6 of this article, inclusive. (Ord. 99-06, 6-21-1999)
9-7A-8: SITE AND STRUCTURE REQUIREMENTS:
   (A)   Minimum Lot Area: A separate ground area of not less than one acre nor
more than two (2) acres shall be designated, provided, and continuously
maintained for each parcel containing a permitted or special use.
   (B)   Minimum Lot Frontage: A minimum lot frontage of two hundred feet
(200') shall be provided for each parcel containing a permitted or special use.
   (C)   Yards:
      1.   Front Yard: All structures shall be set back not less than fifty
feet (50') from the front lot line. The principal building may not be set back
farther than thirty three percent (33%) of the depth of the lot.
      2.   Side Yard: All structures shall be set in from the side lot line a
distance of not less than twenty feet (20') or ten percent (10%) of the lot
frontage, whichever is greater.
      3.   Rear Yard: All detached, accessory structures shall be set in a
distance of not less than thirty feet (30') from the rear lot line.
   (D)   Maximum Height: No principal structure shall exceed thirty five feet
(35') in height, and no accessory structure shall exceed twenty feet (20') in
height, except as provided elsewhere in this title.
   (E)   Floor Area Ratio: Not to exceed thirty percent (30%). (Ord. 99-06, 6-
21-1999)
   (F)   Minimum Size Of Dwelling: Each single-family detached dwelling, and
any other structure occupied in whole or in part for residential purposes,
shall contain at least two thousand (2,000) square feet of livable floor area
exclusive of garages and any story below grade. All residential units shall be
required to have a garage in conformance with section
8-1-19 of this code. (Ord. 02-39, 5-19-2003)
9-7A-9: SPECIAL PROVISIONS:
   (A)   Parking Requirements: In accordance with the applicable regulations
set forth in chapter 12 of this title.
   (B)   Sign Regulations: In accordance with the applicable regulations set
forth in chapter 13 of this title.
   (C)   Trucks: Trucks shall be parked or stored only in accordance with the
requirements of chapter 12 of this title.
   (D)   Tents: Tents shall not be erected, used or maintained on any lot
except such tents that are customarily used for temporary purposes.
   (E)   Recreational Vehicles: Recreational vehicles shall be parked or stored
only in accordance with the requirements of chapter 12 of this title. (Ord. 99-
06, 6-21-1999)
ARTICLE B. R-1 SINGLE-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT
SECTION:
9-7B-1: Purpose
9-7B-2: Policy
9-7B-3: Uses Permitted
9-7B-4: Special Uses Permitted
9-7B-5: Temporary Uses Permitted
9-7B-6: Accessory Uses
9-7B-7: Prohibited Uses
9-7B-8: Site And Structure Requirements
9-7B-9: Special Provisions
9-7B-1: PURPOSE:
The residential district R-1 as hereby established to provide for an
environment of predominately single-family detached dwellings with certain
additional compatible uses which serve the residents living in district. The R-
1 district is also established to implement the purpose and intent for
residential districts where provision for compatible community facilities and
services are available. (Ord. 99-06, 6-21-1999)
9-7B-2: POLICY:
To achieve the purpose of the R-1 single-family residential district, it shall
be the policy of the village to:
   (A)   So locate R-1 single-family residential districts to other districts
nearby or adjacent to available municipal police and fire protection so as to
protect these residential areas from the danger of fire, explosion, or noxious
fumes and the irritations of offensive odors, noise, smoke, vibrations, glare,
or other threats to health and well being.
   (B)   So locate R-1 single-family residential districts where paved roads
meeting current village standards may serve the residents providing convenience
and safety in transportation where mobility is not impeded and where hazards
and the intensity or potential for accidents are avoided or minimized. (Ord.
99-06, 6-21-1999)
9-7B-3: USES PERMITTED:
Public, quasi-public, and governmental buildings and facilities:
   Churches and other places of worship.
   Municipal buildings.
   Public and parochial schools.
   Public libraries.
Public parks, public playgrounds and public community center buildings.
Residential uses:
   Single-family detached dwellings. (Ord. 99-06, 6-21-1999)
9-7B-4: SPECIAL USES PERMITTED:
The following uses shall be permitted only if specifically authorized by the
village board as allowed in chapter 14 of this title:
   Clubhouses, country clubs, public or private golf courses, tennis clubs,
swimming pools, and similar recreational uses.
   "Group home, small", as defined in chapter 2 of this title and provided no
other group home is established within six hundred feet (600').
   Nursery schools and daycare centers, when accessory to the principal
residence on the premises.
   Public utility buildings and structures. (Ord. 99-06, 6-21-1999)
9-7B-5: TEMPORARY USES PERMITTED:
Upon application to and issuance by the code enforcement officer of a permit,
the following uses may be operated as temporary uses:
   Temporary building, trailer, or yard for construction materials and/or
equipment, both incidental and necessary to construction in the zoning
district. Each permit shall specify the location of both building or yard and
the area of permitted operation. Within any development, each such permit shall
be valid for a period of six (6) calendar months and shall not be renewed for
more than one additional period.
   Temporary office, both incidental and necessary for the sale or rental of
real property. Each permit shall specify the location of the office and the
area of permitted operation. Each such permit shall be valid for a period of
not more than one year and shall not be renewed for more than two (2)
successive periods at the same location. (Ord. 99-06, 6-21-1999)
9-7B-6: ACCESSORY USES:
Accessory uses, buildings, or other structures customarily incidental to and
commonly associated with a principal or conditioned permitted use may be
permitted, provided they are operated and maintained under the same ownership
and on the same lot as the permitted use, and do not involve the conduct of any
business, trade, or industry. See section
8-1-19 of this code for additional requirements.
Garages, carports, or other parking areas for the exclusive use of the resident
occupants of the premises, but subject to the requirements of section
8-1-19 of this code.
Gardening, raising of plant material, fruits, and vegetables.
Home occupations.
Keeping of household pets exclusively for the use of personal enjoyment of
residents of the premises and not for commercial purposes as defined as kennels
in chapter 2 of this title.
Real estate signs in accordance with the applicable regulations of chapter 13
of this title.
Swimming pools, exclusively for the use of the residents and their guests, and
in accordance with section
8-8-1 of this code. (Ord. 99-06, 6-21-1999; amd. Ord. 02-39, 5-19-2003)
9-7B-7: PROHIBITED USES:
All uses not expressly authorized in sections
9-7B-3 through
9-7B-6 of this article, inclusively. (Ord. 99-06, 6-21-1999)
9-7B-8: SITE AND STRUCTURE REQUIREMENTS:
   (A)   Minimum Lot Area: A separate ground area of not less than nine
thousand six hundred (9,600) square feet shall be designated, provided, and
continuously maintained for each parcel containing a permitted and special use.
   (B)   Minimum Lot Width: A minimum lot width of eighty feet (80') shall be
provided for each parcel containing a permitted or special use. Corner lots
shall have a minimum lot width of one hundred feet (100').
   (C)   Minimum Lot Depth: A minimum lot depth of one hundred twenty feet
(120') shall be provided for each parcel containing a permitted or special use.
Reverse corner or double frontage lots shall have a minimum lot depth of one
hundred fifty feet (150').
   (D)   Yards:
      1.   Front yard: All structures shall be set back at least twenty five
feet (25') from the front lot line. Maximum setback shall be twenty five feet
(25') plus ten percent (10%) of the average depth of the lot. (Ord. 99-06, 6-
21-1999)
      2.   Side yard: All structures shall be set in from the side lot line a
distance not less than eight feet (8'). (Ord. 13-33, 2-18-2014)
      3.   Rear yard: All principal structures shall be set in a distance of
not less than thirty feet (30') from the rear property line. (Ord. 99-06, 6-21-
1999)
   (E)   Maximum Height: No principal structure shall exceed thirty five feet
(35') in height. Detached garages shall comply with the height requirements of
section
8-1-19 of this code. (Ord. 02-39, 5-19-2003)
   (F)   Floor Area Ratio: Not to exceed fifty percent (50%). (Ord. 99-06, 6-
21-1999)
   (G)   Minimum Size Of Dwelling: Each single-family detached dwelling, and
any other structure occupied in whole or in part for residential purposes,
shall contain at least one thousand three hundred fifty (1,350) square feet of
livable floor area, exclusive of garages and any story below grade. All
residential units shall be required to have a garage in conformance with
section
8-1-19 of this code. (Ord. 02-39, 5-19-2003)
   (H)   Maximum Lot Coverage: Principal building not to exceed thirty percent
(30%). Accessory buildings not to exceed ten percent (10%). (Ord. 16-11, 8-15-
2016)
   (I)   Maximum Area Coverage: Including all buildings, structures, sidewalks,
parking areas or other hard surface not to exceed sixty percent (60%). (Ord.
99-06, 6-21-1999)
9-7B-9: SPECIAL PROVISIONS:
   (A)   Parking Requirements: In accordance with the applicable regulations
set forth in chapter 12 of this title.
   (B)   Sign Regulations: In accordance with the applicable regulations set
forth in chapter 13 of this title.
   (C)   Tents: Tents shall not be erected, used, or maintained on any lot,
except such tents that are customarily used for temporary recreational
purposes.
   (D)   Residential Driveways: Shall be constructed of asphalt or concrete and
meet the conditions set forth in section
9-12-5 of this title.
   (E)   Recreational Vehicles: Recreational vehicles shall be parked or stored
only in accordance with the requirements of chapter 12 of this title. (Ord. 99-
06, 6-21-1999)
ARTICLE C. R-2 TWO-FAMILY ATTACHED RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT
SECTION:
9-7C-1: Purpose
9-7C-2: Policy
9-7C-3: Uses Permitted
9-7C-4: Special Uses Permitted
9-7C-5: Temporary Uses Permitted
9-7C-6: Accessory Uses
9-7C-7: Prohibited Uses
9-7C-8: Site And Structure Requirements
9-7C-9: Special Provisions
9-7C-1: PURPOSE:
The two-family attached residential district R-2 is hereby established to
provide for an environment of predominately two- family attached dwellings with
certain additional compatible uses which serve the residents living in the
district. The R-2 district is also established to implement the purpose and
intent for residential districts where provision for compatible community
facilities and services are available. (Ord. 99-06, 6-21-1999)
9-7C-2: POLICY:
To achieve the purpose of the R-2 two-family attached residential district, it
shall be the policy of the village to:
   (A)   So locate R-2 districts to other districts nearby or adjacent to
available municipal police and fire protection so as to protect these
residential areas from the danger of fire, explosion, or noxious fumes and the
irritations of offensive odors, noise, smoke, vibrations, glare, or other
threats to health and well being.
   (B)   So locate R-2 districts where paved roads meeting current village
standards may serve the residents providing convenience and safety in
transportation where mobility is not impeded and where hazards and the
intensity or potential for accidents are avoided or minimized. (Ord. 99-06, 6-
21-1999)
9-7C-3: USES PERMITTED:
Public, quasi-public, and governmental buildings and facilities:
   Churches and other places of worship.
   "Group homes, small", as defined in chapter 2 of this title and provided no
other group home is established within six hundred feet (600').
   Municipal buildings.
   Public and parochial schools.
   Public libraries.
   Public parks, public playgrounds and public community center buildings.
   Residential uses:
   Single-family detached dwellings.
   Two-family attached dwellings. Any dwelling constructed for the purpose of
or with the potential to be subdivided for individual ownership shall complete
the process of subdividing the lot (as specified under village subdivision
regulations) prior to certificate of compliance being issued for either unit.
Such process shall be required even in the instance where one owner intends to
own and maintain the entire property and both units, whether owner occupied or
not. The lot shall be equally divided down the common wall by a single straight
line from the lot front to the lot rear property line. (Ord. 99-06, 6-21-1999)
9-7C-4: SPECIAL USES PERMITTED:
The following uses shall be permitted only if specifically authorized by the
board as allowed in chapter 14 of this title:
Clubhouses, country clubs, public or private golf courses, tennis clubs,
swimming pools, and similar recreational uses.
Nursery schools and daycare centers, when accessory to the principal residence
on the premises.
One detached accessory shed, toolroom or similar building or structure used for
domestic storage shall be permitted per each individual dwelling unit, under
the specifications and within the requirements as defined under section
9-3-6 of this title.
Planned Unit Developments, as authorized by Chapter 4 of this title, provided
the uses therein shall be limited to those allowed as permitted uses in the R-
2 Two-Family Attached Residential District.
Public utility buildings and structures. (Ord. 99-06, 6-21-1999; amd. Ord. 22-
01, 5-2-2022)
9-7C-5: TEMPORARY USES PERMITTED:
Upon application to and issuance by the code enforcement officer of a permit,
the following uses may be operated as temporary uses:
   Temporary building, trailer, or yard for construction materials and/or
equipment, both incidental and necessary to construction in the zoning
district. Each permit shall specify the location of both building or yard and
the area of permitted operation. Within any development, each such permit shall
be valid for a period of six (6) calendar months and shall not be renewed for
more than one additional period.
   Temporary office, both incidental and necessary for the sale or rental of
real property. Each permit shall specify the location of the office and the
area of permitted operation. Each permit shall be valid for a period of not
more than one year and shall not be renewed for more than five (5) successive
periods at the same location. (Ord. 99-06, 6-21-1999)
9-7C-6: ACCESSORY USES:
Accessory uses, buildings, or other structures customarily incidental to and
commonly associated with a principal or conditioned permitted use may be
permitted, provided they are operated and maintained under the same ownership
and on the same lot as the permitted use, do not include structural features
inconsistent with the permitted use, and do not involve the conduct of any
business, trade, or industry. See section
9-3-6 of this title for additional requirements.
Garages, carports, or other parking areas for the exclusive use of the resident
occupants of the premises, but subject to the requirements of section
8-1-19 of this code.
Gardening, raising of plant material, fruits, and vegetables.
Home occupations.
Keeping of household pets exclusively for the use of personal enjoyment of
residents of the premises and not for commercial purposes as defined as kennels
in chapter 2 of this title.
Real estate signs in accordance with the applicable regulations of chapter 13
of this title.
Swimming pools, exclusively for the use of the residents and their guests, and
in accordance with section
8-8-1 of this code. (Ord. 99-06, 6-21-1999; amd. Ord. 02-39, 5-19-2003)
9-7C-7: PROHIBITED USES:
All uses not expressly authorized in sections
9-7C-3 through
9-7C-6 of this article, inclusively. (Ord. 99-06, 6-21-1999)
9-7C-8: SITE AND STRUCTURE REQUIREMENTS:
   (A)   Minimum Lot Area: A separate ground area of not less than twelve
thousand (12,000) square feet shall be designated, provided, and continuously
maintained for each parcel containing a permitted and special use. Attached
two-family lots that are subdivided for individual ownership shall provide half
of the lot area for each dwelling as defined under section
9-7C-3 of this article, but in no case shall this area be less than six
thousand (6,000) square feet per unit.
   (B)   Minimum Lot Width: A minimum lot width of one hundred feet (100')
shall be provided for each parcel containing a permitted or special use. Corner
lots shall have a minimum lot width of one hundred twenty feet (120'). Attached
two-family lots that are subdivided for individual ownership shall divide the
width of the lot equally, but in no case shall this width be less than fifty
feet (50') per unit.
   (C)   Minimum Lot Depth: A minimum lot depth of one hundred twenty feet
(120') shall be provided for each parcel containing a permitted or special use.
Reverse corner or double frontage lots shall have a minimum lot depth of one
hundred fifty feet (150').
   (D)   Yards:
      1.   Front yard: All structures shall be set back at least thirty feet
(30') from the front lot line. Maximum setback shall be thirty feet (30') plus
ten percent (10%) of the average depth of the lot. (Ord. 99-06, 6-21-1999)
      2.   Side yard: All structures shall be set in from the side lot line a
distance not less than ten feet (10'). (Ord. 13-33, 2-18-2014)
      3.   Rear yard: All principal structures shall be set in a distance of
not less than thirty feet (30') from the rear property line. (Ord. 99-06, 6-21-
1999)
   (E)   Maximum Height: No principal structure shall exceed thirty five feet
(35') in height. Detached garages shall comply with the height requirements of
section
8-1-19 of this code. (Ord. 02-39, 5-19-2003)
   (F)   Floor Area Ratio: Not to exceed fifty percent (50%). (Ord. 99-06, 6-
21-1999)
   (G)   Minimum Size Of Dwelling: Each attached dwelling unit, and any other
structure occupied in whole or in part for residential purposes, shall contain
at least one thousand two hundred (1,200) square feet of livable floor area,
exclusive of garages and any story below grade. All residential units shall be
required to have a garage in conformance with section
8-1-19 of this code. (Ord. 02-39, 5-19-2003)
   (H)   Maximum Lot Coverage: Principal building not to exceed thirty percent
(30%). Accessory buildings not to exceed ten percent (10%).
   (I)   Maximum Area Coverage: Including all buildings, structures, sidewalks,
parking areas or other hard surface not to exceed sixty percent (60%).
   (J)   Common Wall: The common wall constructed to divide the building and
create separate dwelling units shall be a solid, UL approved fire separation
wall, extending from its footing below grade to the underside of floor/roof,
containing no plumbing or electrical work. (Ord. 99-06, 6-21-1999)
9-7C-9: SPECIAL PROVISIONS:
   (A)   Parking Requirements: In accordance with the applicable regulations
set forth in chapter 12 of this title.
   (B)   Sign Regulations: In accordance with the applicable regulations set
forth in chapter 13 of this title.
   (C)   Trucks: Trucks shall be parked or stored only in accordance with the
requirements of chapter 12 of this title.
   (D)   Tents: Tents shall not be erected, used, or maintained on any lot,
except such tents that are customarily used for temporary recreational
purposes.
   (E)   Residential Driveways: Shall be constructed of asphalt or concrete and
meet the conditions set forth in section
9-12-5 of this title.
   (F)   Recreational Vehicles: Recreational vehicles shall be parked or stored
only in accordance with the requirements of chapter 12 of this title. (Ord. 99-
05, 6-21-1999)
ARTICLE D. R-3 MULTIPLE-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT
SECTION:
9-7D-1: Purpose
9-7D-2: Policy
9-7D-3: Uses Permitted
9-7D-4: Special Uses Permitted
9-7D-5: Temporary Uses Permitted
9-7D-6: Accessory Uses
9-7D-7: Prohibited Uses
9-7D-8: Site And Structure Requirements
9-7D-9: Special Provisions
9-7D-1: PURPOSE:
The multiple-family residential district R-3 is hereby established to permit
existing multi-family developments and to provide for an environment of
predominately attached, semiattached and two-family attached dwellings with
certain additional compatible uses which serve the residents living in the
district. The R-3 district is also established to implement the purpose and
intent for residential districts by providing an appropriate density where
provision for compatible community facilities and services are available. (Ord.
99-06, 6-21-1999)
9-7D-2: POLICY:
To achieve the purpose of the R-3 multiple-family residential district, it
shall be the policy of the village to:
   (A)   So locate R-3 districts to other districts nearby or adjacent to
available municipal police and fire protection so as to protect these
residential areas from the danger of fire, explosion, or noxious fumes and the
irritations of offensive odors, noise, smoke, vibrations, glare, or other
threats to health and well being.
   (B)   So locate R-3 districts where paved roads meeting current village
standards may serve the residents providing convenience and safety in
transportation where mobility is not impeded and where hazards and the
intensity or potential for accidents are avoided or minimized.
   (C)   So locate R-3 districts to minimize its effects on single- family
detached developments. (Ord. 99-06, 6-21-1999)
9-7D-3: USES PERMITTED:
Public, quasi-public, and governmental buildings and facilities:
   Churches and other places of worship.
   Group homes, large and small, as defined in chapter 2 of this title and
provided no other group home is established within six hundred feet (600').
   Municipal buildings.
   Public and parochial schools.
   Public libraries.
   Public parks, public playgrounds and public community center buildings.
   Residential uses:
   Apartment buildings and multiple-unit dwellings.
   Attached dwellings.
   Multi-family condominium or townhouse dwellings. Any dwelling constructed
for the purpose of or with the potential to be subdivided for individual
ownership shall complete the process of subdividing the property (as specified
under village subdivision regulations) prior to certificate of compliance being
issued for any unit.
   Semiattached dwellings.
   Two-family attached dwellings and the property is under single ownership.
(Ord. 99-06, 6-21-1999; amd. Ord. 04-46, 5-2-2005)
9-7D-4: SPECIAL USES PERMITTED:
The following uses shall be permitted only if specifically authorized by the
board as allowed in chapter 14 of this title:
Clubhouses, country clubs, public or private golf courses, tennis clubs,
swimming pools, and similar recreational uses.
Nursery school, day nursery, and childcare center, but not allowed in a multi-
family residence unit.
Planned Unit Developments, as authorized by Chapter 4 of this title, provided
the uses therein shall be limited to those allowed as permitted uses in the R-
3 Multiple-Family Residential District.
Public utility buildings and structures. (Ord. 99-06, 6-21-1999; amd. Ord. 22-
01, 5-2-2022)
9-7D-5: TEMPORARY USES PERMITTED:
Upon application to and issuance by the code enforcement officer of a permit,
the following uses may be operated as temporary uses:
   Temporary building, trailer, or yard for construction materials and/or
equipment, both incidental and necessary to construction in the zoning
district. Each permit shall specify the location of both building or yard and
the area of permitted operation. Within any development, each such permit shall
be valid for a period of six (6) calendar months and shall not be renewed for
more than one additional period.
   Temporary office, both incidental and necessary for the sale or rental of
real property. Each permit shall specify the location of the office and the
area of permitted operation. Each such permit shall be valid for a period of
not more than one year and shall not be renewed for more than two (2)
successive periods at the same location. (Ord. 99-06, 6-21-1999)
9-7D-6: ACCESSORY USES:
Accessory uses, buildings, or other structures customarily incidental to and
commonly associated with a principal or conditioned permitted use may be
permitted, provided they are operated and maintained under the same ownership
and on the same lot as the permitted use, do not include structures or
structural features inconsistent with the permitted use, and do not involve the
conduct of any business, trade, or industry. See section
9-3-6 of this title for additional requirements.
Detached garages or structures associated with automobile storage for the
exclusive use of residential occupants of the premises of residential uses,
providing parking space quantity to meet requirements based on the number of
units in a building, but only in the event that attached garages have not been
provided. Said garages may exceed the floor dimension limitations stipulated in
section
8-1-19 of this code, by determination of the code enforcement officer and with
approval of the planning commission and village board.
Home occupation.
Keeping of household pets exclusively for the use of personal enjoyment of
residents of the premises and not for commercial purposes as defined as kennels
in chapter 2 of this title.
Real estate signs in accordance with the applicable regulations of chapter 13
of this title.
Swimming pools, exclusively for the use of the residents and their guests,
following guidelines as established under section
8-8-1 of this code and set back from every property line at least twenty feet
(20'). (Ord. 99-06, 6-21-1999; amd. Ord. 02-39, 5-19-2003)
9-7D-7: PROHIBITED USES:
All uses not expressly authorized in sections
9-7D-3 through
9-7D-6 of this article, inclusively. (Ord. 99-06, 6-21-1999)
9-7D-8: SITE AND STRUCTURE REQUIREMENTS:
   (A)   Minimum Lot Area: A separate ground area of not less than fifteen
thousand (15,000) square feet shall be designated, provided, and continuously
maintained for each parcel containing a multi-family dwelling and special use.
This requirement shall not pertain to separate ownership conveyances for
individual attached, semiattached or two-family dwelling units, although as a
whole development, these uses must meet this requirement. For multi-family
buildings, a ground area of four thousand (4,000) square feet shall be required
for each dwelling unit in the building.
   (B)   Minimum Lot Width: A minimum lot width of one hundred twenty feet
(120') shall be provided for each parcel containing a permitted or special use.
Corner lots shall contain a minimum of one hundred forty four feet (144') of
lot width. No lots shall be resubdivided for individual ownership of dwelling
units with less than twenty feet (20') of lot width.
   (C)   Minimum Lot Depth: A minimum lot depth of one hundred twenty feet
(120') shall be provided for each parcel containing a permitted or special use.
Reverse corner or double frontage lots shall have a minimum lot depth of one
hundred fifty feet (150').
   (D)   Yards:
      1.   Front yard: All structures shall be set back at least thirty feet
(30') from the front lot line. Maximum setback shall be thirty feet (30') plus
ten percent (10%) of the average depth of the lot. (Ord. 99-06, 6-21-1999)
      2.   Side yard: All structures shall be set in from the side lot line a
distance not less than fifteen feet (15'). (Ord. 13-33, 2-18-2014)
      3.   Rear yard: All principal structures shall be set in a distance of
not less than forty feet (40') from the rear property line.
   (E)   Maximum Height: No principal structure shall exceed thirty five feet
(35') in height. Approved detached garages for multiple tenant usage shall be
of such height as determined at time of approval, but shall not exceed the
height of the principal structure.
   (F)   Floor Area Ratio: Not to exceed seventy percent (70%).
   (G)   Minimum Size Of Dwelling: Each dwelling shall contain at least the
following square feet of floor area for each dwelling unit:
      1.   For one and two (2) bedroom units: One thousand (1,000) square feet.
      2.   For three (3) or more bedroom units: One thousand two hundred
(1,200) square feet.
   (H)   Maximum Lot Coverage: Principal building not to exceed thirty percent
(30%). The total of all accessory buildings not to exceed ten percent (10%).
   (I)   Maximum Area Coverage: Including all buildings, structures, sidewalks,
parking areas or other hard surface not to exceed sixty percent (60%). The
balance of the lot shall be used for, but not limited to, open space and yard
recreation space.
   (J)   Minimum Landscaped Area: Two percent (2%) of the total square footage
of the real property shall be set aside as a decorative landscaped area on the
street side. (Ord. 99-06, 6-21-1999)
9-7D-9: SPECIAL PROVISIONS:
   (A)   Parking Requirements: In accordance with the applicable regulations
set forth in chapter 12 of this title.
   (B)   Sign Regulations: In accordance with the applicable regulations set
forth in chapter 13 of this title.
   (C)   Trucks: Trucks shall be parked or stored only in accordance with the
requirements of chapter 12 of this title.
   (D)   Recreational Vehicles: Recreational vehicles shall not be parked or
stored on a zoning lot in an R-3 district.
   (E)   Tents: Tents shall not be erected, used, or maintained on any lot,
except such tents that are customarily used for temporary recreational
purposes.
   (F)   Screening: Any screening required of service yards or other areas
which tend to be unsightly shall be accomplished by walls, fencing, planting,
or a combination of these as outlined in section
9-3-5 of this title. Screening must enhance architectural features and
strengthen vistas along important ways of approach or entry. (Ord. 99-06, 6-21-
1999)
CHAPTER 8
COMMERCIAL DISTRICTS
ARTICLE A. C-1 DOWNTOWN COMMERCIAL DISTRICT
SECTION:
9-8A-1: Purpose
9-8A-2: Policy
9-8A-3: Uses Permitted
9-8A-4: Special Uses Permitted
9-8A-5: Temporary Uses Permitted
9-8A-6: Accessory Uses Permitted
9-8A-7: Prohibited Uses
9-8A-8: Site And Structure Requirements
9-8A-9: Special Provisions
9-8A-1: PURPOSE:
To preserve the historical characteristics and heritage of the traditional
central commercial area of the village, which by its nature requires special
regulation design to enhance the area and ensure that future development or
redevelopment is not incompatible with the historical character of the area.
The area included within this district has historical significance as being the
commercial business center of the village as it was originally laid out. (Ord.
99-06, 6-21-1999)
9-8A-2: POLICY:
To achieve the purpose of commercial districts and preserve the C-1 downtown
commercial district, it shall be the policy of the village to:
   (A)   Ensure that all redevelopment or new development is consistent in
appearance with surrounding buildings and historical characteristics of the
area.
   (B)   Promote sound community planning to preserve the heritage, aesthetic
interest, values, and customs related to the historic significance of the area.
   (C)   Preserve the economic stability of retail trade and personal service
business of the traditional downtown commercial district. (Ord. 99-06, 6-21-
1999)
9-8A-3: USES PERMITTED:
No land shall be used or occupied and no building, structure, or premises shall
be erected, altered, enlarged, occupied or used, except as otherwise provided
in this title for other than one or more of the following uses:
   Business service establishments:
   Banks.
   Business and management consultants.
   Business office.
   Chamber of commerce.
   Charitable organization.
   Civic association.
   Credit agency.
   Currency exchange.
   Employment agency.
   Financial institution.
   Insurance agency.
   Investment carrier.
   Investment company.
   Labor union and organization.
   Loan agency.
   Mail order house.
   Merchants association.
   News syndicate.
   Newspaper office.
   Parking lot, commercial.
   Picture framing.
   Professional membership association.
   Radio and television service and repair.
   Real estate office.
   Savings and loan.
   Security and commodity broker.
   Social service and fraternal association.
   Theater, indoor only.
   Trade association.
   Video rental establishments, including repair of video equipment.
   Personal service establishments which perform services on the premises:
      Beauty parlor.
      Dry cleaner.
      General minor repair or fix it shop, excluding automobile repair.
      Health and fitness club.
      Interior decorating shop, including upholstering and drapery making.
      Laundry.
      Meeting hall.
      Schools or studios for art, music or dance.
      Tailor or dressmaker.
      Tanning parlor.
      Travel bureau.
      Undertaking establishment and funeral parlor.
   Professional office establishments:
      Accounting, auditing and bookkeeping.
      Artists and industrial designers.
      Attorney and law office.
      Chiropractor's office.
      Dentist's office.
      Doctor's, surgeon's and/or physician's office.
      Engineering and architectural services.
      Land surveyors.
   Medical and dental clinics.
   Optician's office.
   Osteopath's office.
   Private clinic.
   Professional consultants.
   Professional offices.
   Public, quasi-public and governmental buildings and facilities:
      Churches.
      Essential services (as defined in chapter 2 of this title).
      Government buildings and facilities.
      Museum, art gallery.
      Office building.
      Post office.
   Public utility establishment.
   Retail businesses – alcohol sales and consumption, as permitted by the
liquor commissioner.
   Retail businesses which supply commodities on the premises:
      Antique store.
      Apparel store.
      Appliance store.
      Art and school supply store.
      Art gallery.
      Bakery, in which the manufacture of goods is limited to goods retailed on
the premises only.
      Bicycle store – retail, rental and repair.
      Book and stationery store.
      Business machine store.
      Camera store and photographic store.
      Candy and confectionery store.
      China and glassware store.
      Clothing and costume rental stores.
      Dairy products store.
      Delicatessen.
      Department store.
      Drapery store.
      Drugstore.
      Dry goods store.
      Floor coverings, including rugs and carpets.
      Floral shop.
      Furniture store.
      Garden supply, tool and seed stores.
      General retail store.
      Gift shop.
      Grocery and food store.
      Hardware store.
      Hobby shop.
      Ice cream store.
      Jewelry store.
      Leather goods and luggage store.
      Linoleum and tile store.
      Locksmith.
      Meat market.
      Merchandising machines, sale of products.
      Music store.
      Newsstand.
      Office supplies and stationery store.
      Orthopedic and medical appliance supply store.
      Paint and wallpaper store.
      Pet shop.
      Photography studio.
      Plumbing and heating shop.
      Radio and television sales.
      Record shop.
      Restaurants.
      Shoe store.
      Sporting goods store.
      Tobacco shop.
      Toy store.
      Variety store. (Ord. 99-06, 6-21-1999; amd. Ord. 05-36, 12-5-2005)
9-8A-4: SPECIAL USES PERMITTED:
The following uses shall be permitted only if specifically authorized by the
Board as allowed in chapter 14 of this title:
   Automobile parts and supply store, automobile repair (minor), automobile
sales.
   Bars, taverns, and cocktail lounges as permitted by the Liquor Commissioner.
   Billiard and pool hall.
   Drive-in banking and saving and loan facilities.
   Drive-in restaurants.
   Drive-in uses.
   Gun dealer/shooting range.
   Hotel/Motel.
   Laboratories, medical and dental.
   Nursery school, day nursery, and childcare center.
   Planned commercial development group.
   Residence when behind or on the second floor of a commercial establishment.
   Scientific research agencies. (Ord. 99-06, 6-21-1999; amd. Ord. 05-36, 12-5-
2005; Ord. 17-08, 7-17-2017; Ord. 25-18, 9-15-2025)
9-8A-5: TEMPORARY USES PERMITTED:
Upon application to and issuance by the Code Enforcement Officer of a permit,
the following uses may be operated as temporary uses:
   Christmas tree sales, each such permit shall be valid for a period of not
more than sixty (60) days.
   Parking lot designated for a special event; provided, however, that each
permit shall be valid only for the duration of the designated special event.
   Temporary building, trailer or yard for construction materials and/or
equipment, both incidental and necessary to construction in the zoning
district. Each permit shall specify the location of the building or yard and
the area of permitted operation. Within any development, each such permit shall
be valid for a period of six (6) calendar months and shall not be renewed for
more than one additional period.
   Temporary mobile signs as provided in chapter 13 of this title.
   Temporary office, both incidental and necessary for the sale or rental of
real property. Each permit shall specify the location of the office and the
area of permitted operation. Each such permit shall be valid for a period of
not more than one year and shall not be renewed for more than two (2)
successive periods at the same location. (Ord. 99-06, 6-21-1999)
9-8A-6: ACCESSORY USES PERMITTED:
Accessory uses, buildings, or other structures and devices customarily
incidental to and commonly associated with a permitted use or special use may
be permitted, provided they are operated and maintained under the same
ownership, on the same zoning lot, and do not include structures or features
inconsistent with the permitted use or special use. See section
9-3-6 of this title for additional requirements. (Ord. 99-06, 6-21-1999)
9-8A-7: PROHIBITED USES:
All uses not expressly authorized in sections
9-8A-3 through
9-8A-6 of this article, inclusive. (Ord. 99-06, 6-21-1999)
9-8A-8: SITE AND STRUCTURE REQUIREMENTS:
   (A)   Minimum Lot Area: Six thousand (6,000) square feet of separate ground
area shall be provided for each parcel containing a permitted or special use.
   (B)   Minimum Lot Frontage: A minimum lot frontage of forty feet (40') shall
be provided for each parcel used for a permitted or special use.
   (C)   Yards:
      1.   Front Yard: All structures shall be set back the same distance as
the setback from the front lot line as the structures located on adjacent
parcels and as approved by the Code Enforcement Officer.
      2.   Side Yard: No side yards shall be required except ten feet (10')
shall be provided where the side yard abuts an R zone unless zones are divided
by a street or alley. However, in all cases, adequate provision for maintenance
of side walls and internal vehicular circulation shall be made.
      3.   Rear Yard: All structures shall be set back at least ten feet (10')
from the rear lot line. Rear yards that abut an R zone shall provide twenty
five feet (25') except where zones are divided by a street or alley.
   (D)   Maximum Height: No structure or portion thereof shall exceed a height
of thirty five feet (35').
   (E)   Floor Area Ratio: Not to exceed one hundred percent (100%).
   (F)   Maximum Lot Coverage: Principal building and any accessory structures
combined may not exceed fifty percent (50%). The balance of the lot shall be
used for, but not limited to, parking, open space and yard recreation space.
   (G)   Maximum Area Coverage: Including all buildings, structures, sidewalks,
parking areas or other hard surface not to exceed eighty percent (80%). The
balance of the lot shall be used for, but not limited to, open space and yard
recreation space. (Ord. 99-06, 6-21-1999)
9-8A-9: SPECIAL PROVISIONS:
   (A)   Outdoor Storage: No outdoor storage shall be permitted.
   (B)   Parking Requirements: In accordance with the applicable regulations
set forth in chapter 12 of this title.
   (C)   Sign Requirements: In accordance with the applicable regulations set
forth in chapter 13 of this title.
   (D)   Scope Of Operations: All business establishments shall be retail trade
or service establishments dealing directly with consumers. All business,
servicing or processing, except for off street parking or loading, shall be
conducted within completely enclosed buildings. The Village Board may waive
this provision by designating certain days on which business establishments may
conduct their businesses outside the building or structure.
   (E)   Screening: Where a commercial or office use abuts or is across the
street from a residential district, adequate screening shall be provided as set
forth in section
9-3-5 of this title. Any screening required of service yards or other areas
which tend to be unsightly shall be accomplished by walls, fencing, planting,
or a combination of these as outlined in section
9-3-5 of this title. Screening must enhance architectural features and
strengthen vista along important ways of approach or entry.
   (F)   Lighting: Lighting of the facility and parking areas shall be directed
away from surrounding properties, and shall meet specifications as set by the
Code Enforcement Officer. (Ord. 99-06, 6-21-1999)
ARTICLE B. C-2 COMMERCIAL DISTRICT
SECTION:
9-8B-1: Purpose
9-8B-2: Policy
9-8B-3: Uses Permitted
9-8B-4: Special Uses Permitted
9-8B-5: Temporary Uses Permitted
9-8B-6: Accessory Uses Permitted
9-8B-7: Prohibited Uses
9-8B-8: Site And Structure Requirements
9-8B-9: Special Provisions
9-8B-1: PURPOSE:
   (A)   To promote areas which primarily serve the needs of motorists in a
manner conducive to generating business development.
   (B)   To promote regulations for highway associated uses through adequately
sized parcels of land allowing for setbacks, clear vision and safe ingress and
egress. (Ord. 99-06, 6-21-1999)
9-8B-2: POLICY:
To achieve the purpose of the C-2 commercial district, it shall be the policy
of the village to:
   (A)   Promote the grouping of C-2 uses to major thoroughfares and to
discourage the hazards to safety and nuisance of traffic congestion along
public streets.
   (B)   Require adequate off street parking and limited access to road through
the use of frontage roads. (Ord. 99-06, 6-21-1999)
9-8B-3: USES PERMITTED:
No land shall be used or occupied and no building enlarged, occupied, or used,
except as otherwise provided in this title, for other than one or more of the
following specified uses:
   Any use allowed in the C-1 traditional downtown district.
   Business service establishment which performs services on the premises:
   Automobile diagnostic center or clinic.
   Automobile repair, minor.
   Automobile undercoating establishment.
   Bowling alley.
   Equipment rental and leasing service.
   Funeral home.
   Lawn mowing repair service.
   Motel/Hotel.
   Motorcycle service and repair.
   Public, quasi-public and governmental buildings and facilities:
      Ambulance service.
      "Essential services", as defined in chapter 2 of this title.
      Lodge or fraternal organizations.
      Public, quasi-public and governmental buildings and facilities permitted
in the C-1 district.
   Public service or municipal garage.
   Retail business – alcohol sales and consumption, subject to approval by the
liquor commissioner:
      Ancillary use in restaurants. Establishments serving meals in a permanent
building other than "drive-ins" with the serving of alcohol drinks from only a
service bar as an ancillary use not exceeding fifty percent (50%) of the retail
sales of the establishment.
      Package liquor sales.
   Retail business, which supplies commodities on the premises:
      Agriculture implement sales and service.
      Automobile accessories, parts, and supplies stores.
      Boat sales and rentals.
      Building services and supplies.
      Camper sales.
      Motor vehicle dealer and motor home dealer.
      Motorcycle sales.
      Restaurants.
      Tire, battery, and accessory dealer.
      Used car lot. (Ord. 99-06, 6-21-1999; amd. Ord. 05-27, 11-7-2005; Ord.
05-36, 12-5-2005; Ord. 25-18, 9-15-2025)
9-8B-4: SPECIAL USES PERMITTED:
The following uses shall be permitted only if specifically authorized by the
Board as allowed in chapter 14 of this title:
Adult oriented establishments, as identified and under specific additional
regulations of section
9-3-10 of this title.
Airports.
Animal hospital.
Assisted living center.
Automobile laundry or car wash.
Automobile service station.
Automotive repair, major.
Bars, taverns, and cocktail lounges as approved by the Liquor Commissioner.
Commercial recreational uses.
Drive-in restaurants, drive-in banks, and other drive-in uses when acting as a
primary use in itself and not accessory to a permitted or special use.
Drive-in uses.
Gun dealer/shooting range.
Hospitals.
Lumberyard.
Miniwarehouses for private storage.
Mobile home dealer.
Outdoor storage. All outdoor storage facilities for fuel, raw materials and
products shall be enclosed by a fence, wall, or plant materials adequate to
conceal such facilities from adjacent properties and the public right-of-way.
Planned Unit Developments, as authorized by Chapter 4 of this title, provided
the uses therein shall be limited to those allowed as permitted and/or special
uses in the C-2 Commercial District or as a mixed-use development and limited
to those uses allowed as permitted and/or special uses in the C-2 Commercial
District and multiple-family residential uses.
Residence, secondary to the business use of the premises and not located below
the second floor above ground level of the building.
Tattoo parlors.
Truck stop terminals. (Ord. 08-03, 6-16-2008; amd. Ord. 17-08, 7-17-2017; Ord.
22-01, 5-2-2022)
9-8B-5: TEMPORARY USES PERMITTED:
Upon application to and issuance by the Code Enforcement Officer of a permit,
the following uses may be operated as temporary uses: C-1 District temporary
permitted uses. (Ord. 99-06, 6-21-1999)
9-8B-6: ACCESSORY USES PERMITTED:
Accessory uses, buildings or other structures and devices customarily
incidental to and commonly associated with a permitted use or special use may
be permitted, provided they are operated and maintained under the same
ownership, on the same permitted use or special use. See section
9-3-6 of this title for additional requirements. (Ord. 99-06, 6-21-1999)
9-8B-7: PROHIBITED USES:
All uses not expressly authorized in sections
9-8B-3 through
9-8B-6 of this article, inclusive. (Ord. 99-06, 6-21-1999)
9-8B-8: SITE AND STRUCTURE REQUIREMENTS:
   (A)   Minimum Lot Area: Forty thousand (40,000) square feet of separate
ground area shall be provided for each parcel used for a permitted or special
use.
   (B)   Minimum Lot Frontage: A minimum lot frontage of one hundred twenty
feet (120') shall be provided for each parcel used for a permitted or special
use. Corner lots shall have a minimum of one hundred forty four feet (144') of
lot width.
   (C)   Yards:
      1.   Front Yard: All structures shall be set back at least thirty feet
(30') from the front lot line.
      2.   Side Yard: All structures shall be set back at least five feet (5')
from the side lot line.
      3.   Rear Yard: All structures shall be set in from the rear lot line a
distance of not less than fifty feet (50').
      4.   Transitional Yard: Where properties in the C-2 District are
adjoining other zoning districts or across road right-of-way from other zoning
districts, the required yards shall be at least equal in dimension to the
adjoining yards in the adjoining district(s) or the front yards in the district
(s) separated from the property by road right-of-way. Where yards in the C-
2 District exceed the requirements of the adjoining district(s), the yards of
the C-2 District shall apply.
   (D)   Maximum Height: No structure or portion thereof, shall exceed a height
of thirty five feet (35'), and no accessory structure shall exceed fifteen feet
(15') in height.
   (E)   Floor Area Ratio: Not to exceed one hundred percent (100%).
   (F)   Maximum Lot Coverage: Principal building not to exceed thirty percent
(30%). The total of all accessory buildings not to exceed ten percent (10%).
   (G)   Maximum Area Coverage: Including all buildings, structures, sidewalks,
parking areas or other hard surface not to exceed eighty percent (80%). The
balance of the lot shall be used for, but not limited to, open space and yard
recreation space.
   (H)   Minimum Landscaped Area: Two percent (2%) of the total square footage
of the real property shall be set aside as a decorative landscaped area on the
street side. (Ord. 99-06, 6-21-1999)
9-8B-9: SPECIAL PROVISIONS:
   (A)   Outdoor Storage: Shall not be placed within any required front or side
yard and shall be set back at least ten feet (10') from the rear lot line.
   (B)   Outdoor Sales: All outdoor sales space shall be provided with a
permanent durable concrete or asphalt surface, and shall be graded and drained
as to dispose of all surface water.
   (C)   Parking Requirements: In accordance with the applicable regulations
set forth in chapter 12 of this title.
   (D)   Sign Requirements: In accordance with the applicable regulations set
forth in chapter 13 of this title.
   (E)   Waste Materials: No materials or wastes shall be deposited upon a lot
in such a form that they may be transferred off the property by natural causes
or forces.
   (F)   Screening: Where a commercial or office use abuts or is across the
street from a residential district, adequate screening shall be provided as set
forth in section
9-3-5 of this title. Any screening required of service yards or other areas
which tend to be unsightly shall be accomplished by walls, fencing, planting or
a combination of these as outlined in section
9-3-5 of this title. Screening must enhance architectural features and
strengthen vistas along important ways of approach or entry.
   (G)   Lighting: Lighting of the facilities and parking areas shall be
directed away from surrounding properties, and shall meet specifications as
determined by the Code Enforcement Officer.
   (H)   Performance Standards: Commercial establishments shall comply with the
provisions of performance standards as outlined in chapter 9, article C of this
title. (Ord. 99-06, 6-21-1999)
CHAPTER 9
INDUSTRIAL DISTRICTS
ARTICLE A. I-1 LIGHT INDUSTRIAL DISTRICT
SECTION:
9-9A-1: Purpose
9-9A-2: Policy
9-9A-3: Uses Permitted
9-9A-4: Special Uses Permitted
9-9A-5: Temporary Uses Permitted
9-9A-6: Accessory Uses Permitted
9-9A-7: Prohibited Uses
9-9A-8: Site And Structure Requirements
9-9A-9: Special Provisions
9-9A-1: PURPOSE:
   (A)   To provide for lands for development by industrial firms that have
high standards of performance that can be located in relatively close proximity
to residential and business uses.
   (B)   To provide regulations that are designed to permit the operations of
most manufacturing, wholesaling and warehousing activities with adequate
protection to adjacent district uses and sufficient control of external effects
to protect one industry from another.
   (C)   To provide some retail uses that service industrial uses within the
industrial areas or that do not depend upon the direct visits of retail
customers. (Ord. 99-06, 6-21-1999)
9-9A-2: POLICY:
To achieve the purpose of the I-1 light industrial district, it shall be the
policy of the village to:
   (A)   Promote industrial development in municipal planned industrial areas.
   (B)   Locate industrial uses on lands suitable for those purposes, yet at
locations that would not be harmful or disadvantageous to nearby or adjacent
lands.
   (C)   So locate the I-1 light industrial district to available municipal
police and fire protection so as to protect these areas from the dangers of
fire, explosion, noxious fumes and other threats to health and well being.
   (D)   Encourage the grouping of compatible industrial activities, thereby
promoting convenience, efficiency and safety in transportation.
   (E)   So locate the I-1 light industrial district where existing paved roads
may provide convenience, efficiency, and safety in transportation.
   (F)   Discourage the intrusion of residential and commercial uses which are
noncompatible with I-1 uses.
   (G)   Locate all I-1 districts within current municipal water sewerage
disposal service areas. (Ord. 99-06, 6-21-1999)
9-9A-3: USES PERMITTED:
No land shall be used or occupied and no building, structure, or premises shall
be erected, altered, enlarged, occupied, or used, except as otherwise provided
in this title, for other than one or more of the following specified uses:
   Industrial type uses:
      All low nuisance, light manufacturing and industrial activities, not
expressly prohibited in section
9-9A-7 of this article including fabrication, processing, assembly,
disassembly, repairing, cleaning, servicing, testing, packaging and storage of
materials, products and goods that can be conducted wholly within enclosed
buildings.
      Fertilizer and seed sales.
      Grain storage.
      Laboratories and research firms involved in a research, experimentation
or testing of materials, goods or products.
      Printing, publishing, or lithography establishments.
      Vocational schools.
   Miscellaneous uses:
      Automobile service station.
      Contractor offices.
      Manufactured housing sales.
      Meeting halls.
      Professional offices.
      Restaurant.
   Public, quasi-public and governmental buildings and facilities:
      Animal pounds and shelters.
      "Essential services", as defined in chapter 2 of this title.
      Office building.
      Public service or municipal garage.
      Public utility establishment.
      Vocational school.
   Wholesale and warehouse uses:
      Direct selling establishments, where products are stored and distributed,
but not displayed for retail sales.
      Establishments that warehouse and distribute beverages.
      Miniwarehouses.
      Wholesale and warehouse establishments that deal in commodities which are
the product of a use permitted in the I-1 district. (Ord. 99-06, 6-21-1999)
9-9A-4: SPECIAL USES PERMITTED:
The following uses shall be permitted only if specifically authorized by the
board as allowed in chapter 14 of this title:
   Adult oriented establishments, as identified and under additional specific
regulations of section
9-3-10 of this title.
   Medical cannabis facilities provided the facilities otherwise comply with
the provisions of chapter 17 of this title.
   Outdoor storage, including contractors' yards.
   Planned Unit Developments, as authorized by Chapter 4 of this title,
provided the uses therein shall be limited to those allowed as permitted and/or
special uses in the I-1 Light Industrial District.
   Recreational uses (commercial or private).
   Residence of the proprietor, caretaker or watchman, when located on the
premises of the commercial or industrial use.
   Service retail businesses, such as, but not limited to:
      Animal hospitals.
      Automobile painting, repair, major and minor, including body repair
shops, but excluding salvage yards.
      Banks, savings and loans.
      Blueprinting establishments.
      Medical clinics.
      Tattoo parlors. (Ord. 11-09, 8-15-2011; amd. Ord. 13-29, 1-20-2014; Ord.
22-01, 5-2-2022)
9-9A-5: TEMPORARY USES PERMITTED:
Upon application to and issuance by the code enforcement officer of a permit,
the following uses may be operated as temporary uses:
   Temporary building, trailer or yard for construction materials and/or
equipment, both incidental and necessary to construction in the zoning
district. Each permit shall specify the location of the building or yard and
the area of permitted operation. Each such permit shall be valid for a period
of six (6) months and shall not be renewed for more than one additional period.
   Temporary office or residence both incidental and necessary for the sale,
maintenance, or rental of real property. Each permit shall specify the location
of the office and the area of permitted operation. Each such permit shall be
valid for a period of six (6) months and shall not be renewed for more than two
(2) successive periods at the same location. (Ord. 99-06, 6-21-1999)
9-9A-6: ACCESSORY USES PERMITTED:
Accessory uses, buildings or other structures and devices customarily
incidental to and commonly associated with a permitted use or special use may
be permitted, provided they are operated and maintained under the same
ownership, on the same parcel, and do not include structures or features
inconsistent with the permitted use or special use. (Ord. 99-06, 6-21-1999)
9-9A-7: PROHIBITED USES:
All uses not expressly authorized in sections
9-9A-3 through
9-9A-6 of this article, inclusive. Any use that creates any external odor,
smoke, dust, noise or glare or that involves the use of any radioactive or
highly toxic materials, as determined by the code enforcement officer. (Ord.
99-06, 6-21-1999)
9-9A-8: SITE AND STRUCTURE REQUIREMENTS:
   (A)   Minimum Lot Area: Forty thousand (40,000) square feet of separate
ground area shall be provided for each parcel used for a permitted or special
use.
   (B)   Minimum Lot Frontage: A minimum lot frontage of one hundred twenty
feet (120') shall be provided for each parcel used for a permitted or special
use. Corner lots shall have a minimum of one hundred forty four feet (144') of
lot width.
   (C)   Minimum Lot Depth: A minimum lot depth of one hundred twenty feet
(120') shall be provided for each parcel containing a permitted or special use.
   (D)   Yards:
      1.   Front yard: All structures shall be set back at least fifty feet
(50') from the front lot line.
      2.   Side yard: All structures shall be set back at least five feet (5')
from the side lot line.
      3.   Rear yard: All structures shall be set in from the rear lot line a
distance of not less than fifteen feet (15').
      4.   Transitional yard: Where properties in the I-1 district are
adjoining a residential or commercial district, a yard shall be provided along
such side lot line, not less than thirty feet (30') in width. Where properties
in the I-1 district are adjoining or across road rights of way from commercial
or residential zoning districts, or across road rights of way from other zoning
districts, the required yards shall be at least equal in dimension to the
adjoining yards in the adjoining district(s) or the front yards in the district
(s) separated from the property by road rights of way. Where yards in the I-
1 district exceed the requirements of the adjoining district(s), the yards of
the I-1 district shall apply.
   (E)   Maximum Height: No structure or portion thereof shall exceed a height
of fifty feet (50').
   (F)   Floor Area Ratio: Not to exceed eighty percent (80%).
   (G)   Maximum Lot Coverage: Principal building not to exceed thirty percent
(30%). The total of all accessory buildings not to exceed ten percent (10%).
   (H)   Maximum Area Coverage: Including all buildings, structures, sidewalks,
parking areas or other hard surface not to exceed eighty percent (80%).
   (I)   Minimum Landscaped Area: Two percent (2%) of the total square footage
of the real property shall be set aside as a decorative landscaped area,
enhancing the street side of the property, and as approved by the code
enforcement officer. (Ord. 99-06, 6-21-1999)
9-9A-9: SPECIAL PROVISIONS:
   (A)   Warehouse And Storage Facilities: Warehouse and storage facility
functions shall be totally enclosed and conducted within buildings and
structures.
   (B)   Business Servicing Or Processing: All business servicing or
processing, except for off street parking and off street loading shall be
conducted within completely enclosed buildings.
   (C)   Outside Storage: All outside storage of goods, materials and products
shall be screened in accordance with section
9-3-5 of this title. Lighting of the facility shall be directed away from
surrounding properties.
   (D)   Outdoor Sales: All outdoor sales space shall be provided with a
permanent durable concrete or asphalt surface, and shall be graded and drained
as to dispose of all surface water.
   (E)   Curb, Gutter, Storm Drainage And Entrance Curbs: Required on all
street frontages and shall meet the approval of the village engineer and
village standards.
   (F)   Parking And Loading Requirements: In accordance with the applicable
regulations set forth in chapter 12 of this title.
   (G)   Sign Requirements: In accordance with the applicable regulations set
forth in chapter 13 of this title.
   (H)   Waste Materials: No materials or wastes shall be deposited upon a lot
in such a form that they may be transferred off the property by natural causes
or forces.
   (I)   Screening: Where a commercial or industrial use abuts or is across the
street from a residential district, adequate screening shall be provided as set
forth in section
9-3-5 of this title. Any screening required of service yards or other areas
which tend to be unsightly shall be accomplished by walls, fencing, planting or
a combination of these as outlined in section
9-3-5 of this title. Screening must enhance architectural features and
strengthen vistas along important ways of approach or entry.
   (J)   Enclosure Of Use: All industrial or commercial operations shall take
place within completely enclosed buildings, unless otherwise specified.
   (K)   Performance Standards: Processes and equipment employed shall comply
with the provisions of performance standards as outlined in article C of this
chapter. (Ord. 99-06, 6-21-1999)
ARTICLE B. I-2 HEAVY INDUSTRIAL DISTRICT
SECTION:
9-9B-1: Purpose
9-9B-2: Policy
9-9B-3: Uses Permitted
9-9B-4: Special Uses Permitted
9-9B-5: Temporary Uses Permitted
9-9B-6: Accessory Uses
9-9B-7: Prohibited Uses
9-9B-8: Site And Structure Requirements
9-9B-9: Special Provisions
9-9B-1: PURPOSE:
   (A)   To provide for lands for development by most types of industrial
firms.
   (B)   To provide regulations that are designed to permit operations of most
industrial activities with adequate protection to adjacent district uses and
sufficient control of external effects to protect one industry from another
within the district. (Ord. 99-06, 6-21-1999)
9-9B-2: POLICY:
To achieve the purpose of the I-2 district, it shall be the policy of the
village to:
   (A)   Promote industrial development in municipal planned industrial areas.
   (B)   Locate industrial uses on lands suitable for those purposes, yet at
locations that would not be harmful or disadvantageous to nearby or adjacent
lands.
   (C)   So locate the I-2 district to available municipal police and fire
protection so as to protect these areas from the dangers of fire, explosion,
noxious fumes and other threats to health and well being.
   (D)   Encourage the grouping of compatible industrial activities, thereby
promoting convenience, efficiency and safety in transportation.
   (E)   So locate the I-2 district where existing paved roads may provide
convenience, efficiency and safety in transportation.
   (F)   Discourage the intrusion of residential and commercial uses which are
noncompatible with I-2 uses. (Ord. 99-06, 6-21-1999)
9-9B-3: USES PERMITTED:
No land shall be used or occupied and no building, structure or premises shall
be erected, altered, enlarged, occupied, or used, except as otherwise provided
in this title, for other than one or more of the following specified uses:
   Adult oriented establishments, as identified and under specific additional
regulations of section
9-3-10 of this title.
   Industrial and manufacturing type uses:
      Abrasive manufacturing.
      Bakeries.
      Boot and shoe manufacturing.
      Bottling companies.
      Dairy products processing.
      Dry cleaning establishments and laundries employing more than ten (10)
persons.
      Electronic and scientific precision instruments manufacturing.
      Electroplating.
      Food manufacture, packaging and processing.
      Furniture, bedding, and carpet manufacturing.
      General manufacturing.
      Glass products production and sales.
      Light machinery production.
      Lithographing.
      Machine shop.
      Paper products manufacturing.
      Plastics processing.
      Pottery and ceramics manufacturing.
      Printing and publishing establishments.
      Wearing apparel manufacturing.
      Woodworking.
   Miscellaneous uses:
      Freight terminals, including air, motor and railroad.
      Parking lots and garages, principal.
      Radio and television stations and studios.
      Schools – vocational or trade.
   Public, quasi-public and governmental buildings and facilities:
      Banks and financial institutions.
      Business, professional, medical and dental offices.
      Civic buildings.
   Wholesale and warehouse uses:
      Building materials and products sales and storage.
      Cartage and express facilities.
      Warehouses, storage, and distribution facilities. (Ord. 99-06, 6-21-1999)
9-9B-4: SPECIAL USES PERMITTED:
The following uses shall be permitted only if specifically authorized by the
board as allowed in chapter 14 of this title:
Antenna towers in excess of sixty feet (60') in height, as measured from ground
level.
Industrial or manufacturing uses:
   Asphalt products manufacturing.
   Boiler and tank manufacturing.
   Brick and structural clay products manufacturing.
   Chemical and processing manufacturing.
   Concrete mixing plants.
   Feed mills.
   Foundries and forge plants.
   Grain storage and processing.
   Heavy machinery production.
   Leather tanning and processing.
   Meatpacking.
   Metal reduction and refinement.
   Metal stamping.
   Petroleum products processing and storage.
   Petroleum refining.
   Rubber processing and manufacturing.
   Steel manufacturing.
   Stone products manufacturing.
Medical cannabis facilities provided the facilities otherwise comply with the
provisions of chapter 17 of this title.
Miscellaneous uses:
   Air, motor and railroad freight terminals.
   Airports and heliports.
   Automobile or truck service stations, repair facilities and car washes used
in conjunction with a service station.
   Bulk storage of petroleum products.
   Car washes.
   Eating and drinking establishments.
   Fuel and ice sales.
   Garages for storage, repair and servicing of motor vehicles, including body
repair, painting and engine rebuilding.
   Health clubs.
   Mining operations.
   Planned Unit Developments, as authorized by Chapter 4 of this title,
provided the uses therein shall be limited to those allowed as permitted and/or
special uses in the I-2 Heavy Industrial District.
   Public and private utility facilities.
   Recreation and social facilities.
   Stadiums. (Ord. 99-06, 6-21-1999; amd. Ord. 13-29, 1-20-2014; Ord. 22-01, 5-
2-2022)
9-9B-5: TEMPORARY USES PERMITTED:
Upon application to and issuance by the code enforcement officer of a permit,
the following uses may be operated as temporary uses:
   Temporary building, trailer or yard for construction materials and/or
equipment, both incidental and necessary to construction in the zoning
district. Each permit shall specify the location of the building or yard and
the area of permitted operation. Each such permit shall be valid for a period
of six (6) months and shall not be renewed for more than one additional period.
   Temporary office or residence both incidental and necessary for the sale,
maintenance, or rental of real property. Each permit shall specify the location
of the office and the area of permitted operation. Each such permit shall be
valid for a period of six (6) months and shall not be renewed for more than two
(2) successive periods at the same location. (Ord. 99-06, 6-21-1999)
9-9B-6: ACCESSORY USES:
Accessory uses, buildings or other structures and devices customarily
incidental to and commonly associated with a permitted use or special use may
be permitted, provided they are operated and maintained under the same
ownership, on the same parcel and do not include structures or features
inconsistent with the permitted use or special use. (Ord. 99-06, 6-21-1999)
9-9B-7: PROHIBITED USES:
All uses not expressly authorized in sections
9-9B-3 through
9-9B-6 of this article, inclusive. Any use that creates any external odor,
smoke, dust, noise or glare or that involves the use of any radioactive or
highly toxic materials, as determined by the code enforcement officer. (Ord.
99-06, 6-21-1999)
9-9B-8: SITE AND STRUCTURE REQUIREMENTS:
   (A)   Minimum Lot Area: One acre of separate ground area shall be provided
for each parcel used for a permitted or special use.
   (B)   Minimum Lot Frontage: A minimum lot frontage of one hundred fifty feet
(150') shall be provided for each parcel used for a permitted or special use.
Corner lots shall contain a minimum of one hundred seventy feet (170') of
width.
   (C)   Minimum Lot Depth: A minimum lot depth of one hundred twenty feet
(120') shall be provided for each parcel containing a permitted or special use.
   (D)   Yards:
      1.   Yards Facing Existing Or Proposed Roadways (Not Including Interior
Circulation Roads Or Drive Within An Individual Tract): There shall be a
required yard adjacent to each existing or proposed roadway which bounds an
individual tract. Such required yard shall not be less than one hundred feet
(100') in depth; provided, however, that such a yard located across a street
from a residential district shall not be less than one hundred fifty feet
(150') in depth.
      2.   Side Yard: All structures shall be set back not less than fifteen
feet (15') from the side lot line, except where side lot line abuts upon a
residential district, the required side yard shall be not less than one hundred
feet (100').
      3.   Rear Yard: All structures shall be set back not less than fifteen
feet (15') from the rear lot line, except where rear lot line abuts upon a
residential district, the required rear yard shall be not less than one hundred
feet (100').
   (E)   Maximum Height: No structure or portion thereof, shall exceed a height
of fifty feet (50').
   (F)   Floor Area Ratio: Not to exceed seventy percent (70%).
   (G)   Maximum Lot Coverage: Principal building and any accessory structures
combined may not exceed forty percent (40%). The balance of the lot shall be
used for, but not limited to, parking, open space and yard recreation space.
   (H)   Maximum Area Coverage: Including all buildings, structures, sidewalks,
parking areas or other hard surface not to exceed eighty percent (80%).
   (I)   Minimum Landscaped Area: Two percent (2%) of the total square footage
of the real property shall be set aside as a decorative landscaped area,
enhancing the street side of the property, and as approved by the code
enforcement officer. (Ord. 99-06, 6-21-1999)
9-9B-9: SPECIAL PROVISIONS:
   (A)   Warehouse And Storage Facilities: Warehouse and storage facility
functions shall be totally enclosed and conducted within buildings and
structures.
   (B)   Business Servicing Or Processing: All business servicing or
processing, except for off street parking and off street loading shall be
conducted within completely enclosed buildings.
   (C)   Outside Storage: All outside storage of goods, materials and products
shall be screened in accordance with section
9-3-5 of this title. Lighting of the facility shall be directed away from
surrounding properties.
   (D)   Outdoor Sales: All outdoor sales space shall be provided with a
permanent durable concrete or asphalt surface, and shall be graded and drained
as to dispose of all surface water.
   (E)   Curb, Gutter, Storm Drainage And Entrance Curbs: Required on all
street frontages and shall meet the approval of the village engineer and
village standards.
   (F)   Parking And Loading Requirements: In accordance with the applicable
regulations set forth in chapter 12 of this title.
   (G)   Sign Requirements: In accordance with the applicable regulations set
forth in chapter 13 of this title.
   (H)   Waste Materials: No materials or wastes shall be deposited upon a lot
in such a form that they may be transferred off the property by natural causes
or forces.
   (I)   Screening: Where a commercial or industrial use abuts or is across the
street from a residential district, adequate screening shall be provided as set
forth in section
9-3-5 of this title. Any screening required of service yards or other areas
which tend to be unsightly shall be accomplished by walls, fencing, planting or
a combination of these as outlined in section
9-3-5 of this title. Screening must enhance architectural features and
strengthen vistas along important ways of approach or entry.
   (J)   Enclosure Of Use: All industrial or commercial operations shall take
place within completely enclosed buildings, unless otherwise specified.
   (K)   Performance Standards: Processes and equipment employed shall comply
with the provisions of performance standards as outlined in article C of this
chapter. (Ord. 99-06, 6-21-1999)
CHAPTER 9
INDUSTRIAL DISTRICTS 1
 
Notes
1 1. Commercial districts, as applicable.
ARTICLE C. PERFORMANCE STANDARDS
SECTION:
9-9C-1: Purpose
9-9C-2: Compliance
9-9C-3: Measurement
9-9C-4: Standards
9-9C-5: Investigation
9-9C-1: PURPOSE:
   (A)   To provide that business, utilities, light industry, research and
related activities shall be established and maintained with proper appearance
from streets and adjoining properties.
   (B)   To provide that each permitted or special use shall be a good neighbor
to adjoining properties by the control of emission of noise, odor, glare,
light, vibration, smoke, particulate matter, gases, wastes and other hazards.
   (C)   To state the conditions of construction and operation with which uses
will be expected to comply. (Ord. 99-06, 6-21-1999)
9-9C-2: COMPLIANCE:
   (A)   Performance Standards Procedure:
      1.   Any application for a building permit for a use which shall be
subject to performance standards shall be accompanied by a sworn statement
filed by the owner of subject property or the operator of the proposed use that
said use will be operated in accordance with the performance standards set
forth herein.
In many cases, the relation of a prospective use to all these performance
standards cannot be judged properly at the time of building permit issuance. In
such cases, the recipient of the building permit should note that these
standards, like all other provisions of this title, are continuing obligations
and that all uses shall be expected to operate in compliance with these
standards. The building plans shall bear the signature of a qualified
professional stating that all performance standards will be complied with based
upon the submitted building plans. The village retains the option to conduct
its own investigation to determine compliance with the performance standards.
      2.   Continued compliance with performance standards is required and
enforcement of continued compliance with these performance standards shall be
enforced by the code enforcement officer.
      3.   The code enforcement officer shall investigate any purported
violation of performance standards and, if there is reasonable grounds for the
same, shall notify the village board of the occurrence or existence of a
probable violation thereof. If after investigation, the code enforcement
officer finds that a violation occurred or exists, such violation shall be
terminated as provided in subsection (A)4 of this section.
      4.   All violations, as ascertained through investigation, shall be
terminated within thirty (30) days of the decision of the code enforcement
officer or shall be deemed a separate violation for each day following and
subject to fines as set forth herein, except that certain uses established
before the effective date of these regulations and nonconforming as to
performance standards shall be given a reasonable time in which to conform
therewith as determined by the code enforcement officer. Any violation which
presents an emergency to person or property shall be dealt with immediately in
a manner determined by emergency personnel.
   (B)   Regulation Of Nuisance Elements:
      1.   No land or building in any I-1 or I-2 district which shall be used,
occupied or operated in such a manner so as to create any dangerous, injurious,
noxious or otherwise objectionable, fire, explosive or other hazard; noise or
vibration, smoke, dust, dirt or other form of air pollution; electrical or
other disturbance; glare; or other substance, condition or element in such
amount as to adversely affect the surrounding area or premises at the specified
point or points of the determination.
      2.   The determination of the existence of any dangerous and
objectionable elements shall be made at:
         (a)   The point or points where such elements shall be most apparent
for fire and explosion hazards, for radioactivity and electrical disturbances,
for smoke and other forms of air pollution.
         (b)   At or beyond the property lines of the use creating such
elements for noise, for vibration, for glare, and for odors, wherever the
effect is greatest. (Ord. 99-06, 6-21-1999)
9-9C-3: MEASUREMENT:
Each measurable standard shall be measured at the appropriate indicated
location in accordance with the provisions of section
9-9C-4 of this article. (Ord. 99-06, 6-21-1999)
9-9C-4: STANDARDS:
   (A)   Fire And Explosion Hazards: All activities involving, and all storage
of, inflammable and explosive materials shall be provided with adequate safety
devices against the hazard of fire and explosion and adequate firefighting and
fire suppression equipment and devices standard in this industry. Burning of
waste materials in open fires is prohibited. The relevant provisions of state
and local laws and regulations shall also apply.
   (B)   Radioactivity Or Electrical Disturbance: No activities shall be
permitted which cause radioactivity in violation of the code of federal
regulations, "standards for protection against radiation", the most current
revision or amendment thereto.
No activities shall be permitted which emit dangerous electrical disturbances
adversely affecting the operation of any equipment. All applicable federal
regulations shall be complied with.
   (C)   Noise: Noise shall be measured on any property line of the tract on
which the operation is located. Noise shall be muffled so as not to become
objectionable due to intermittence, beat frequency, shrillness, or intensity.
At the property line, the sound pressure level of noise radiated continuously
from a facility shall not exceed the value given in tables 1 and 2 of this
subsection (C) of any octave band frequency. The sound pressure level shall be
measured with a sound level meter and an octave band analyzer that conform to
specifications published by the American Standards Association. Octave band
analyzers shall be calibrated in the preferred frequencies (American Standards
Association S1.6-1967). Preferred frequencies for acoustical measurements shall
be used.
TABLE 1
Center Frequency Cycles Per Second Maximum Permitted Sound Pressure Level,
                                   Decibels
Center Frequency Cycles Per Second Maximum Permitted Sound Pressure Level,
                                   Decibels
31.5                               79
63                                 74
125                                69
250                                64
500                                58
1,000                              52
2,000                              47
4,000                              43
8,000                              40
 
If the noise is not smooth and continuous, one or more of the corrections in
table 2 shall be added to or subtracted from each of the decibel levels given
in table 1.
TABLE 2
Type Of Operation Or Character Of Noise Corrections In Decibels
Type Of Operation Or Character Of Noise          Corrections In Decibels
Daytime operation only                           plus 5
Noise source operates less than:
20 percent of any 1 hour period                  plus 51
5 percent of any 1 hour period                   plus 101
1 percent of any 1 hour period                   plus 15 percent
Noise of impulsive character (hammering, etc.)   minus 5
Noise of periodic character (hum, screech, etc.) minus 5
Property not located within 500 feet of any R district:
I-1 district                                     plus 5
I-2 district                                     plus 10
 
      1.   Apply one of these corrections only.
   (D)   Odors: No emission shall be permitted of odorous gases or other
odorous matter in such quantities as to be readily detectable without
instruments at the property line of the lot from which they are emitted.
Detailed plans for the prevention of odors crossing property lines may be
required before the issuance of a building permit.
   (E)   Glare: Glare, whether direct or reflected, such as from floodlights or
high temperature processes, and as differentiated from general illumination,
shall not be visible at any property line. Any operation or activity producing
glare shall be performed within a completely enclosed building and be conducted
so that direct and indirect illumination from the source of light on the lot
shall not cause illumination in excess of one-half (1/2) foot-candle when
measured at the lot line. Exposed sources of light shall be shielded and
intense sources of light shall be controlled so as not to cause a nuisance
across lot lines.
   (F)   Exterior Lighting: Any lights used for exterior illumination shall
direct light away from adjoining properties.
   (G)   Heat: Any operation producing intense heat shall be performed within a
completely enclosed building in such a manner as not to create a public
nuisance or hazard along lot lines.
   (H)   Vibration: No vibration shall be permitted which is detectable without
instruments at any property line of the lot.
   (I)   Smoke: Measurement shall be made at of the point of emission. The
Ringelmann smoke chart published by the United States bureau of mines shall be
used for the measurement of smoke. Smoke no darker or more opaque than no. 0 on
said chart may be emitted except that smoke not darker or more opaque than no.
1 on said chart may be emitted for periods not longer than four (4) minutes in
any thirty (30) minutes. These provisions, applicable to visible gray smoke,
shall also apply to visible smoke of a different color but with an equivalent
apparent opacity.
   (J)   Particulate Matter: Solid or liquid particles shall not be emitted at
any point in concentrations exceeding 0.1 grains per cubic foot of the
conveying gas or air. For measurement of the amount of particles in gases
resulting from combustion, standard corrections shall be applied to a stack
temperature of five hundred degrees Fahrenheit (500°F) and fifty percent (50%)
excess air.
   (K)   Gases: Fumes or gases shall not be emitted at any point in
concentrations or amounts that are noxious, toxic, or corrosive. Detailed plans
for the elimination of fumes or gases may be required before the issuance of a
building permit.
   (L)   Other Forms Of Pollution: No emission of fly ash, dust, fumes, vapors,
gases or any other forms of air, earth or water pollution shall be permitted
which can cause any damage to health, to animal, vegetation, or other forms of
property, or which can cause any excessive soiling. No discharge beyond lot
lines of any toxic or noxious matter in such quantity as to be detrimental to
or endanger the public health, safety, comfort, or welfare, or cause injury or
damage to property or business, shall be permitted.
   (M)   Hazard: Any operation allowed in articles A and B of this chapter
shall be carried on with reasonable precautions against fire and explosion
hazards.
   (N)   Waste: All sewage and industrial wastes shall be treated and disposed
of in such manner as to comply with the water quality standards applicable to
the classification assigned to the receiving waters by the village, the state
of Illinois, and the USEPA. Approval of the Illinois environmental protection
agency of all plans for waste disposal facilities shall be required before
issuance of any building permit. (Ord. 99-06, 6-21-1999)
9-9C-5: INVESTIGATION:
   (A)   Should the code enforcement officer determine that the proposed or
current use violates or may violate the performance standards as set forth
herein, an investigation shall be initiated. The property owner shall provide
information as requested, including, but not limited to, the following:
      1.   Plans of the existing or proposed construction and development.
      2.   A description of the existing or proposed machinery, processes and
products.
      3.   Specifications for the mechanisms and techniques used or proposed to
be used in restricting the possible emission of any of the dangerous and
objectionable elements as set forth in this section.
      4.   Measurements of the amount or rate of emission of said dangerous and
objectionable elements. Failure to submit data requested by the code
enforcement officer shall constitute an intentional violation. (Ord. 99-06, 6-
21-1999)
   (B)   The code enforcement officer may require any person, firm or
corporation to retain an expert consultant or consultants to study and report
as to compliance or noncompliance with the performance standards, and to advise
how a proposed or current use could be brought into compliance. Such
consultants shall be fully qualified to give the required information and shall
be persons or firms mutually agreeable to the code enforcement officer and to
the owner or operator of the use in question. In the event of inability to
select a mutually agreeable consultant, the planning commission shall select
the consultant. The cost of the consultant's services shall be borne by the
owner or operator of said use. (Ord. 99-06, 6-21-1999; amd. Ord. 05-01, 5-16-
2005)
   (C)   If violation continues to exist after the conclusion of the time
granted for compliance with the performance standards, any permits previously
issued shall be void and the operator shall be required to cease operation
until the violation is remedied. (Ord. 99-06, 6-21-1999)
CHAPTER 10
SPECIALTY DISTRICTS
ARTICLE A. A-1 AGRICULTURAL DISTRICT
SECTION:
9-10A-1: Purpose
9-10A-2: Policy
9-10A-3: Uses Permitted
9-10A-4: Special Uses Permitted
9-10A-5: Temporary Uses Permitted
9-10A-6: Accessory Uses Permitted
9-10A-7: Prohibited Uses
9-10A-8: Special Provisions
9-10A-1: PURPOSE:
The zoning district A-1 is hereby established to allow the transitional and
temporary designation of lands for agriculture use until such time as
appropriate development is proposed and municipal improvements become
available. (Ord. 99-06, 6-21-1999)
9-10A-2: POLICY:
To achieve the purpose of the A-1 agricultural district, it shall be the policy
of the village to:
   (A)   Foster uses where adequate police and fire protection are available.
   (B)   Require a minimum, continuous area for the A-1 agricultural district
to be twenty (20) acres in area. (Ord. 99-06, 6-21-1999)
9-10A-3: USES PERMITTED:
No land shall be used or occupied, and no building, structure, or premises
shall be erected, altered, enlarged, occupied, or used, except as otherwise
provided in this title for other than the agricultural use that exists at time
of annexation. (Ord. 99-06, 6-21-1999)
9-10A-4: SPECIAL USES PERMITTED:
Any changes in usage from those in existence at time of annexation shall be
permitted only if specifically authorized by the board as allowed in chapter 12
of this title. (Ord. 99-06, 6-21-1999)
9-10A-5: TEMPORARY USES PERMITTED:
Upon application to and issuance by the code enforcement officer of a permit,
the following uses may be operated as temporary uses:
   Temporary building, trailer or yard for construction materials and/or
equipment, both incidental and necessary to construction in the zoning
district. Each permit shall specify the location of the building or yard and
the area of permitted operation. Each such permit shall be valid for a period
of six (6) calendar months and shall not be renewed for more than one
successive period location. (Ord. 99-06, 6-21-1999)
9-10A-6: ACCESSORY USES PERMITTED:
Accessory uses, buildings or other structures and devices customarily
incidental to and commonly associated with a permitted use or special use may
be permitted, provided they are operated and maintained under the same
ownership, on the same parcel, and do not include structures or features
inconsistent with the permitted use or special use.
Barns, stables, greenhouses, and other similar structures for the exclusive use
of the occupants of the premises, which are incidental to the use of the
property.
Garages, carports, or other parking spaces for the exclusive use of the
residents or occupants of the premises.
Home occupations. (Ord. 99-06, 6-21-1999)
9-10A-7: PROHIBITED USES:
All uses not expressly authorized in sections
9-10A-3 through
9-10A-6 of this article, inclusive. (Ord. 99-06, 6-21-1999)
9-10A-8: SPECIAL PROVISIONS:
   (A)   Sign Requirements: In accordance with the applicable regulations set
forth in chapter 13 of this title. (Ord. 99-06, 6-21-1999)
ARTICLE B. OS-1 OPEN SPACE DISTRICT
SECTION:
9-10B-1: Purpose
9-10B-2: Uses Permitted
9-10B-3: Special Uses Permitted
9-10B-4: Temporary Uses Permitted
9-10B-5: Accessory Uses Permitted
9-10B-6: Prohibited Uses
9-10B-7: Special Provisions
9-10B-1: PURPOSE:
To recognize the existence of major open space and recreational areas in the
village. The open space district is intended to apply to all public open space
of notable quality and to major private open spaces. (Ord. 99-06, 6-21-1999)
9-10B-2: USES PERMITTED:
Detention, retention or natural swale areas and property designated for
recreational usage such as bike trails, walk paths or natural landscaping.
Municipal and public utility facilities.
Public and private cemeteries.
Public or private golf courses and recreational areas, including associated
structures such as clubhouses, maintenance buildings and pro shops.
Public parking lots on land whether public or private.
Publicly owned parks, playgrounds, gardens, recreational and other open areas,
including those leased, and also including associated structures such as
playground equipment, rest facilities, gazebos and other similar public
buildings. (Ord. 99-06, 6-21-1999)
9-10B-3: SPECIAL USES PERMITTED:
The following uses shall be permitted only if specifically authorized by the
board as allowed in chapter 14 of this title:
   Band shells and amphitheaters.
   Concession stands and restaurants, but not drive-through, and only as
associated with a particular permitted use.
   Libraries and information centers.
   Membership sports and recreation clubs.
   Museums and art galleries.
   Organized groups or clubs holding scheduled events or meetings on a regular
basis and utilizing the area in a manner consistent with its primary permitted
usage.
   Public sports and recreation buildings and facilities. (Ord. 99-06, 6-21-
1999)
9-10B-4: TEMPORARY USES PERMITTED:
Upon application to the village board and issuance by the code enforcement
officer of a permit, the following uses may be operated as temporary uses:
   Open space area designated for a special event; provided, however, that each
permit shall be valid only for the duration of the designated special event.
   Temporary mobile signs on privately owned property only and as provided in
chapter 13 of this title. (Ord. 99-06, 6-21-1999)
9-10B-5: ACCESSORY USES PERMITTED:
Accessory uses and structures, as allowed under section
9-3-6 of this title, are permitted in the open space district, subject to
consistency with the permitted usage of the property. (Ord. 99-06, 6-21-1999)
9-10B-6: PROHIBITED USES:
All uses not expressly authorized in sections
9-10B-2 through
9-10B-5 of this article, inclusive. (Ord. 99-06, 6-21-1999)
9-10B-7: SPECIAL PROVISIONS:
   (A)   Outdoor Storage: No outdoor storage shall be permitted.
   (B)   Lighting: Lighting of the facility and parking areas shall be directed
away from surrounding properties, and shall meet specifications as set by the
code enforcement officer.
   (C)   Parking: In accordance with the applicable regulations set forth in
chapter 12 of this title. (Ord. 99-06, 6-21-1999)
ARTICLE C. FB-1 ROUTE 50 CORRIDOR DISTRICT
SECTION:
9-10C-1: Introduction
9-10C-2: Definitions
9-10C-3: General Provisions
9-10C-3-1: Public And Private Improvements
9-10C-3-2: Uses
9-10C-3-3: Building Standards
9-10C-3-4: Parking
9-10C-3-5: Alleys
9-10C-3-6: Vehicle Access
9-10C-3-7: Landscaping
9-10C-3-8: Fencing
9-10C-3-9: Lighting
9-10C-3-10: Encroachments
9-10C-4: Signage
9-10C-5: Administration And Procedures
9-10C-5-1: How To Obtain Project Approval
9-10C-5-2: Public Meetings Required
9-10C-5-3: Required Submittal Information
9-10C-5-4: Approval Standards
9-10C-5-5: Appeals
9-10C-5-6: Special Uses
9-10C-5-7: Deviations
9-10C-5-8: Parking Agreement Standards And Waivers
9-10C-1: INTRODUCTION:
   (A)   Purpose: The village of Manteno adopts this article as the ROUTE 50
CORRIDOR CODE with a clear vision and preferred urban design arrangement for
the heritage district and beyond. This article implements Manteno's vision with
a precise form based approach.
   This article was created to enhance the architectural aesthetic quality and
strengthen economic base of the Route 50 corridor district by implementing the
following principles:
      1.   Ensure that new development respects the historic scale and
character of the Route 50 corridor district.
      2.   Build a strong economic future for Manteno.
      3.   Preserve Manteno's unique historic heritage.
      4.   Create walkable downtown and Route 50 corridor areas where
pedestrians come first.
      5.   Create a connected roadway framework with small walkable blocks.
      6.   Promote a green downtown showcasing leadership in the preservation
of natural resources and sustainable practices.
   (B)   Intent: This article is intended to allow for the continued function
of contemporary land uses, while creating standards and design criteria for
infill and redevelopment projects. These regulations have been developed to
accomplish the goals of this article by:
      1.   Regulating building form to create a street wall of appropriately
scaled buildings that address the street and create a pedestrian oriented
setting.
      2.   Prohibiting the placement of off street parking in front yards in
order to maintain the continuity of buildings along the street, minimize the
views of parked cars, and provide adequate sidewalks and amenities for
pedestrians and bicyclists.
      3.   Restricting drive-through facilities and other automobile related
uses to encourage an environment where pedestrian comfort and safety comes
first.
      4.   Regulating streets and rights of way to encourage landscaped
streetscapes and complete streets that accommodate multiple modes of travel.
      5.   Concentrating commercial development in a walkable Route 50 corridor
district and transition areas outside the district to residential development
to create a supportive neighborhood market.
      6.   Creating architectural standards to ensure that new buildings comply
with the community's shared vision.
      7.   Creating a review process that rewards compliance with this article
with a shortened review process.
   (C)   Applicability: This article shall apply to the area of land along
Illinois Route 50 (Locust Street) and Oak Street generally from the south
branch of Rock Creek to the northern Manteno boundary as depicted on figure
1.C.1 of this section and as designated on the official zoning map of the
village of Manteno. This area is to be depicted as the Route 50 corridor
district.
   The standards set forth in this article shall apply and rezone property
within the Route 50 corridor district.
   Should this article be found by village staff to be silent on any matter
that is otherwise provided for in any other section of the zoning ordinance, or
building code, the applicable provisions of those sections shall apply.
   In the event of conflict between this article and the village's zoning
ordinance or building code, the provisions of this article shall govern.
   (D)   Severability: Should any section or provision of this article be
declared invalid, the invalidity thereof shall not affect any of the other
provisions of this article or zoning ordinance, as a whole.
   (E)   Process Overview: The following provides a concise overview of the
general review process for the development of new property within the Route 50
corridor district. The intent of this article is to reward those who strive to
meet its standards and regulations. Therefore, the length of review time and
number of meetings required to obtain project approval shall be based upon the
degree of conformity to this article. Those changes involving existing
structures will typically not require public meetings unless a determination is
made by village staff that the nature of the modifications warrant review by
village commissions and/or the village board. A complete description of the
process and submission requirements is located in section
9-10C-5 of this article.
FIGURE 1.C.1
ROUTE 50 CORRIDOR AREA MAP
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/a52ddd8667179438dfe82ac8fd74e09d8c5052bc/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2541.jpg]
(Ord. 12-34, 2-19-2013)
9-10C-2: DEFINITIONS:
ACCESS DRIVE: A private driveway that links parking facilities to an abutting
public street.
ATTACHED PARKING: A parking structure of one or more levels that is connected
to a building situated either in whole or in part outside the footprint of the
building.
BELOW GRADE PARKING: Parking facilities located either in whole or in part
below grade.
BLOCK END: A lot having at least two (2) sides abutting a street.
BUILDING HEIGHT: The number of stories between the floor of the first story
(exclusive of basements or cellars) and the roof, and shall include both
habitable and mechanical space.
CORRIDOR: That area comprised of the thoroughfare, public frontage, and private
frontage, and extending across a street from building facade to building
facade.
FRONT YARD PARKING: Surface parking facilities located between the building
facade and the curb of the thoroughfare, and accessed directly from the
thoroughfare without the use of a drive aisle.
GRANDFATHERED SITES: Those lots with structures or uses that lawfully existed
prior to the adoption of this article. Grandfathered sites are generally
classified as such until they incur voluntary, private owner initiated site
improvements that exceed fifty percent (50%) of the property's market value
based on most recent tax bill, at which time they shall be reclassified as
redevelopment sites and subject to the pertinent provisions within this
district. Absent such voluntary, private owner initiated site improvements,
grandfathered sites may retain their nonconforming status in perpetuity, and
can change owner and/or use, be maintained and repaired as part of normal
upkeep, undergo site improvements that do not exceed fifty percent (50%) of the
property's market value based on most recent tax bill and be rebuilt following
a natural or manmade event. Nonconforming uses and building types lawfully
established at the time of the natural or manmade event may be reestablished,
provided that no new nonconformities are created and that the existing degree
of nonconformity is not increased, and with the condition that the property be
reconstructed to meet the private lot, corridor and alley standards of this
district. In order to reestablish previous nonconforming uses and building
types following a natural or manmade event, a building permit relative to such
reestablishment must be obtained within one year of the date of the damage or
destruction by a natural or manmade event, and construction must be completed
within one year of issuance of the building permit. In the event that the
permit is not obtained within one year from the date of damage or destruction
by a natural or manmade event, or construction is not completed within one year
of the issuance of the building permit, the grandfathered site status shall be
lost, and the building or use must thereafter conform to those allowed in this
district.
LINEAR FRONTAGE (BLOCK): The distance as measured along the front lot line of
one or more properties abutting one side of a thoroughfare and lying between
the two (2) nearest intersecting streets as determined by staff.
LOT ASSEMBLAGE: The assemblage of two (2) or more contiguous parcels to form a
single lot.
MARKET VALUE: Shall be determined, within the Route 50 corridor area, by
dividing the assessed valuation of the property as determined by the Kankakee
County assessor, and as shown on the most recent tax bill for the property, by
the level of assessment used by the assessor for the type of property (i.e.,
vacant, single-family, commercial, etc.). For example, a property with an
assessed valuation of forty thousand dollars ($40,000.00), and a level of
assessment of sixteen percent (16%), shall have a market value of two hundred
fifty thousand dollars ($250,000.00) ($40,000.00/0.16).
MIXED USE BUILDING: A mixed use building contains residential dwelling units
above or behind ground floor commercial, group assembly, and/or civic uses, and
may be designed to accommodate office and/or group assembly space on the second
level.
MODERATE CONFORMANCE: Project proposals shall be considered in moderate
conformance with this article when village staff determines that the plans
match the spirit and intent of this article, but there are qualitative
differences (i.e., site layout) that do not require a variance from this
article, or need special approval.
MULTI-FAMILY STRUCTURE: A residence for multiple households where dwelling
units are located above or below one another and may share a common lobby
(synonym: condominiums and/or apartments).
PRECISE CONFORMANCE: Project proposals shall be considered in precise
conformance with this article when village staff determines that the plans
match the development or redevelopment scenario presented in this article,
including use, site plan, massing, and architectural details, and requires no
variances or other special approvals.
PRIMARY FACADE: The primary facade of a building is the entire linear exposed
exterior surface that fronts a thoroughfare and extends from exterior grade to
the roofline. On interior and corner lots, the primary facade shall be the face
of the building used for its primary mailing address, as determined by village
staff.
PRIVATE FRONTAGE: The privately owned area between the front lot line of a
parcel and the building facade.
PUBLIC FRONTAGE OR PUBLIC PARKWAY: The publicly held area between the curb of
the thoroughfare and the front lot line of a parcel.
REDEVELOPMENT SITES: Those lots, structures, and uses that are subject to the
redevelopment requirements of the Route 50 corridor district. Property shall be
classified as a redevelopment site when it is part of a lot assemblage and/or
when voluntary, private owner initiated site improvements exceed fifty percent
(50%) of the property's market value. Redevelopment sites include those lots,
structures, and uses that did not lawfully exist prior to the adoption of this
article, those lots that are, at present, undeveloped, and those lots that lose
their status as grandfathered sites by operation of a provision of this
article.
SECONDARY FACADE: On corner lots, the secondary facade is the entire linear
exposed exterior surface that fronts a thoroughfare and extends from exterior
grade to the roofline, and is the face of the building not used as the primary
mailing address, as determined by village staff.
SINGLE-FAMILY ATTACHED STRUCTURE: A residence designed to house a single-family
unit from lowest level to roof, with a private outside entrance and a shared
common wall with an adjoining dwelling unit (synonyms: row house; townhouse).
SINGLE-FAMILY DETACHED STRUCTURE: A residence designed to house a single-family
unit only, and is separated from other dwelling units by open space.
SITE IMPROVEMENTS: Voluntary, private owner initiated modifications to a
property, including structures that require a building permit. In determining
the value of such site improvements in relation to grandfathered site status,
the final costs shall exclude the costs of underground public and private
improvements required by the grandfathered sites sections.
STAND ALONE COMMERCIAL BUILDING: Contains retail, office, group assembly, and/
or civic uses on all levels of the structure.
STRUCTURE EXPANSION: A modification that results in an increase in the floor
area and/or volume of a structure.
THOROUGHFARE: That portion of a corridor consisting of the pavement upon which
vehicle and bicycle movement occurs.
TUCKED IN PARKING: Parking facilities located in their entirety within the
envelope of a building.
UNDEVELOPED SITES: Those vacant sites upon which there were no structures or
uses lawfully established at the time of adoption hereof.
WATER COLLECTION AREA: An area where rainwater is harvested and stored above
ground and open to the sky. (Synonyms: bioswales, rain gardens.) (Ord. 12-34,
2-19-2013)
9-10C-3: GENERAL PROVISIONS:
9-10C-3-1: PUBLIC AND PRIVATE IMPROVEMENTS:
   (A)   Intent: The regulations and standards within this section are intended
to help transition existing single-family houses and commercial uses into a
more compatible environment to support the redevelopment of the Route 50
corridor district, and to encourage the redevelopment of the district to a
commercially viable area and gateway into the downtown. It is also the desire
of the village to streamline the approval process for redevelopment projects
within the Route 50 corridor district.
   (B)   Applicability: The regulations and standards within this section shall
apply to those parcels identified on the regulating plan as within the Route 50
corridor district.
   (C)   General Standards:
TABLE 3.1.1
Permitted Building Functionality On Site Vehicle Parking On Site Bike Parking
                                                          On Site   On Site
Permitted Building Functionality                          Vehicle   Bike
                                                          Parking   Parking
Street                                                    2 spaces  0.2 per
level       •       •                              per 1,000 1,000 sq.
commercial                                                sq. ft.   ft. (2
                                                                    min.)
Second                                                    2 spaces  0.2 per
floor       •       •                              per 1,000 1,000 sq.
office                                                    sq. ft.   ft. (2
                                                                    min.)
                                                          1 space
                                                          per
                                                          dwelling  1 per
Residential •                  •    •      •      unit;     dwelling
                                                          guest     unit
                                                          parking
                                                          not
                                                          required
A list of
special
uses and
prohibited                                                Design details for
uses for                                                  on site vehicle
the entire            Stand             Single-  Single-  parking and on site
Route 50    Mixed Use Alone      Multi- Family   Family   bike parking are
corridor              Commercial Family Attached Detached located in section
area is                                                   9-10C-3-4 of this
located in                                                article
section
9-10C-3-
2 of this
article
                                                     Can be converted to
            Existing Building Type                        a mixed use building
 
   (D)   Corridor And Alley Requirements:
      1.   Intent: The type and minimum degree of public and private
improvements required within the corridor or alley areas shall be based upon
the location and percentage of the total linear frontage of a block to be
assembled and/or improved as part of a project (see table 3.1.2 of this
section).
      2.   Applicability: This subsection shall apply to projects involving lot
improvements greater than fifty percent (50%) of the market value of the
property, as well as projects involving lot assemblage. Refer to grandfathered
sites for standards relating to single lot improvements less than fifty percent
(50%) of market value.
      3.   Waivers: In those instances in which village staff determines that
it is impractical or impossible to complete all or a portion of the required
improvements due to sequencing or physical constraints, or determines that
unique circumstances exist relative to the subject site and/or block
development, village staff may defer to the village board to consider one or a
combination of the following options:
         (a)   Postpone the implementations of improvements to a date certain,
and require the petitioner to provide a letter of credit, bond, or similar form
of financial security in an amount equal to the estimated cost of such
improvements as determined by village staff;
         (b)   Require cash in lieu of in an amount equal to the estimated cost
of such improvements as determined by village staff; and/or
         (c)   Waive such improvements in whole or in part based upon the
unique nature of the subject site and/or block development, either existing or
proposed.
      4.   Required Improvements:
TABLE 3.1.2
          Corridor                      Alley
Site Type Thoroughfare Public  Private  Dedication Construct Connect To
                       Parkway Frontage To Village On Site   Thoroughfare
                Corridor                      Alley
Site Type       Thoroughfare Public  Private  Dedication Construct Connect To
                             Parkway Frontage To Village On Site   Thoroughfare
>75% of block   •          •     •      •        •       •
Lot assemblage              •     •      •        •       •
>50% of block
Lot assemblage              •     •      •        •        
<50% of block
Single lot >10%             •     •      •        •        
of block
Single lot <10%             •     •      •                  
of block
Block end (any              •     •      •        •       •
%)
 
FIGURE 3.1.1
ILLUSTRATION OF TERMS
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/a52ddd8667179438dfe82ac8fd74e09d8c5052bc/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2543.jpg]
   (E)   Private Frontage Standards:
TABLE 3.1.3
PERMITTED PRIVATE FRONTAGES
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/a52ddd8667179438dfe82ac8fd74e09d8c5052bc/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2565.jpg]
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/a52ddd8667179438dfe82ac8fd74e09d8c5052bc/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2567.jpg]
 
Description                             Standards
Corner: A building treatment oriented
to address an intersection and allow
for direct access to commercial or      Entrance at sidewalk grade
residential uses from the public
frontage
Grand entry: An entry treatment with or Entrance inset from facade - 5'
without a staircase that provides       maximum. Stairs may encroach into front
access to building lobbies serving      yard setback
office or residential uses
Stoop: An entrance treatment with a
staircase that may be covered and       Stairs may encroach into front yard
provides access to a private            setback
residential dwelling
Flush: An entrance treatment built at
sidewalk grade that may be covered and  None
provides access to a private
residential dwelling
 
   (F)   Private Lot Standards:
FIGURE 3.1.2
BUILDING PLACEMENT
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/a52ddd8667179438dfe82ac8fd74e09d8c5052bc/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2579.jpg]
FIGURE 3.1.3
PARKING PLACEMENT
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/a52ddd8667179438dfe82ac8fd74e09d8c5052bc/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2581.jpg]
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/a52ddd8667179438dfe82ac8fd74e09d8c5052bc/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2583.jpg]
TABLE 3.1.4
General:                           
Minimum lot width                 40 feet
Maximum lot width                 n/a
Maximum building height           3 stories
Building setbacks:                 
Front yard (primary street)       5 - 15 feet (A)
Front yard (secondary street)     5 - 15 feet (A)
Side yard (interior)              0 - 5 feet (B)
Side yard (along access drive)    5 feet minimum (C)
Rear yard (existing alley)        5 feet minimum (D)
Rear yard (no alley required)     5 feet minimum (D)
Rear yard (from future alley ROW) 5 feet minimum (D)
Parking setbacks:                  
Front yard (primary street)       25 feet minimum (F)
Front yard (secondary street)     10 feet minimum (G)
Side yard (interior)              0 feet (H)
Side yard (along access drive)    5 feet minimum (I)
Rear yard (existing alley)        5 feet minimum (J)
Rear yard (no alley required)     5 feet minimum (J)
Rear yard (from future alley ROW) 5 feet minimum (J)
Alley and access road setbacks:    
Alley rear yard setback           5 feet minimum (L)
Accessory structures:              
Permitted location                Parking zone
 
   (G)   Grandfathered Sites: Grandfathered sites are those lots with
structures and uses that were lawfully existing prior to the adoption of this
article. Grandfathered sites are generally classified as such until they incur
site improvements that exceed fifty percent (50%) of the property's market
value based on most recent tax bill or changed ownership or tenantship after
the adoption of this article.
      1.   Intent: The intent of this subsection is to establish regulations
that govern the use and voluntary modification of grandfathered sites, and to
specify the circumstances and conditions under which such properties are
required to implement certain improvements aimed at decreasing their degree of
nonconformity, if applicable. The purpose is to meet the goals of this article
while protecting the interests of grandfathered site owners and tenants.
      2.   Applicability: This subsection shall apply to projects involving lot
improvements less than fifty percent (50%) of a property's market value as well
as changes of property ownership and/or building use within the Route 50
corridor district only.
      3.   General Standards:
TABLE 3.1.1
Permitted Building Functionality On Site Vehicle Parking On Site Bike Parking
                                                          On Site   On Site
Permitted Building Functionality                          Vehicle   Bike
                                                          Parking   Parking
Street                                                              0.2 per
level       •       •                              Not       1,000 sq.
commercial                                                required  ft. (2
                                                                    min.)
Second                                                    2 spaces  0.2 per
floor                •                              per 1,000 1,000 sq.
office                                                    sq. ft.   ft. (2
                                                                    min.)
                                                          1 space
                                                          per
                                                          dwelling  1 per
Residential •                  •    •      •      unit;     dwelling
                                                          guest     unit
                                                          parking
                                                          not
                                                          required
A list of
special
uses and
prohibited                                                Design details for
uses for                                                  on site vehicle
the entire            Stand             Single-  Single-  parking and on site
Route 50    Mixed Use Alone      Multi- Family   family   bike parking are
corridor              Commercial Family Attached detached located in section
area is                                                   9-10C-3-4 of this
located in                                                article
section
9-10C-3-
2 of this
article
                                                          Can be converted to
           Existing Building Type                        a multi- family
                                                          building
 
   (H)   Grandfathered Sites; Public And Private Improvements:
      1.   Intent: The type and minimum degree of public and private
improvements required shall be based upon the action being taken (table 3.1.6
of this section).
      2.   Applicability: This subsection shall apply to changes in use or
ownership, structure, and special uses within this district, with the exception
of single-family detached properties.
      3.   Waivers: In those instances in which village staff determines that
it is impractical or impossible to complete all or a portion of the required
improvements due to sequencing or physical constraints, or determines that
unique circumstances exist relative to the subject site and/or block
development, village staff may approve, or recommend to the village board for
consideration when applicable, one or a combination of the following options:
         (a)   Postpone the implementations of improvements to a date certain,
and require the petitioner to provide a letter of credit, bond, or similar form
of financial security in an amount equal to the estimated cost of such
improvements as determined by village staff;
         (b)   Require cash in lieu of in an amount equal to the estimated cost
of such improvements as determined by village staff; and/or
         (c)   Waive such improvements in whole or in part based upon the
unique nature of the subject site and/or block development, either existing or
proposed.
      4.   Required Improvements:
TABLE 3.1.6
 
                      Landscaping     Front         Access Drive Alley
Action                                Yard Parking
                      Public  Private Modify Remove Modify       Dedication
                      Parkway Lot
Change of owner                                             •
Change of use >50% of •     •           •    •          •
building
Structure expansion   •     •     •          •          •
Special use                  •     •          •          •
 
   (I)   Grandfathered Sites; Private Sites Standards:
      1.   Private Frontages: Permitted private frontages for this district
shall follow table 3.1.3 of this section.
      2.   Building And Parking Placement: Building and parking placement for
this district shall follow figures 3.1.2 and 3.1.3 of this section.
      3.   General Provisions: All general provisions in this section shall
apply unless otherwise noted. (Ord. 12-34, 2-19-2013)
9-10C-3-2: USES:
   (A)   Permitted Uses: Permitted uses of structures and land as set forth in
this subsection shall be allowed according to the regulations set forth within
this district and each building form. Permitted uses may be approved by either
administrative review or by site plan review by the village board, depending on
the nature of the improvement. Only those uses listed in this subsection shall
be considered permitted uses and no structure or land shall be devoted to any
other use other than a use that is permitted here, with the exception of uses
that were lawfully established prior to the effective date hereof; and
accessory uses, in compliance with this article.
   Commercial:
      Retail/service. An enterprise that provides goods and/or services
directly to the customer, including, but not limited to, merchandise shops,
eating and drinking establishments, specialty goods/foods stores, financial
institutions, personal services, convenience uses, entertainment, lodging,
fruit and vegetable stands and farmers' markets.
   Professional/public:
      Office. A workplace that conducts business and/or professional services
in which goods, wares, or professional merchandise are not displayed or sold on
the premises, including, but not limited to, general offices, medical services,
tax exempt uses that are exempt from taxation, including, but not limited to,
public uses, not for profits, places of worship and public educational uses.
   Residential:
      Owner and renter occupied dwelling units located within single-family
detached or single-family attached units.
   (B)   Special Uses: Special uses of structures and land are set forth in
this subsection. Such special uses shall be deemed to be and shall be treated
as grandfathered sites hereunder and shall be governed by the applicable
regulations relating to this article. These uses create off site impacts or
design issues that require special consideration by the plan commission and
approval by the village board. Petitions for uses that are listed as special
uses shall be reviewed according to procedures set forth by the village. The
village board may impose conditions and restrictions upon the premises
benefitted by a special use as may be necessary to assure compliance with any
standards, to reduce or minimize the effect of such a use on the other
properties in the neighborhood, and to better carry out the general intent of
this article. Failure to comply with conditions of a special use shall
constitute a violation of this article and may result in a revocation of the
special use. The special use will be enforced as the grantee continues to
occupy and/or operate said property. In the event of a transfer of property to
another party the special use expires and opportunity for granting the
continuing of the special use will be required by the new owner or operator.
      Amusement and recreation establishments including bowling alleys,
billiard parlors, coin operated amusement devices, swimming pools, dance halls,
skating rinks and other similar places of recreation.
      Any establishment with operating hours between two o'clock (2:00) A.M.
and six o'clock (6:00) A.M.
      Automobile and custom van sales (new and used).
      Automobile car wash (either manual or automatic).
      Automobile/gasoline service stations.
      Automobile repair shops (including body work).
      Building material sales.
      Drive-through establishments (accessory to restaurants, banks, pharmacies
and all other uses).
      Funeral homes, mortuaries, and cremation facilities.
      Greenhouses, garden centers, and landscape nurseries.
      Gun dealer/interior shooting range.
      Interior archery/bow range.
      Machinery and equipment sales.
      Motel or motor inn.
      Multi-family, and/or mixed use structures, and including, but not limited
to, senior housing.
      Package liquor stores.
      Plumbing, heating, air conditioning sales and service.
      Private surface parking lots located on a lot with no structures or other
uses.
      Taverns.
      Teen recreation and dance facilities.
      Vehicle rental.
      Warehouse and storage facilities.
      Winery, distillery, or brewery, including sales and tasting.
   (C)   Prohibited Uses: Some uses that would otherwise be allowed in other
areas of the village shall not necessarily be allowed in the Route 50 corridor
district. This is because the nature of these uses is inconsistent with the
intent and purpose of this article. Any existing prohibited use may change
owner as long as no new prohibited use is created. Prohibited uses of land and
structures are listed in this subsection.
      Adult regulated uses - strip clubs, adult bookstore, etc.
      Advertising signs and billboards for lease.
      Agricultural uses (except for farmers' markets and private gardens).
      Boarding/rooming house/transitional residents.
      Drive-in theaters.
      Exterior archery/bow range.
      Exterior shooting range.
      Frozen food lockers.
      Industrial facility (heavy or light).
      Kennel/pound.
      Model garage display and sales.
      Open storage.
      Tattoo parlor.
      Truck depot/truck stop.
      Wireless communications towers.
   (D)   Nonconformities: This article is a significant departure from
traditional zoning. Typically nonconformities are encouraged to discontinue or
are required to be removed over a time period. However, the unique
characteristics of the Route 50 corridor district and this article demand a
more flexible approach to nonconformities. The significant contributions many
existing uses and structures have made toward establishing the Route 50
corridor district's identity require that they be treated in a manner that
respects their existing characteristics, but also aims to update these uses and
structures in a manner that also fulfills the vision of this article.
Therefore, existing sites have been identified as "grandfathered sites" within
this article. As these sites seek to redevelop, change ownership, and/or expand
(under 50 percent of market value based on most recent tax bill) a series of
criteria has been established that build upon the vision of this article,
without being overly burdensome to those that reside or conduct/own businesses
within this district. (Ord. 12-34, 2-19-2013)
9-10C-3-3: BUILDING STANDARDS:
   (A)   Intent: The intent of these building regulations is to establish
architectural standards for new construction projects as well as building
expansions.
   (B)   Applicability: The building standards herein shall apply to all
development types within the Route 50 corridor district.
   (C)   Building Types:
      1.   Mixed Use: A mixed use building contains residential dwelling units
above or behind ground floor commercial, group assembly, and/or civic uses, and
may be designed to accommodate office and/or group assembly space on the second
level.
      2.   Stand Alone Commercial: A stand alone commercial building contains
retail, office, group assembly, and/or civic uses on all levels of the
structure.
      3.   Multi-Family: A multi-family structure is a residence for multiple
households where dwelling units are located above or below one another and may
share a common lobby (synonyms: condominiums and/or apartments).
      4.   Single-Family Attached: A single-family attached structure is a
residence designed to house a single-family unit from lowest level to roof,
with a private outside entrance and a shared common wall within an adjoining
dwelling unit (synonyms: row house; townhouse).
      5.   Single-Family Detached: A single-family detached structure is a
residence designed to house a single-family unit only, and is separated from
other dwelling units by open space.
   (D)   Mechanical Equipment: All vents, air conditioning units, mechanical,
electrical and other equipment located on the roof of any structure shall be
screened from surrounding public and private property.
   (E)   Accessory Structures: The size, height and location of accessory
structures shall follow regulations set forth in the zoning ordinance per use.
   (F)   Materials: The following material lists shall apply to new
construction projects, the new portion of building expansions, and all new
accessory structures. Materials on existing structures are permitted to remain,
and can be replaced with an equivalent, but in no event shall an existing
primary material be replaced with an accent or prohibited material.
      1.   Primary materials: A minimum of seventy five percent (75%) of all
facades and roofs exclusive of glazing shall be comprised of the following:
         (a)   Brick, stone and fiber cement siding.
         (b)   Cedar, slate and asphalt shingles (roof only).
         (c)   Vinyl and wood siding (residential only).
      2.   Accent materials: A maximum of twenty five percent (25%) of all
facades and roofs exclusive of glazing may be comprised of the following:
         (a)   Concrete panels and decorative block.
         (b)   EIFS and stucco.
         (c)   Wood.
         (d)   Standing seam roofs.
      3.   Prohibited materials:
         (a)   Vinyl and wood siding (commercial use).
         (b)   Smooth face cinder block.
         (c)   Mirrored and reflective glass.
         (d)   Nonarchitectural plywood sheet siding.
   (G)   Architectural Guidelines: The following guidelines present the
architectural qualities and details deemed desirous by the village for projects
within the Route 50 corridor district. See figure 3.3.1 of this section for
desired pallet of architectural elements.
      1.   General: A consistent style of architectural composition should be
applied throughout a structure. A mix of styles is discouraged.
      2.   Articulated Base: The distinction between ground floors and upper
floors should be articulated through changes in architectural treatments and/or
materials.
      3.   Articulated Corner: Buildings located at intersections should
feature articulated corners in the form of architectural treatments and/or
unique private frontages whenever feasible.
      4.   Windows: Wherever practical, commercial ground floor windows should
remain free of internal obstructions in order to allow for views into and out
of the building. Windows on the upper floor should be smaller in size than
storefront windows on the ground floor.
      5.   Awnings: Awnings should only be located within the established width
of a functional window or door frame.
      6.   Sign Band: A sign band is encouraged above storefront windows to
accommodate both tenant signage and decorative lighting.
      7.   Cornice: Commercial structures should be capped with a cornice,
which is a horizontal projection that can include elements such as decorative
brick, stone work, and/or ornamental brackets.
FIGURE 3.3.1
PALLET OF ARCHITECTURAL ELEMENTS
General
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/a52ddd8667179438dfe82ac8fd74e09d8c5052bc/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2585.jpg]
Articulated Base
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/a52ddd8667179438dfe82ac8fd74e09d8c5052bc/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2587.jpg]
Windows
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/a52ddd8667179438dfe82ac8fd74e09d8c5052bc/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2589.jpg]
Sign Band
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/a52ddd8667179438dfe82ac8fd74e09d8c5052bc/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2545.jpg]
Articulated Corner
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/a52ddd8667179438dfe82ac8fd74e09d8c5052bc/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2547.jpg]
Awnings
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/a52ddd8667179438dfe82ac8fd74e09d8c5052bc/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2549.jpg]
Cornice
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/a52ddd8667179438dfe82ac8fd74e09d8c5052bc/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2551.jpg]
   (H)   Grandfathered Site Guidelines: The following guidelines present the
preferred architectural approach to modifying a structure on a grandfathered
site:
      1.   Exterior Materials: When replacing exterior materials, consideration
should be given to using only primary materials. Note that any building
expansion is to conform as best as possible to the material standards found in
subsection (F), "Materials", of this section.
      2.   Building Expansion: Wherever practical and appropriate, building
expansions should be located at the front of a structure in order to bring the
building into closer conformance with the district's front yard setback and re-
image the structure to better reflect the district's architectural character.
(Ord. 12-34, 2-19-2013)
9-10C-3-4: PARKING:
   (A)   Intent: The intent of these parking regulations is to define the
minimum design standards for such facilities, both existing and proposed.
   (B)   Applicability: The parking standards herein shall apply to all lots
within the Route 50 corridor district.
   (C)   Vehicle Parking; General:
      1.   Required Spaces: The required vehicular parking shall be provided as
indicated in the parking chart (see table 3.4.1 of this section) for the Route
50 corridor district.
      2.   Accessible Spaces: The required number and size of accessible spaces
shall be based upon the Illinois accessibility code.
      3.   Shared Parking: Shared parking is permitted and encouraged between
dissimilar uses or time demands. Follow ULI (Urban Land Institute) guidelines
for shared parking.
      4.   Residential Parking: Whenever possible parking for residential uses
shall not be open to the sky and must be located either within or below the
building envelope or within an attached parking structure. In the event that it
is not possible to enclose parking, parking lot is to be screened with
landscaping and/or fencing at no more than three feet (3') in height. Detached
single-family residential units are exempt from this requirement.
      5.   Parking Location: Parking lots shall meet the setback standards
established for this district.
      6.   Parking Access: Access to parking facilities shall be provided from
alleys or adjacent parking lots wherever existing or proposed. If neither
alleys nor adjacent parking lots are available, access to parking facilities
and loading areas may be provided from existing thoroughfares and street
systems.
   (D)   Vehicle Parking Design Standards: The following minimum dimensions for
parking facilities, both enclosed and open to the sky, shall apply to all
development types within the Route 50 corridor district. The village may
require greater dimensions in order to accommodate engineering and/or public
safety requirements.
TABLE 3.4.1
 
Angle Aisle Width     Stall Size 1
      Two-Way One-Way Length x Width
90°  24'     22'     18' x 9'
60°  24'     19'     18' x 9'
45°  24'     14'     18' x 9'
30°  24'     12'     18' x 9'
0°   12'     12'     24' x 9'
 
Note:
   1.   Stalls designated for compact cars to be 8'6" wide.
   (E)   Guest Parking: In those areas that require guest parking, such
facilities may be provided on the same lot as the principal use or, if approved
by village staff, accounted for off site where adequate street parking or
public parking facilities exist in the vicinity.
   (F)   Bicycle Parking:
      1.   Required Spaces: The required bicycle parking shall be provided as
indicated in the general standards for the Route 50 corridor district.
      2.   Parking Location: Bicycle parking shall be provided within a lot's
parking zone or at the front of a building no more than fifty feet (50') from
an entrance. Installation within the private frontage is permitted with village
approval.
      3.   Parking Shelter: Bicycle parking shelters permitted within a lot's
parking zone shall not be located within five feet (5') of any property line.
      4.   Rack Type: Inverted "U" style racks or functionally similar racks
are required.
   (G)   Additional Parking Standards:
FIGURE 3.4.1
ATTACHED AND TUCKED IN PARKING
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/a52ddd8667179438dfe82ac8fd74e09d8c5052bc/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2553.jpg]
      1.   The setbacks for attached parking structures and tucked in parking
shall be based upon the building setbacks established in the Route 50 corridor
district.
      2.   Access doors for attached parking structures and tucked in parking
are to be minimized as best as possible from street view.
FIGURE 3.4.2
BELOW GRADE PARKING
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/a52ddd8667179438dfe82ac8fd74e09d8c5052bc/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2555.jpg]
      1.   Parking facilities located below grade are permitted to extend past
the building footprint to the property lines.
      2.   Access doors for below grade parking are to be minimized as best as
possible from street view.
FIGURE 3.4.3
FREESTANDING PARKING STRUCTURES
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/a52ddd8667179438dfe82ac8fd74e09d8c5052bc/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2557.jpg]
      1.   Within freestanding parking structures, ground floor uses are
required along the facade that abuts Route 50.
      2.   Access doors for wrapped parking structures are not permitted on
Route 50.
   (H)   Special Parking Standards; Grandfathered Sites:
      1.   Front Yard Parking: Front yard parking on grandfathered sites in
existence at the time of adoption hereof shall be permitted to continue, but
shall not be expanded in order to accommodate more parking spaces.
Grandfathered sites currently without front yard parking are prohibited from
adding such facilities.
      2.   Modification: In some instances a property owner is required to
modify their front yard parking in order to improve the safety of the
thoroughfares. When required, the following modifications shall be completed to
the fullest extent possible:
         (a)   Parking located within twenty five feet (25') of an intersection
shall be removed and replaced with the corridor's public frontage requirements.
(A)
         (b)   Parking along the primary street shall be relocated to a
secondary street. (B)
FIGURE 3.4.4
FRONT YARD PARKING
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/a52ddd8667179438dfe82ac8fd74e09d8c5052bc/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2559.jpg]
(Ord. 12-34, 2-19-2013)
9-10C-3-5: ALLEYS:
   (A)   Intent: The intent of these alley regulations is to define the minimum
design standards for such facilities, both existing and proposed, for the
primary purpose of providing vehicular and pedestrian access to parking and
other facilities located at the rear of a property.
   (B)   Applicability: The alley standards herein shall apply to all alleys
within the Route 50 corridor district and their applicability is based upon the
type of activity proposed on a parcel as denoted within the specific district
regulation.
   (C)   Dedication: Based upon the type of activity proposed on a parcel, the
village may require a property owner to dedicate to the village an alley right
of way. All dedications are subject to the following provisions:
      1.   The physical location of the alley right of way on a parcel shall be
determined by the village based upon the nature of the block's development,
both existing and proposed.
      2.   The village is not required to accept a dedication, nor does
acceptance of a dedication obligate the village to make any physical
improvements within the alley right of way or guarantee public access to
facilities located at the rear of a property. Furthermore, a dedication does
not preclude the village from requiring or allowing other parties to construct
the physical alley, either in whole or in part. An alley may be public or
private at the option of the village.
      3.   The adjacent property owner(s), not the village, shall maintain the
unimproved alley right of way, including sodding, routine landscape
maintenance, and keeping the area clear of debris and vehicles.
      4.   No structure shall be permitted to be built within five feet (5') of
the alley right of way.
   (D)   Construction: Based upon the type of activity proposed on a parcel,
the village may require a property owner to construct an alley. The
construction of an alley is subject to the following provisions:
      1.   An alley may be public or private, and can operate as a dedicated
throughway or a drive aisle for the primary purpose of providing vehicular and
pedestrian access to rear parking facilities.
      2.   Alleys shall be paved in accordance with this code.
      3.   The village may require greater dimensions in order to accommodate
engineering and/or public safety requirements.
   (E)   Right Of Way Standards: The width of the required alley right of way
shall be determined by the village based on the following:
      1.   Twenty five foot (25') alley right of way: Required on those
properties in which the alley right of way will abut a parcel located outside
of the Route 50 corridor district in order to accommodate a five foot (5')
landscape buffer between the uses. See figure 3.5.1 of this section.
FIGURE 3.5.1
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/a52ddd8667179438dfe82ac8fd74e09d8c5052bc/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2561.jpg]
      2.   Forty two foot (42') or sixty four foot (64') alley right of way
with alley parking: Required on those properties in which the alley right of
way is bounded on either or both sides by parking located within the Route 50
corridor district. See figure 3.5.2 of this section.
FIGURE 3.5.2
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/a52ddd8667179438dfe82ac8fd74e09d8c5052bc/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2563.jpg]
(Ord. 12-34, 2-19-2013)
9-10C-3-6: VEHICLE ACCESS:
   (A)   Intent: The intent of these vehicle access regulations is to minimize
the width and number of curb cuts along the corridors.
   (B)   Applicability: The vehicle access standards herein shall apply to all
lots within the Route 50 corridor district and their applicability is based
upon the type of activity proposed on a parcel as denoted within the specific
use regulations.
   (C)   Hierarchy Of Access Points:
      1.   Access to parking facilities shall be provided from alleys or
adjacent parking lots wherever available.
      2.   Where alleys or adjacent parking lots are not available, access to
parking facilities shall be provided from secondary streets wherever available.
      3.   Access to rear parking facilities from primary streets via a private
driveway may be permitted only when alleys, adjacent parking, or secondary
streets are not available.
   (D)   Permanent Curb Cuts And Driveways: Each block shall be permitted one
midblock curb cut on the primary street, and one curb cut on each of the
bounding secondary streets with the following provisions. In the event that a
new development encompasses more than half of a block, two (2) midblock curb
cuts shall be permitted on the primary street, and one curb cut on each of the
bounding secondary streets.
      1.   The village shall determine the location of midblock curb cuts and
secondary street access points serving alleys and/or parking facilities.
      2.   Access drives shall remain private property, with the property owner
required to grant cross access rights to adjoining properties. This excludes
single-family residential property.
      3.   The maximum width of driveways/curb cuts shall be twelve feet (12')
for a one lane and twenty two feet (22') for a two (2) lane driveway.
      4.   Sidewalks shall be constructed continuously across driveways without
a change in grade.
   (E)   Temporary Curb Cuts And Driveways: When access to parking facilities
must be provided from a primary street, curb cut shall be permitted subject to
the following:
      1.   The maximum number of temporary curb cuts associated with a single
development shall be one.
      2.   The maximum width of temporary driveways/curb cuts shall be twelve
feet (12') for a one lane and twenty two feet (22') for a two (2) lane
driveway, and will not be permitted closer than seventy five feet (75') to an
intersection, if possible.
      3.   The granting of a curb cut by the village shall require the grantee
to enter into cross access agreements with adjoining properties to allow for
shared use of the access.
      4.   At the village's discretion, curb cuts shall be eliminated when
alleys or adjacent parking lots provide a physical connection via neighboring
properties to a permanent curb cut or alley provided that there is access
through the property to the existing parking field. This excludes single-family
residential property.
      5.   A restrictive covenant shall be recorded against the property for
which a curb cut is provided, which covenant will require the elimination of
the curb cut, the demolition of the portion of the driveway located on village
property, and the construction of the corridor's required public frontage.
Financial security in a form and amount acceptable to the village shall be
provided at the time of the covenant to ensure that all required work is
completed when the curb cut is eliminated.
   (F)   Modifications: When grandfathered site property owners are required to
modify their existing curb cuts, the following actions shall be undertaken to
the fullest extent possible:
      1.   On interior lots, reduction of the number of curb cuts to one.
      2.   On corner lots, removal of primary street curb cuts and utilization
of the secondary street for access provided that there is access through the
property to the existing parking field.
      3.   Reduction of the width of the curb cut to meet the standards herein.
(Ord. 12-34, 2-19-2013)
9-10C-3-7: LANDSCAPING:
   (A)   Intent: The intent of these landscaping regulations is to define the
minimum requirements deemed necessary to achieve adequate buffering, provide
visual interest, and add pervious surfaces on a site.
   (B)   Applicability: The landscaping standards herein shall apply to all
lots within the Route 50 corridor district and be executed to the extent
required based upon district standards relating to the following:
      1.   New construction.
      2.   Structure expansion.
      3.   Special use.
      4.   Change of owner.
      5.   Change of use.
   (C)   General Standards:
      1.   Plan Conformance: All landscaping, including mulch and seeding,
shall be completed in accordance with the approved landscape plan, and nothing
shall be planted or installed within an underground or overhead utility
easement or drainage easement without the consent of the village.
      2.   Private Lot Phasing: For those projects built in stages, the
landscaping on the private lot may be phased to coincide with stage
completions. A plan schedule must be approved by the village staff.
      3.   Public Property Requirements: Median landscaping and alley
buffering, when required, and public parkway landscaping, shall be completed in
their entirety prior to the issuance of an occupancy permit for any component
of a project.
      4.   Water Collection Areas: Water collection areas (i.e., bioswales) may
be utilized in private lot and buffer yard areas with approval by the village
and provided that the required number of trees are installed.
   (D)   Waivers: In those instances in which the village determines that it is
impractical or impossible to complete all or a portion of the required
landscaping improvements due to sequencing or physical constraints or
determines that unique circumstances exist relative to the subject site and/or
block development, village staff may approve one or a combination of the
following options:
      1.   Allow phasing of a portion of such improvements and grant a
temporary occupancy permit provided that the developer or property owner
submit, and the village approves, financial security in a form and amount
acceptable to the village ensuring the installation of the remaining landscape
material by a date certain;
      2.   Require the developer to provide cash in lieu of in an amount
determined by the village; or
      3.   Waive such requirements in whole or in part based upon the unique
nature of the site and/or block development, either existing or proposed.
   (E)   Installation And Maintenance Standards:
      1.   The plantings in any landscaped area must he properly maintained in
order for the landscaped area to fulfill the purposes for which it was
established. The owner of the property and any tenant on the property where a
landscaped area is required shall be jointly and severally responsible for the
maintenance of all plant material within the landscaped area. Such maintenance
shall include all actions necessary to keep the landscaped areas free of litter
and debris and to keep plantings healthy and orderly in appearance.
      2.   All landscape materials required by this section in any business,
commercial, and/or office developments shall be installed in accordance with
the standard practices of horticultural professionals and in a good and
workmanlike manner, and shall be maintained by the property owner in good
condition. All applicants for landscape plan approval shall file a maintenance
schedule and the scope of maintenance work with the village. Such maintenance
schedule shall be subject to the approval of the village. Any damaged or dead
trees, shrubs or ground cover shall be replaced promptly. Maintenance of
landscaped areas shall include continuous operations for removal of weeds;
mowing; trimming; edging; cultivation; reseeding; plant replacement;
appropriate fertilization; spraying; control of pests, insects and rodents by
nontoxic methods wherever possible; watering; and any other operations
necessary to assure normal plant growth and good health. The obligation for
continuous maintenance shall be binding on the applicant for landscape plan
approval, on any subsequent owners of the property, and on any other parties
having a controlling interest in the property and/or tenants residing thereon.
      3.   The adjacent property owner shall maintain a parkway unless an
agreement for maintenance has been reached with the village.
      4.   The plantings, fences, walls or berms that constitute a buffer must
be properly maintained in order for the buffer to fulfill the purpose for which
it is established. The owner of the property and any tenant on the property
where a buffer is required shall be jointly and severally responsible for the
maintenance of all buffer materials. Such maintenance shall include all actions
necessary to keep the buffer free of litter and debris and to keep walls,
fences, and berms in good repair and neat appearance. All buffer materials
shall be protected from damage by motor vehicles or pedestrians.
      5.   In the event that any vegetation or physical element functioning to
meet the standards of this section is severely damaged due to an unusual
weather occurrence or natural catastrophe, the owner shall have one year or one
growing season, whichever is sooner, to replace or replant.
      6.   An approved tree planting palette for the entire Route 50 corridor
area shall be kept on file with the village. Plant materials that are native to
the area should be selected whenever feasible.
      7.   The use of loose stone, rock, or gravel is prohibited within public
parkways.
   (F)   Thoroughfare:
      1.   Medians: When appropriate, standards will be established by the
village and provided to a developer for implementation.
   (G)   Public Parkway: Specific approved public parkway standards for the
entire Route 50 corridor area shall he kept on file with the village. General
public parkway standards are listed below:
      1.   Route 50 Corridor District: Shade trees spaced no greater than
twenty five (25) to thirty feet (30') apart shall be located within the buffer
zone and placed within one tree grate; or two (2) turf parkways.
      2.   Street Furniture And Planters: Street furniture and planters
containing annuals and perennials shall be permitted within the buffer zone
provided that such objects do not impede pedestrian movement within the
sidewalk zone or inhibit the use of on street parking spaces.
   (H)   Private Frontage:
      1.   Foundation Plantings: Foundation plantings are permitted provided
that the mature size of such plantings will not impede pedestrian movement or
security within the sidewalk zone or at building entrances.
      2.   Street Furniture And Planters: Street furniture and planters
containing annuals and perennials are permitted provided that such objects do
not impede pedestrian movement within the sidewalk zone or inhibit the use of
building entrances.
FIGURE 3.7.1
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/a52ddd8667179438dfe82ac8fd74e09d8c5052bc/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2569.jpg]
   (I)   Private Lot:
      1.   Interior Landscaping: Interior landscaping standards shall be per
section
9-3-5 of this title with the following exception:
         (a)   Such standards shall also apply to single-family detached
residential developments of two (2) or more units.
      2.   Parking Lot Landscaping: Parking lot landscaping standards shall be
per section
9-3-5 of this title.
   (J)   Buffer Yards:
      1.   Commercial And Mixed Use Side Yards: In order to promote shared
parking facilities, properties with a commercial component are not required to
provide side yard buffer yards. If proposed, the minimum standard shall be a
buffer yard of five feet (5'). In the event that adjacent property owners
develop a parking lot, interior buffers are not required.
      2.   Rear Yards: A buffer yard shall be provided at the rear of any
property that has a surface parking lot that abuts a lot outside of the Route
50 corridor district. The minimum standard shall be a minimum buffer yard of
five feet (5').
      3.   Alley Buffer: A five foot (5') buffer yard is required between a
parcel within the Route 50 corridor district and an alley.
      4.   Outside Properties Adjacent To Heritage District: A buffer yard is
required between an alley and a parcel located outside of the Route 50 corridor
district. The minimum standard shall be a buffer yard of five feet (5').
   TABLE 3.7.1
 
Buffer Yard Width Minimum Plant Materials (Per 40 Feet)
                  Shade Trees Ornamental Shrubs
5 feet            1           1          15
10 feet           1           1          20
15 feet           1           2          25
 
(Ord. 12-34, 2-19-2013)
9-10C-3-8: FENCING:
   (A)   Intent: The intent of these fencing regulations is to define the
minimum and maximum screening standards required or permitted on a parcel.
   (B)   Applicability: The fencing standards herein shall apply to all lots
within the Route 50 corridor district.
   (C)   General:
      1.   Plan Conformance: All fencing shall be completed in accordance with
the approved site plan, and nothing shall be installed within an underground or
overhead utility easement or drainage easement without the consent of the
village.
   (D)   Materials:
      1.   Permitted: Wrought iron, aluminum, and welded steel ornamental
fences; solid and open wood fences; solid and open PVC fences; masonry and
brick walls and/or pillars.
      2.   Prohibited: Chainlink (except for temporary construction fences);
barbed wire and razor ribbon.
   (E)   Public Parkway: Fences in the public frontage are limited to
decorative, open style types (i.e., wrought iron) within the buffer zone either
incorporated into raised planter beds or utilized as surrounds for trees.
Fences are not permitted to encroach into the sidewalk zone.
   (F)   Private Frontage: Fences and gates in the private frontage are
permitted to extend to the property line and are limited to decorative, open
style types (i.e., wrought iron) with a minimum height of three feet (3') and a
maximum height of four feet (4') with the following exceptions:
      1.   Corner lots; all: The visibility requirements at intersections shall
be per section
9-3-2 of this title.
      2.   Corner lots; detached single-family residential: Such lots shall be
permitted to erect an open or solid fence with a maximum height of four feet
(4') along their secondary frontage provided that the fence is located no
closer than one foot (1') to the property line, and does not extend past the
front facade of the primary structure.
   (G)   Private Lots: Solid fences with a maximum height of six feet (6')
shall be permitted in side and rear yards with the following exceptions:
      1.   Rear Yard Requirements: A solid six foot (6') fence shall be
provided at the rear of any property that has a surface parking lot that abuts
a lot outside of the Route 50 corridor district.
      2.   Parking Lot Screening: Fences and gates utilized to screen parking
lots from secondary streets shall be located along the parking setback and are
limited to decorative fencing with a minimum height of three feet (3') and a
maximum height of four feet (4'). (Ord. 12-34, 2-19-2013)
9-10C-3-9: LIGHTING:
   (A)   Intent: The intent of these lighting standards is to increase safety
and provide clear views both to and within a site while preventing unnecessary
light pollution and promoting pedestrian scaled fixtures.
   (B)   Applicability: The lighting standards herein shall apply to the Route
50 corridor district.
   (C)   Location: Figure 3.9.1 and table 3.9.1 of this section show the
permitted location on the lot of light sources based upon the height and style
of the fixture. Minimum and maximum lighting standards shall be determined by
the village based upon a submitted photometric plan. The following standards
also apply to each of the lighting zones identified:
      1.   Alley Lighting Zone: All lots with alleys shall have lighting
fixtures whenever possible within five feet (5') of the alley's edge of
pavement. When a structure in the lot is within seven feet (7') of the alley's
edge, the lighting fixture shall be attached to the structure and not to a
freestanding pole. Cutoff lens not to cast direct light into adjacent property.
      2.   Parking Lot Lighting Zone: All lots with surface parking facilities
shall have freestanding lighting fixtures located no closer than three feet
(3') to any property line or alley. When a parking lot abuts a structure in the
lot, the lighting fixture shall be attached to the structure and not to a
freestanding pole. Cutoff lens not to cast direct light into adjacent property.
      3.   Public Parkway Lighting Zone: Pedestrian streetlights must be placed
two feet (2') from the back of curb on each side of the street with a maximum
average spacing (per block face) of sixty feet (60') on center.
      4.   Building Lighting Zone: Exterior lights shall be mounted between six
feet (6') and fourteen feet (14') above adjacent grade.
   (D)   Lighting Elements: Lighting elements shall be compact fluorescent,
metal halide, LED, or halogen only.
FIGURE 3.9.1
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/a52ddd8667179438dfe82ac8fd74e09d8c5052bc/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2571.jpg]
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/a52ddd8667179438dfe82ac8fd74e09d8c5052bc/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2573.jpg]
   (E)   Glare: Fixtures where light is visible to the public in a clear or
frosted lamp shall be equipped with refractors to direct light downward and
prevent glare.
   (F)   Spillage: All fixtures shall include refractors to direct light away
from property lines. The maximum allowable foot- candles at any property line
shall be 0.5 foot-candle, unless it can be demonstrated to the satisfaction of
the village that:
      1.   Additional illumination is required for security, outdoor dining, or
other use.
      2.   Such illumination can be provided without negative impacts on
adjacent properties.
   (G)   Standards: The village shall keep on file, and provide to property
owners, the specifications for all lighting fixtures and components located on
public property and/or maintained by the village.
TABLE 3.9.1
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/a52ddd8667179438dfe82ac8fd74e09d8c5052bc/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2691.png]
(Ord. 12-34, 2-19-2013)
9-10C-3-10: ENCROACHMENTS:
   (A)   Intent: The intent of these encroachment regulations is to allow
flexibility in the design of a private lot without infringing upon the
functionality of the public frontage.
   (B)   Applicability: The encroachment standards herein shall apply to lots
within the district and is based upon the type of activity proposed on a parcel
as denoted within the district regulations.
TABLE 3.10.1
ENCROACHMENT REGULATIONS
 Front Yard
 (Primary Or Secondary Street)
                               Front Yard
                               (Primary Or Secondary Street)
Accessory structures           -
Architectural features         50% of setback
Awnings, canopies and marquees 5 ft. into right of way 1
Balconies                      50% of setback
Fire escapes                   -
Flagpoles                      50% of setback
Landscape features             50% of setback
Mechanical equipment           -
Porticos                       5 ft. into right of way1
Public art                     50% of setback
Stairs/stoop                   100% of setback
Water collection               50% of setback
 
 Side Yard
 (Interior Or Along Access Drive)
                                Side Yard
                                (Interior Or Along Access Drive)
Accessory structures            -
Architectural features          2.5 ft.
Awnings, canopies, and marquees -
Balconies                       -
Fire escapes                    -
Flagpoles                       -
Landscape features              -
Mechanical equipment            1 ft. from property line (minimum)
Porticos                        -
Public art                      -
Stairs/stoop                    2.5 ft.
Water collection                -
 
Note:
   1.   Provided there is a minimum vertical clearance of 8 feet. May encroach
up to 100 percent of setback on a secondary street within the heritage
district.
(Ord. 12-34, 2-19-2013)
9-10C-4: SIGNAGE:
   (A)   Intent: The regulations and standards set forth in chapter 13 of this
title are to be followed with the exception of the following amendments:
      1.   Paint: All paint used must be exterior grade paint.
      2.   Wood To Be Sealed: No signs shall be permitted that show wood in its
natural exposed condition, without being sealed by a clear commercial sealer.
      3.   Pole/Pylon Signs: No pole/pylon signs are allowed in the Route 50
corridor district.
      4.   Ground Signs: No ground sign shall be located closer than forty feet
(40') from another sign in the Route 50 corridor district regardless if it is
located on the same zoning lot or not.
      5.   Number Allowed: Only one sign shall be permitted on zoning lots less
than two hundred feet (200') of frontage, with the exception of corner lots. A
maximum of two (2) signs shall be permitted on corner lots and lots greater
than two and one-half (2.5) acres.
      6.   Maximum Height: No sign shall project higher than the bottom of the
windowsills of the second floor or other second floor architectural features of
a building, whichever is lower.
   (B)   Sign Types:
FIGURE 4.B.1
SIGN TYPES
1   Inflatable - temporary           10   Pennant (or festoon lighting)
2   Roof                             11   Frame - freestanding
3   Banner                           12   Sandwich board - temporary
4   Projecting                       13   Hanging - freestanding
5   Mural                            14   Ground - monument
6   Pole - freestanding              14.a Manual changeable copy
7   Awning                           14.b Electronic changeable copy - fixed
7.a Awning - writing or logo on top  14.c Electronic changeable copy - variable
    panel
7.b Awning - valance                 15   Portable
7.c Awning - writing or logo on side 16   Address
    panel
7.d Hanging - awning                 17   Integral
8   Wall                             18   Memorial
9   Window                                
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/a52ddd8667179438dfe82ac8fd74e09d8c5052bc/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2577.jpg]
 
* Manual changeable copy prohibited and no electronic reader boards without
special approval.
(Ord. 12-34, 2-19-2013)
9-10C-5: ADMINISTRATION AND PROCEDURES:
9-10C-5-1: HOW TO OBTAIN PROJECT APPROVAL:
   (A)   Preapplication Conference: Prior to the official submission of any
application for improvements within the Route 50 corridor district, the
applicant shall meet with village staff for a preliminary discussion as to:
      1.   The scope and nature of the proposed improvement;
      2.   The types of building forms and uses proposed; and
      3.   Any site or facade improvements proposed.
The applicant shall be prepared to present conceptual plans, sketches or any
other information necessary to explain the proposed improvements, including any
specific requests to deviate from the standards of this article. Village staff
will provide general information and direction relative to the long range goals
of the Route 50 corridor district and the village of Manteno, as a whole.
Village staff will also provide direction on the applications, reviews, and
meetings that will be required to obtain approval.
TABLE 5.1.1
                                              Staff Review,
Type Of     Staff Review And Staff Review And Planning       Full Approval With
Development Approval 1       Village Board    Commission And Public Hearing
                             Approval         Village Board
                                              Approval
                                                       Staff
                                          Staff Review Review,     Full
                               Staff      And Village  Planning    Approval
Type Of Development            Review And Board        Commission  With Public
                               Approval 1 Approval     And Village Hearing
                                                       Board
                                                       Approval
Appeals                                              •          
Awnings and canopies           •                                
Change of owner                •                                
Change of use                  •                                
Collective and shared parking  •                                
Deviations:                                                      
   1 - 2                    •                                
   3 - 4                              •                      
   5 - 6                                          •          
   7+ or special use and/or                                  •
PUD
Exterior alteration in         •                                
footprint <50%
Facade improvements            •                                
Lot improvements (e.g.,                                         •
parking lots)
Maintenance                    Exempt
Outdoor dining                                                  •
Plats and annexations                                           •
Signs                          •                                
 
Note:
   1.   Staff reserves the right to request village board approval at their
discretion.
   (B)   Types Of Review And Approvals:
      1.   Staff Review And Approval: Certain improvements require staff review
and approval because of their minimal size and scope. Staff approvals may
consist of reviews from village staff, including planning department, building
department, public works, engineering, fire department, police department, and
the village's landscape consultants, if applicable. All staff reviews and
approvals will require an application and must be documented. Village staff may
require an improvement that qualifies for staff review to go through site plan
review by the plan commission if the application does not comply with the
standards herein or if village staff determines that the scope of the project
exceeds his/her administrative authority.
      2.   Site Plan Review By Village Board: Certain improvements require site
plan approval because of the proposed changes to the site or building and the
scope of the project. Site plan review by the village board typically involves
two (2) public meetings for review by the village board.
      3.   Site Plan Review By Plan Commission And Village Board: Certain
improvements require site plan review and approval by the plan commission and
village board because the application requires that an ordinance be considered.
Any public hearing required for approvals granted by the village board will be
held by the plan commission.
      4.   Site Plan Review By Planning Commission And Village Board With
Public Hearing Process: Any project requiring more than six (6) deviations,
special use, or PUD will require full approval process with public hearing.
(Ord. 12-34, 2-19-2013)
9-10C-5-2: PUBLIC MEETINGS REQUIRED:
   (A)   Process Determination: The process for meetings and approvals for
projects requiring site plan review will be determined by village staff, based
upon the relative conformity to this article, and also based upon whether or
not special use or deviation(s) are required. See section
9-10C-5-1, table 5.1.1 of this article. (Ord. 12-34, 2-19-2013)
9-10C-5-3: REQUIRED SUBMITTAL INFORMATION:
   (A)   Staff review and approval (1 - 2 deviations):
      1.   Proof of ownership. (If tenant, provide owner's approval.)
      2.   Written explanation of deviation(s).
      3.   Design plan(s) as applicable:
         (a)   Site plan.
         (b)   Landscape plan.
         (c)   Current survey and legal description.
         (d)   Civil engineering plan.
         (e)   Elevations (rendered).
         (f)   Signage exhibit(s) (rendered).
         (g)   Floor plan(s).
         (h)   Photometric plan and cut sheets.
   (B)   Staff review and village board approval (3 - 4 deviations):
      1.   Proof of ownership. (If tenant, provide owner's approval.)
      2.   Written explanation of deviation(s).
      3.   Design plan(s) as applicable:
         (a)   Site plan.
         (b)   Landscape plan.
         (c)   Current survey and legal description.
         (d)   Civil engineering plan.
         (e)   Elevations (rendered).
         (f)   Signage exhibit(s) (rendered).
         (g)   Floor plan(s).
         (h)   Photometric plan and cut sheets.
   (C)   Staff review, planning commission, and village board approval (5 - 6
deviations, and no special use or PUD):
      1.   Proof of ownership. (If tenant, provide owner's approval.)
      2.   Written explanation of deviation(s).
      3.   Design plan(s) as applicable:
         (a)   Site plan.
         (b)   Landscape plan.
         (c)   Current survey and legal description.
         (d)   Civil engineering plan.
         (e)   Elevations (rendered).
         (f)   Signage exhibit(s) (rendered).
         (g)   Floor plan(s).
         (h)   Photometric plan and cut sheets.
   (D)   Full approval with public hearing (greater than 6 deviations, special
use and/or PUD): Applicant is to follow current process for public hearing
requirements.
      1.   Proof of ownership. (If tenant, provide owner's approval.)
      2.   Written explanation of deviation(s).
      3.   Design plan(s) as applicable:
         (a)   Site plan.
         (b)   Landscape plan.
         (c)   Current survey and legal description.
         (d)   Civil engineering plan.
         (e)   Elevations (rendered).
         (f)   Signage exhibit(s) (rendered).
         (g)   Floor plan(s).
         (h)   Photometric plan and cut sheets. (Ord. 12-34, 2-19-2013)
9-10C-5-4: APPROVAL STANDARDS:
In addition to any other specific standards set forth herein the plan
commission shall not recommend a special use, variance, appeal, or map
amendment from the regulations of this article unless it shall have made
findings of fact, based upon evidence presented to it, in each specific case
that:
   (A)   The proposed improvement meets this article and its principles, as
presented in subsections 9-10C-1A and B of this article, purpose and intent.
   (B)   The new improvement is compatible with uses already developed or
planned in this district and will not exercise undue detrimental influences
upon surrounding properties.
   (C)   Any improvement meets the architectural standards set forth in this
article.
   (D)   The improvement will have the effect of protecting and enhancing the
economic development of the Route 50 corridor district. (Ord. 12-34, 2-19-2013)
9-10C-5-5: APPEALS:
Appeals shall be considered by the plan commission and approved by the village
board according to the procedures set forth in this code. (Ord. 12-34, 2-19-
2013)
9-10C-5-6: SPECIAL USES:
Special uses shall be considered by the plan commission and approved by the
village board according to the procedures set forth in this code.
   (A)   Additional Standards For Special Uses: The plan commission shall not
recommend a special use unless it shall have made findings of fact, based upon
evidence presented to it, in each specific case that:
      1.   The establishment, maintenance, or operation of the special use will
not be detrimental to or endanger the public health, safety, morals, comfort,
or general welfare.
      2.   The special use will not be injurious to the use and enjoyment of
other property in the immediate vicinity for the purposes already permitted,
nor substantially diminish and impair property values within the neighborhood.
      3.   The establishment of the special use will not impede the normal and
orderly development of surrounding property for uses permitted within the Route
50 corridor district.
      4.   Adequate utilities, access roads, drainage, and/or other necessary
facilities have been or are being provided.
      5.   Adequate measures have been or will be taken to provide ingress or
egress so designated as to minimize traffic congestion in the public streets.
      6.   The special use shall in other respects conform to the applicable
regulations of this district, except as such regulations may in each instance
be modified by the village board pursuant to recommendation of the plan
commission.
      7.   The special use contributes directly or indirectly to the economic
development of the community as a whole. (Ord. 12-34, 2-19-2013)
9-10C-5-7: DEVIATIONS:
See section
9-10C-5-1, table 5.1.1 of this article.
   (A)   Additional Standards Specific To A Variance: The plan commission shall
not recommend a variance from the regulations of this article unless it shall
have made findings of fact, based upon evidence presented to it, in each
specific case that:
      1.   Property in question cannot yield a reasonable return if permitted
to be used only under the conditions allowed by the regulations in this
district.
      2.   The plight of the owner is due to unique circumstances.
      3.   The variance, if granted, will not alter the essential character of
the locality.
      4.   There are practical difficulties or particular hardships that are
unique to the property such as:
         (a)   The particular physical surroundings, shape, or topographical
condition of the property creates a hardship upon the owner, as distinguished
from a mere inconvenience, if the strict letter of the regulations were carried
out;
         (b)   The conditions upon which the petition for a variance is based
would not be applicable, generally, to other property within the same zoning
classification;
         (c)   The purpose of the variance is not based exclusively upon a
desire to make more money out of the property;
         (d)   The granting of the variance would not be detrimental to the
public welfare or injurious to other property or improvements in the Route 50
corridor district;
         (e)   The proposed variance will not impair an adequate supply of
light and air to adjacent property, or substantially increase congestion in the
public streets, or increase the danger of fire, or endanger the public safety,
or substantially diminish or impair property values in the neighborhood.
   (B)   Additional Standards Specific To A Parking Variance: The number of off
street automobile and/or bicycle parking spaces required may be reduced by a
variance reviewed by the plan commission and approved by the village board
following the variance standards in this section and when all of the following
standards are met:
      1.   The development does not have the benefit of shared or collective
parking;
      2.   The applicant proves that adequate parking exists for such use,
based on the unique number, type and use characteristics (i.e., peak hour or
day) of those businesses or residences that currently use such a lot;
      3.   A municipal parking lot exists within three hundred feet (300') of
the development that has adequate parking to accommodate all or a portion of
the number of required spaces for the use;
      4.   The owner of the building makes a payment equal to one thousand
dollars ($1,000.00) per required automobile and bicycle parking space that
cannot be provided on the subject lot. The fees collected for the payment in
lieu of parking will be used only for the acquisition of land or construction
of municipally owned or leased off street parking facilities for automobiles or
bicycles; landscape or streetscape; bike trails, lanes, or paths; or
maintenance or illumination of off street parking facilities. (Ord. 12-34, 2-
19-2013)
9-10C-5-8: PARKING AGREEMENT STANDARDS AND WAIVERS:
   (A)   Additional Standards For Cross Parking And Cross Access Agreements:
Off street parking facilities for automobiles are encouraged to be provided for
collectively or shared. The plan commission must approve a shared parking
arrangement through site plan review and under the following conditions:
      1.   A shared parking analysis is conducted, following the standards of
the Urban Land Institute, and indicates that reduced parking standards between
uses can be supported because the hourly parking demand associated with each
business is different.
      2.   There is adequate parking proposed to serve each business sharing
the parking during the peak hour associated with each use.
      3.   There is a written acknowledgement from all property owners that are
party to the collective or shared parking that the shared parking approval will
only be recognized by the village if the current arrangements of commercial and
residential square footages on the property remain the same. If these
arrangements change by change of use or change of owner, expansion or
redevelopment, new parking improvements may be required.
      4.   The arrangement is formalized through officially recorded cross
access and cross parking agreements.
   (B)   Additional Standards Specific To A Parking Waiver: The number of off
street automobile or bicycle parking spaces required in the Route 50 corridor
district may be reduced by an administratively granted parking waiver approved
by village staff under the following conditions:
      1.   The waiver requested is for fifty percent (50%) or less of the total
required parking for the site to meet commercial automobile and/or bicycle
parking requirements.
      2.   The waiver is not for residential parking requirements. Residential
parking requirements cannot be waived.
      3.   A municipal lot exists within three hundred feet (300') of the
business that has adequate parking to accommodate all or a portion of the
number of required spaces for a new tenant or use or a public commuter parking
lot exists within three hundred feet (300') of the business and can be used on
weekends and weekdays (after 11:30 A.M.).
      4.   The development does not have the benefit of shared or collective
parking.
      5.   It is determined that the waiver of parking requirements will not
detrimentally impact surrounding single-family residential neighborhoods with
overflow parking and traffic.
      6.   The owner of the building makes a payment equal to one thousand
dollars ($1,000.00) per required automobile and bicycle parking space that
cannot be provided on the subject lot. The fees collected for the payment in
lieu of parking will be used only for the acquisition of land or construction
of municipally owned or leased off street parking facilities for automobiles or
bicycles; landscape or streetscape; bike trails, lanes, or paths; or
maintenance or illumination of off street parking facilities. (Ord. 12-34, 2-
19-2013)
CHAPTER 11
NONCONFORMING BUILDINGS, STRUCTURES AND USES
SECTION:
9-11-1: Statement Of Purpose
9-11-2: Nonconforming Buildings And Structures
9-11-3: Nonconforming Use Of Conforming Building Or Structure
9-11-4: Nonconforming Use Of Land
9-11-5: Conversion To Special Use
9-11-6: Developments As Legal Nonconforming Use
9-11-7: FB-1 Route 50 Corridor District
9-11-1: STATEMENT OF PURPOSE:
The purpose of this chapter is to provide for the regulation of nonconforming
buildings, structures and uses, and to specify those circumstances and
conditions under which those nonconforming buildings, structures and uses may
be continued.
This title establishes separate zoning districts, each of which is an
appropriate area for the location of the uses which are permitted in that
zoning district. It is necessary and consistent with the establishment of those
districts that those nonconforming buildings, structures and uses which
substantially and adversely affect the orderly development and taxable value of
other property in the district not be continued without restriction. (Ord. 99-
06, 6-21-1999)
9-11-2: NONCONFORMING BUILDINGS AND STRUCTURES:
Any nonconforming building or structure which existed lawfully at the time of
the adoption of this title and which remains nonconforming, and any such
building or structure which shall become nonconforming upon the adoption of
this title or of any subsequent amendment thereto, may be continued in
accordance with the regulations which follow:
   (A)   Repairs And Alterations:
      1.   Buildings Or Structures Intended For A Nonconforming Use: Ordinary
repairs and alterations may be made to a nonconforming building or structure
which existed lawfully at the time of the adoption of this title and which
remains nonconforming, and any such building or structure which shall become
nonconforming upon the adoption of this title or of any subsequent amendment
thereto, may be continued only in accordance with the regulations which follow:
         (a)   A building in a residential district containing nonconforming
uses may be repaired or altered to improve livable and health conditions,
provided no changes are made that would increase the number of dwelling units
or the bulk of the building.
      2.   Building Or Structure Intended For A Permitted Use: Ordinary repairs
and structural changes may be made to a nonconforming building or structure,
all or substantially all of which is designed or intended for a use permitted
in the district in which it is located; provided said repairs, alterations or
structural changes conform to the regulations of the district in which said
building or structure is located.
   (B)   Additions And Enlargements: A nonconforming building or structure, all
or substantially all of which is designed or intended for a use not permitted
in the district in which it is located, shall not be added to or enlarged in
any manner.
   (C)   Moving Of Building Or Structure: No building or structure which does
not conform to all of the regulations of the district in which it is located
shall be moved in whole or in part to any other location unless every portion
of such building or structure is moved or removed and the use thereof is made
to conform to all regulations of the district into which it is moved. (Ord. 99-
06, 6-21-1999)
   (D)   Restoration Of Damaged, Nonconforming Building Or Structure:
      1.   Nonresidential Buildings And Structures: A building or structure,
which is not used for a single-family residence in the R-1 district, all or
substantially all of which is designed or intended for a nonconforming use,
which is destroyed or damaged by fire or other casualty or act of God to the
extent that the cost of restoration to the condition in which it was before the
occurrence will exceed fifty percent (50%) of the cost of restoration of the
entire building or structure new, shall not be restored, unless said building
or structure shall conform to all site and structure requirements of the
district in which it is located. In the event that such damage or destruction
is less than fifty percent (50%) of the cost of restoration of the building or
structure, no repairs or reconstruction shall be made unless such restoration
is started within one year from the date of the partial destruction and is
completed within the time frame as specified under the permit issued.
      2.   Single-Family Residential Uses: A legally existing single- family
residential building or structure in the R-1 zoning district, the building or
structure, its lot and/or foundation upon which it sits being nonconforming
because of its size, shape and/or setback, which is destroyed or damaged by
fire or other casualty or act of God, may be restored upon its existing
foundation (or foundation footprint). Such a restoration shall not increase the
bulk of the building, but shall restore it to its original size and appearance.
No repairs or reconstruction shall be made unless such repairs or
reconstruction are started within one year of the date of damage or destruction
and is completed within the time frame as specified under the permit issued.
(Ord. 01-33, 2-19-2002)
   (E)   Discontinuance Of Use Of Nonconforming Building Or Structure: A
building, structure or portion thereof, all or substantially all of which is
not permitted in the district in which it is located, and is vacant, unoccupied
and not used on the effective date of this title or thereafter becomes vacant
and remains unoccupied or is not used for a continuous period of one year shall
not thereafter be occupied or used except by a use which conforms to the use
regulations of the district in which it is located. Such change shall be made
after a public hearing in conformance with chapter 14 of this title.
   (F)   Expansion Of Use In Nonconforming Building Or Structure: The
nonconforming use of a part of a building or structure may be expanded within
the building or structure in which said use is presently located, but no
changes and alterations will be permitted unless such changes and alterations,
and the use thereof, conform to all the regulations of the district in which
the building or structure is located.
   (G)   Change Of A Nonconforming Use In Nonconforming Building Or Structure:
The nonconforming use of a building or structure may be changed to any other
permitted use in the district in which it is located; but no change shall
extend or otherwise modify any provision made in this title for elimination of
such nonconforming buildings or structures, and the use thereof. Once a change
has been made to a permitted use, no change can be made back to the previous
nonconforming use. No nonconforming use shall be changed to another
nonconforming use. (Ord. 99-06, 6-21-1999)
9-11-3: NONCONFORMING USE OF CONFORMING BUILDING OR STRUCTURE:
The nonconforming use of land not involving a building or structure, or in
connection with which any building or structure thereon is incidental or
accessory to the principal use of land, may be continued subject to the
principal use of the land and subject to the following provisions:
   (A)   Expansion Of Nonconforming Use: The nonconforming use of part of a
building or structure, all or substantially all of which building or structure
is designed or intended for a use permitted in the district in which it is
located, shall not be expanded into any other portion of such building or
structure.
   (B)   Discontinuance: If a nonconforming use of a building or structure, all
or substantially all of which building or structure is designed or intended for
a use permitted in the district in which it is located, is discontinued for a
period of one year, it shall not be renewed, and any subsequent use of the
building or structure shall conform to the use regulations of the district in
which the premises are located. Such change shall be made after public hearing
in conformance with chapter 14 of this title.
   (C)   Change Of Nonconforming Use: No nonconforming use shall be changed to
another nonconforming use when such nonconforming use is located in a building
or structure, all or substantially all of which building or structure is
designed or intended for a permitted use.
   (D)   Change To A Conforming Use: Whenever all or any part of a building or
structure, all or substantially all of which building or structure is designed
or intended for a use permitted in the district in which it is located, is
occupied by a nonconforming use and is subsequently changed to or replaced by a
use conforming to the provisions of this title, such premises shall not
thereafter be used or occupied by a nonconforming use. (Ord. 99-06, 6-21-1999)
9-11-4: NONCONFORMING USE OF LAND:
The nonconforming use of land not involving a building or structure, or in
connection with which any building or structure thereon is incidental or
accessory to the principal use of land, may be continued subject to the
principal use of the land and subject to the following provisions:
   (A)   Expansion: A nonconforming use of land shall not be expanded or
extended beyond the area it occupies.
   (B)   Discontinuance: If a nonconforming use of land is discontinued for a
period of one year, it shall not thereafter be renewed, and any subsequent use
of land shall conform to the regulations of the district in which the land is
located. Such change shall be made after a public hearing in conformance with
chapter 14 of this title. (Ord. 99-06, 6-21-1999)
9-11-5: CONVERSION TO SPECIAL USE:
Any nonconforming building, structure or use may be converted to a permitted
"special use" by the granting of a special use permit, as authorized in chapter
14 of this title. (Ord. 99-06, 6-21-1999)
9-11-6: DEVELOPMENTS AS LEGAL NONCONFORMING USE:
Developments that have obtained preliminary and final approval at the time this
title is adopted, may be developed as a legal nonconforming use, lot, or
building per the zoning regulations in effect at the time of approval. However,
developments having only preliminary approval prior to the adoption of this
title must actively petition for final approval of the entire project within
one year from the date on which preliminary approval was granted, in order to
proceed with the development in accordance with the zoning regulations, except
for yard requirements which shall comply with the provisions set forth in this
chapter. (Ord. 99-06, 6-21-1999)
9-11-7: FB-1 ROUTE 50 CORRIDOR DISTRICT:
Nonconforming buildings, structures or land located in the FB-1 zoning district
shall be subject to the regulations set forth in chapter 10, article C of this
title. (Ord. 12-34, 2-19-2013)
CHAPTER 12
OFF STREET PARKING AND LOADING
SECTION:
9-12-1: Scope
9-12-2: Off Street Parking General Requirements
9-12-3: Off Street Parking Location
9-12-4: Off Street Parking Separate Or Combined Space
9-12-5: Off Street Parking Design, Development And Maintenance
9-12-6: Off Street Parking Units Of Measure
9-12-7: Off Street Parking Table
9-12-8: Loading Space General Requirements
9-12-9: Loading Space Specific Measurements
9-12-1: SCOPE:
The provisions of this chapter shall apply to and govern all zoning districts
except the FB-1 Route 50 corridor district. (Ord. 99-06, 6-21-1999; amd. Ord.
12-34, 2-19-2013)
9-12-2: OFF STREET PARKING GENERAL REQUIREMENTS:
   (A)   The duty to provide and maintain off street parking space shall be the
joint and shared responsibility of the operator and/or owner of the use and/or
land for which off street parking space is required to be provided and
maintained.
   (B)   For land, structures, or uses actually used, occupied, or operated on
the effective date of this title, there shall be provided such off street
parking space as was required for such land, structures, or uses by any
previous ordinance. However, if such land, structure, or uses are enlarged,
expanded, or changed, determination shall be made by the code enforcement
officer regarding the number of off street parking spaces that shall be
required, taking into consideration all aspects being affected by such
enlargement, expansion or change. In no event shall the required number of
parking spaces be less than the sum of previously required spaces plus required
spaces under this title for the additional area of the enlargement, expansion
or change.
   (C)   For all uses established or placed into operation after the effective
date of this title, there shall be constructed, provided, preserved, and
maintained the amount of off street parking space hereinafter set forth.
   (D)   All off street parking space, whether provided in accordance with the
provisions of this title, or in accordance with the provisions of any former
ordinance, shall be maintained as hereinafter required.
   (E)   Parking and loading spaces for all uses may be provided in garages or
parking areas, with or without charge, conforming with the provisions of this
title.
   (F)   Construction vehicles may be parked on the job site and off the
street.
   (G)   No vehicle may be parked in any residential front yard, rear yard, or
side yard except upon a regularly constructed residential driveway, and
provided that the vehicle is pulled up beyond the sidewalk and no visual or
other type of hazard is created.
   (H)   Multipurpose utility trailers and recreational vehicles, including,
but not limited to, vehicles, travel trailers, pickup campers or coaches,
motorized dwellings, tent trailers, boats, snowmobiles, trailers, dune buggies
and other equipment designated for recreational use, shall not be parked on any
residential street or parking lot, but may be parked in the residential front
yard on a driveway, clearing sidewalks with no visual or other type of hazard
created. Recreational vehicles that, due to size, will not fit in the driveway
or side concrete pad may be parked by resident property owners or their guests
on the street in front of their house only for a period of seventy two (72)
hours for loading, unloading or visiting provided no visual or other type of
hazard is created and after notification to and approval by the police
department.
   Recreational type vehicles may be parked on owner's property to the side of
the principal building, in relation to the front of the home, provided it meets
the following requirements:
      1.   The vehicle does not encroach into a neighbor's yard;
      2.   The vehicle does not cause a safety hazard;
      3.   The vehicle does not cause a visual obstruction;
      4.   The vehicle sits on a concrete pad approved by the building
department;
      5.   The vehicle is kept in operable condition;
      6.   The vehicle is not used for any other purpose than it was designed
for; and
      7.   The vehicle is at the location to the side of the home.
      8.   The vehicle has valid registration.
   This section shall not apply to any recreational vehicle used as a temporary
residence in front of or at the side of the home, if still on the homeowner's
property, provided the recreational vehicle does not remain on the property for
more than one hundred twenty (120) hours.
   (I)   Semitrucks or semitrailers are allowed only on established truck
routes as identified under section
7-11-1  of this code. Parking of any semitruck or semitrailer is prohibited in
all residential districts.
   (J)   Any application for a building permit or for an occupancy certificate
where no building permit is required, shall include a plot plan drawn to scale
and fully dimensioned showing any off street parking or loading facilities to
be provided in compliance with this title. (Ord. 99-06, 6-21-1999; amd. Ord.
05-52, 3-6-2006; Ord. 23-06, 9-5-2023)
9-12-3: OFF STREET PARKING LOCATION:
Off street parking space shall be located on the same lot as the use for which
provided, except as set forth herein:
   (A)   Municipally Owned Property: Municipally owned property.
   (B)   Special Location Plan: Pursuant to the procedure hereinafter set
forth, either part or all of the required off street parking space may be
located off the lot of the use for which the space is provided. Also, two (2)
or more uses may share the same off street parking space and each of such uses
may be considered as having provided such shared space individually. The
following limitations shall apply to the "special location plan".
      1.   Separate From Use: Off street parking shall be located as
hereinafter specified, where a distance is specified, such distance shall be
the walking distance measured from the nearest point of the parking facility to
the nearest point of the building that such facility is required to serve.
         (a)   In all residential districts, parking facilities shall be
located on the same lot or lots with the building they are required to serve,
except that vehicles with a weight of seven thousand (7,000) pounds or more or
exceeding ninety inches (90") in height are prohibited.
         (b)   In the C-2 commercial district and industrial districts, parking
facilities shall be located within three hundred feet (300') of the building
they are required to serve.
      2.   Application: All applications for approval of a special plan
hereunder shall be filed with the code enforcement officer by the owners of the
entire land area and all structures included thereon. The application shall
contain such information and representations required by the title or deemed
necessary and shall include plans showing the following details:
         (a)   The location of the uses or structures for which off street
parking space is required.
         (b)   The location at which the off street parking space is to be
located.
      3.   Procedure:
         (a)   All applicants shall be reviewed and approved by the planning
commission and code enforcement officer. Any approval may establish necessary
conditions and limitations.
         (b)   All special plans recorded hereunder shall be binding upon the
applicants for such special location plan, their successors and assigns, shall
limit and control the issuance and validity of all zoning permits and zoning
certificates and shall restrict and limit the use and operation of all land and
structures include within such special location plans to all conditions and
limitations specified in such plans and approvals thereof.
         (c)   All special plans hereunder may be amended according to the same
procedures and subject to the limitations and requirements by which such plans
were approved. (Ord. 99-06, 6-21-1999)
9-12-4: OFF STREET PARKING SEPARATE OR COMBINED SPACE:
Separate off street parking space shall be provided for each use or the parking
space required of two (2) or more uses located on the same lot may be combined
and used jointly; provided, however:
   (A)   Where off street parking is combined and used jointly by two (2) or
more uses having different standards for determining the amount of off street
parking required, the parking space shall be adequate in area to provide the
sum total of off street parking requirements of all such uses.
   (B)   Where off street parking space is combined and used jointly by two (2)
or more uses having the same standard for determining the amount of off street
parking space required, all such uses, for the purpose of this section shall be
considered a single unit, and the gross floor area of all such uses in all
structures on the same lot and the number of employees of all such uses in all
structures on the same lot as fixed by the applicable standard shall be taken
as a single total for the purpose of determining the amount of off street
parking space required. (Ord. 99-06, 6-21-1999)
9-12-5: OFF STREET PARKING DESIGN, DEVELOPMENT AND MAINTENANCE:
Every parcel of land hereafter used as a public or private parking area,
including commercial parking lots and automobile or trailer sales lots, shall
be designed, developed, and maintained in accordance with the following
requirements:
   (A)   Design Plan Approval: The plan for the design of parking lots or areas
shall be subject to approval of the village engineer and code enforcement
officer, in accordance with current standards on file in the code enforcement
office and requirements noted herein.
   (B)   Restricted Use: No off street parking area shall be used for sale,
repair, dismantling, or servicing of any vehicles, equipment, materials, or
supplies, except when parking is a permitted principal or conditional use.
(Ord. 99-06, 6-21-1999)
   (C)   Design Specifications:
      1.   All districts except FB-1 Route 50 corridor district: (Ord. 12-34,
2-19-2013)
         (a)   Drainage/Approved Material: All off street parking areas shall
be graded for proper drainage and provided with bituminous asphalt, concrete or
other approved dustless, durable material capable of carrying a wheel load of
four thousand (4,000) pounds maintained at all times in such a manner as to
prevent the release of dust and to be free of dust, trash, and debris.
         (b)   Curb Cuts: Except for approved circle drives in residential
districts, no more than one curb cut shall be allowed for any lot with less
than two hundred foot (200') frontage on a public street, and no more than two
(2) curb cuts shall be allowed for any lot with two hundred feet (200') or over
frontage.
         (c)   Access Angle: Entrance/exit access shall intersect the public
street at an angle of seventy (70) to ninety degrees (90°).
         (d)   Vehicular Access: All off street parking areas shall be designed
with appropriate means of vehicular access to a street or alley in a manner
which will least interfere with vehicular and pedestrian traffic, as determined
by the village engineer and code enforcement officer.
         (e)   Parking Space Dimensions: Except for parallel parking spaces,
each required off street parking space shall be at least nine feet (9') in
width and at least twenty feet (20') in length, exclusive of access drives or
aisles, ramps or columns. Such space shall have a vertical clearance of at
least seven feet (7') and shall be measured at right angles to the axis of the
vehicle. For parallel parking, the length of the parking space shall be
increased to twenty four feet (24').
         (f)   ADA Requirements: Parking for the handicapped shall be provided
at a size, number, and location as specified by state and federal regulations.
         (g)   Location: No pavement or curbing shall be located closer than
five feet (5') from any property line unless it can be specifically
demonstrated that the intent is to extend the parking to adjacent properties. A
plan must be submitted and approved during the review process which shows how
the extension of parking will occur.
         (h)   Curbing: All parking areas with more than twelve (12) spaces
within any district shall be provided with curbing along perimeter parking so
located that no part of the parked vehicle will extend beyond the parking area.
         (i)   Ingress/Egress: A clear path of ingress and egress must be
individually provided for each space; parking spaces shall not be adjoined in
any manner whereby use of one space would effectively eliminate ingress or
egress to any other parking space. No turnaround, street or driveway that
serves as access to any parking space shall be considered a separate parking
space or area if its use effectively blocks ingress or egress of any other
parking space.
         (j)   Clear Path Of Vision: At points of ingress and egress into roads
for off street parking, no structure, parked vehicle, sign or plant material
shall obstruct a clear path of motor vehicle driver's vision of approaching
vehicles within a triangular square determined by a diagonal line connecting
two (2) points measured seventy five feet (75') equidistant from the point of
intersection with the centerline of the road and the points of ingress and
egress.
         (k)   Lighting: Driveways, accessways and parking areas shall be
illuminated in sufficient manner to create a safe environment for vehicles and
pedestrians. All lighting shall be glare free and directed away from adjoining
properties. Lighting heads shall be permanently fixed downdraft lighting
utilizing shadow boxes to direct light downward.
         (l)   Landscaping: All open vehicle parking areas containing more than
twelve (12) contiguous and adjacent parking spaces shall be effectively
screened in accordance with the guidelines noted in section
9-3-5 of this title. Five percent (5%) of the entire parking area shall be
landscaped with island greenery; such plan shall be approved with the site
plan. (Ord. 99-06, 6-21-1999)
      2.   Single-family R-1 and two-family R-2 residential districts:
         (a)   Driveways for single-family homes shall not be less than nine
feet (9') in width. Where a driveway leads to a garage, the width shall not be
less than the span of the garage door, or if more than one, the total span of
all doors. The width of the driveway for an attached garage may not extend
beyond three feet (3') from the side of the garage nearest to the structure's
main entrance. The driveway extension, located on the side of the garage
farthest from structure's main entrance, may be extended to within five feet
(5') of the parcel sideline, provided that no extension is constructed on a
drainage easement. (Ord. 15-37, 12-21-2015)
         (b)   No lot in an R-1 residential district shall have more than one
driveway approach to a garage or parking area, except for approved circle
drives.
         (c)   All aprons must be constructed with concrete.
         (d)   No more than fifty percent (50%) of the area in front of a
single-family home's building setback line may be covered by a hard surface,
unless a circle drive is utilized.
         (e)   Circle drives may be permitted when it is determined by the
director of building and zoning that its presence will not be injurious to the
health, safety and welfare of the public. When making such a decision the
director of building and zoning may consider, but in no way shall be limited
to: traffic conditions, aesthetics and lot coverage. No approval for a circle
drive will be granted by the director of building and zoning without the
submission of a site plan, drawn to scale, delineating the circle drive
configuration to be constructed on the lot.
         (f)   Notwithstanding anything in this section to the contrary, no
driveway or portion thereof shall be permitted if its construction would cause
the total lot coverage to exceed sixty percent (60%). (Ord. 06-68, 1-15-2007)
      3.   Commercial, industrial, and multiple-family residential R-
3 districts:
         (a)   Width: Shall be provided with entrances and exits not less than
twelve feet (12') nor more than seventeen and one-half feet (171/2') in width
for each direction of traffic and so located as to minimize traffic congestion.
(Ord. 99-06, 6-21-1999)
         (b)   Distance Between Curb Cuts And Intersections: Minimum distance
between curb cuts and public street intersections shall be no less than one
hundred forty five feet (145') measured from the centerline of the street to
the centerline of the entrance/exit access, unless otherwise approved by the
village chief of police and the village engineer. Any entrance/exit access that
does not meet the distance requirement may be evaluated by the village chief of
police for traffic and safety concerns, and by the village engineer to
determine if a shorter distance would be acceptable based on the particulars of
the location. (Ord. 15-35, 12-21-2015)
         (c)   Vehicular Access: Each off street parking space shall open
directly upon an aisle or driveway at least twelve feet (12') wide for each
direction of traffic or such additional width and design as to provide safe and
efficient means of vehicular access to such parking space.
         (d)   Garages: Where garages are provided, driveway width to the
garage shall be no less than the span of the garage door(s).
         (e)   Screening: Off street parking areas for four (4) or more
vehicles that adjoin or are across the street from property zoned for any
residential use shall have a dense evergreen planting and/or such other
screening in accordance with guidelines of section
9-3-5 of this title.
         (f)   Landscaping: A minimum of fifteen feet (15') of landscaping in
the front yard shall be provided in all commercial and industrial districts.
Reduction in the depth of landscaping may be permitted as a special use if
adequate provisions for landscaping can be demonstrated. (Ord. 99-06, 6-21-
1999)
9-12-6: OFF STREET PARKING UNITS OF MEASURE:
For purposes of this section, the following units of measurement shall apply:
   (A)   Floor Area: "Floor area" shall mean the gross floor area taken from
the outside wall of the building.
   (B)   Dwelling Unit: A "dwelling unit" shall mean one room, or a suite of
two (2) or more rooms, designed for or used by one family for living and
sleeping purposes and having only one kitchen or kitchenette.
   (C)   Seat Or Bench: A seat shall be the space intended for an individual;
in places where patrons or spectators occupy benches, pews, or other seating
facilities, each twenty inches (20") of such seating facilities shall be
counted as one seat.
   (D)   Employees: "Employees" shall mean the maximum number of permanent
staff members working on the premises at any one time.
   (E)   Fractions: When units of measurement result in the requirement of a
fractional space, any fraction shall require one parking space.
   (F)   Multiple Uses: For structures which function under more than one use,
parking space shall be provided to accommodate the maximum potential need for
parking as determined by the code enforcement officer. (Ord. 99-06, 6-21-1999)
9-12-7: OFF STREET PARKING TABLE:
Parking Class Uses (Permitted Or Special) Required Spaces
Parking Class Uses (Permitted Or Special)      Required Spaces
Class 1       Dwelling, single-family          2 per dwelling unit
              Dwelling, two-family
Class 2       Dwelling, multiple-family        2.5 per dwelling unit
              Convalescent home, extended care
              facilities nursing home, home
              for the aged                     1 per each 2 beds plus 1 per
Class 3       Group homes                      each 2 employees
              Institutional uses
              Parsonage, rectory or parish
              house
Class 4       Medical, dental or optical       2 per each office or exam plus 1
              clinics                          per employee
              Library, museum or other public
Class 5       or quasi-public use              3 per 1,000 square feet of gross
              Philanthropic and charitable     floor area
              institutions
              Personal service establishments
              Post office                      4 per 1,000 square feet of gross
Class 6       Professional office              floor area
              establishments
              Recreational or community center
              Business service establishments  6 per 1,000 square feet of floor
Class 7       Retail businesses which supply   area
              commodities on the premises
Class 8       Elementary schools               1 per each employee plus 1 per
             Nursery schools                  each 3 classrooms

                                               1 space per each employee plus 1
Class 9       High schools                     space per each 4 students based
                                               on the maximum number according
                                               to design capacity
              Commercial or trade schools      1 space per each 2 employees
Class 10      Business schools                 plus 1 space per each 2 students
              Music or dance schools
              Cocktail lounges                 10 spaces per 1,000 square feet
Class 11      Restaurants                      of gross floor area
              Taverns
              Auction halls
              Auditoriums (also as accessory   1 space per 2.5 seats or 45
              to churches, school and other    lineal inches of seating or by
Class 12      institutional establishments)    potential seating as determined
              Churches, temples, synagogues    by the enforcement officer
              Convention halls or exhibition
              halls
              Golf driving ranges              1 space per 1,000 square feet of
                                               gross floor area plus 1 space
Class 13      Greenhouses or nurseries, retail per 2,000 square feet of gross
                                               land area

              Golf courses                     75 spaces per 9 holes (regular
Class 14      Par 3 golf courses               golf) or 40 spaces per 9 holes
              Pitch and putt golf course       (par 3 course)

              Athletic fields
Class 15      Grounds of recreational clubs,   1 space per 5,000 square feet of
              noncommercial                    gross land area
              Public parks and playgrounds
              Bowling alleys                   1 space per 2 persons based on
              Dance halls                      the maximum number of persons
              Skating rinks                    that can be accommodated at the
Class 16      Swimming pools                   same time in accordance with
                                               such design capacity and 1 space
              Tennis courts and clubs          per each 2 employees

Class 17      Indoor theaters                  1 space per each 4 seats
                                               Reservoir space sufficient to
Class 18      Drive-in banking facility        accommodate a number of
                                               automobiles equal to 5 times the
                                               number of teller windows
                                               1 space per employee plus
             Automobile laundry (mechanical)  parking spaces equal to 5 times
Class 19                                       the maximum capacity of the auto
                                               washing unit
              Garage for the storage,
              servicing and repair of motor
              vehicles including body repair,
              painting and engine rebuilding
              Mobile home display, sales,
              service                          5 per 1,000 square feet of gross
Class 20      Model garage, display and sales  floor area plus 1 space per
              Motor vehicles sales and service 2,000 square feet of land area
              Motorcycle, bicycle, or other
              outdoor recreational vehicle
              sales, rental, service
              Trailer, boat, and camper or
              camper trailer sales, rental and
              service
                                               1 space per each pump island
Class 21      Auto service station             plus 2 spaces per each stall
                                               plus 1 space per employee
              Industrial type uses, wholesale
Class 22      or warehouse uses, as defined in 1 space per each employee
              chapters 8 and 9 of this title
              Amusement parks and similar
              establishments
              Billiard and pool halls          3 spaces per 1,000 square feet
Class 23      Indoor amusements, including     of gross floor area plus 3
              indoor archery, rifle range and  spaces per 1,000 square feet of
              shooting gallery                 gross land area
              Kiddie park
              Miniature golf
                                               Spaces as required by the
Class 24      Special uses not specified above village board after review by
                                               the code enforcement officer
 
(Ord. 99-06, 6-21-1999)
9-12-8: LOADING SPACE GENERAL REQUIREMENTS:
   (A)   Location: All required loading areas shall be located on the same
zoning lot as the use served. All motor vehicle loading areas which abut a
residential district from a commercial or industrial district shall be
completely screened therefrom by building walls or by a uniform solid fence,
wall, or door, or densely planted, mature shrubbery or any combination thereof,
not less than five feet (5') in height. No permitted or required loading area
shall be located within thirty feet (30') of the nearest point of intersection
of any two (2) streets. No loading area shall be located in a required front or
side yard, and any loading area located in a required rear yard may be open to
the sky. No pavement or curbing shall be located closer than two feet (2') from
any property line unless it can be specifically demonstrated that the intent is
to extend the loading to adjoining properties. A plan must be submitted and
approved during the review process which shows how the extension of loading
will occur.
   (B)   Size: Unless otherwise specified, a required off street loading area
shall be at least twelve feet (12') in width by at least forty feet (40') in
length, exclusive of aisle and maneuvering space, and shall have a vertical
clearance of at least fifteen feet (15').
   (C)   Access: Each required off street loading area shall be designated with
appropriate means of vehicular access to a street or alley in a manner which
will least interfere with traffic movement, and shall be subject to approval by
the code enforcement officer. Loading areas shall be designed in such manner to
create flow through traffic patterns on site; no backing in from public streets
shall be allowed.
   (D)   Surfacing: All open, off street loading areas shall be surfaced with a
bituminous asphalt or concrete material capable of bearing a live load of two
hundred (200) pounds per square foot.
   (E)   Repair And Service:
      1.   Residential Districts: No motor vehicle repair work or service of
any kind shall be permitted in conjunction with loading facilities provided in
any residential district.
      2.   Commercial Districts: No motor vehicle repair of any kind shall be
permitted in conjunction with loading facilities provided in commercial
districts, except emergency repair service necessary to start vehicles.
      3.   Industrial Districts: No motor vehicle repair work or service of any
kind shall be permitted in conjunction with loading facilities provided in an
industrial district if such loading facilities are within five hundred feet
(500') of a residence district. Washing of accessory vehicles and emergency
service required to start vehicles shall be permitted.
   (F)   Utilization: Space allocated for off street loading use shall not,
while so allocated, be used to satisfy the space requirements for any off
street parking facilities or portions thereof.
   (G)   Central Loading: Central loading facilities may be substituted for
loading areas on the individual zoning lots provided the following conditions
are fulfilled:
      1.   Each zoning lot serviced shall have direct access to the central
loading area without cross streets or alley at grade.
      2.   Total off street loading berths provided shall meet the minimum
requirements herein specified based on the sum of the several types of uses
served. (Area of types of uses may be totaled before computing number of
loading berths.)
      3.   No zoning lot served shall be more than five hundred feet (500')
removed from the central loading area.
      4.   The tunnel or ramp connecting the central loading area with the
zoning lot served shall not be less than seven feet (7') in width and have a
clearance of not less than seven feet (7').
   (H)   Minimum Facilities: Uses for which off street loading facilities are
required herein, but which are located in buildings of less floor area than the
minimum prescribed for such required facilities, shall be provided with
adequate receiving facilities accessible by motor vehicle off any adjacent
alley, service drive, or open space on the same lot. (Ord. 99-06, 6-21-1999)
9-12-9: LOADING SPACE SPECIFIC MEASUREMENTS:
   (A)   Residence Districts: Off street loading facilities accessory to uses
allowed in the residence districts shall be provided in accordance with the
following minimum requirements:
      1.   Loading Berths: For the uses listed hereunder, one loading berth
shall be provided for buildings containing ten thousand (10,000) to one hundred
thousand (100,000) square feet of gross floor area, plus one additional loading
berth for each additional one hundred thousand (100,000) square feet of gross
floor area or fraction thereof.
         (a)   Educational and cultural institutions.
         (b)   Philanthropic and cultural institutions.
         (c)   Religious institutions.
      2.   Planned Development, Residential: Loading berths shall be provided
on the basis of the required berths of each individual use.
      3.   Recreational And Social Facilities: For buildings containing ten
thousand (10,000) to one hundred thousand (100,000) square feet of gross floor
area, one loading berth shall be provided, and for each additional one hundred
thousand (100,000) square feet of gross floor area up to five hundred thousand
(500,000) square feet of gross floor area or fraction thereof in excess of five
hundred thousand (500,000) square feet.
      4.   Nonresidential Uses: For all other nonresidential uses, loading
facilities shall be provided in accordance with the following requirements:
         (a)   For buildings containing ten thousand (10,000) to one hundred
thousand (100,000) square feet of gross floor area, there shall be provided on
the same zoning lot, adequate receiving facilities, accessible by motor
vehicle, off any adjacent alley, service drive, or open space.
         (b)   For buildings containing ten thousand (10,000) to one hundred
thousand (100,000) square feet of gross floor area, two (2) off street loading
berths shall be provided.
         (c)   For buildings containing over one hundred thousand (100,000)
square feet of gross floor area, there shall be provided one loading berth for
each one hundred thousand (100,000) square feet of gross floor area or fraction
thereof.
   (B)   Commercial Districts: Off street loading spaces accessory to uses
permitted in the commercial districts shall be provided in accordance with the
following minimum requirements:
      1.   Any use listed in a residential district that also is permitted in
any of the commercial districts shall provide loading spaces as established for
that use in the preceding section for residential districts.
      2.   Establishments containing less than seven thousand (7,000) square
feet of gross floor area shall be provided with adequate facilities, accessible
by motor vehicle, off any adjacent alley, service drive, or open space on the
same zoning lot.
      3.   For the uses listed hereunder, one loading berth shall be provided
for buildings containing seven thousand (7,000) to forty thousand (40,000)
square feet of gross floor area. For buildings containing forty thousand
(40,000) to one hundred thousand (100,000) square feet of gross floor area, two
(2) loading berths shall be provided, plus one additional loading berth for
each additional one hundred thousand (100,000) square feet of gross floor area
or fraction thereof. Each such loading berth for buildings in excess of one
hundred thousand (100,000) square feet of gross floor area shall not be less
than twelve feet (12') in width by fifty five feet (55') in length:
         Cartage and express facilities.
         Mail order houses.
         Printing and publishing.
         Restricted production and repair.
         Warehousing, storage, and wholesale establishments.
      4.   For the uses listed hereunder, one loading berth shall be provided
for buildings containing up to one hundred thousand (100,000) square feet of
gross floor area for each additional one hundred thousand (100,000) square feet
of gross floor area up to five hundred thousand (500,000) square feet, one
additional loading berth shall be provided, plus one additional loading berth
for each fifty thousand (50,000) square feet of gross floor area or fraction in
excess of five hundred thousand feet (500,000').
         Banks and financial institutions.
         Medical and dental clinics.
         Offices, business, professional and governmental.
         Recreation buildings and community centers, noncommercial.
      5.   For the uses listed hereunder, one loading berth shall be provided
for buildings containing up to one hundred thousand (100,000) square feet of
gross floor area, plus one additional loading berth for each additional one
hundred fifty thousand feet (150,000') of gross floor area or fraction thereof.
Each such loading building in excess of twenty thousand (20,000) square feet of
gross floor area shall not be less than twelve feet (12') in width by fifty
five feet (55') in length.
         Clubs or lodges (not for profit), containing retail shops,
auditoriums, exhibition halls, or business or professional offices (other than
accessory).
         Convention halls.
         Exhibition halls.
      6.   For the uses listed hereunder, one loading berth shall be provided
for buildings containing up to one hundred fifty thousand (150,000) square feet
of gross floor area, plus one additional loading berth for each additional two
hundred thousand (200,000) square feet of gross floor area or fraction thereof:
         Amusement establishments: bowling alleys, swimming pools, and skating
rinks. For buildings containing ten thousand (10,000) square feet of gross
floor area, one loading berth shall be provided, plus one additional loading
berth for each additional one hundred thousand (100,000) square feet of gross
floor area or fraction thereof.
         Clubs and lodges (not for profit), containing no retail shops,
convention halls, auditoriums, exhibition halls or business or professional
offices (other than accessory).
         Meeting halls.
         Parking lots and garages: There shall not be requirements for off
street loading.
         Schools: music, dance, business, and trade.
         Theaters, indoor.
         Undertaking establishments and funeral parlors.
      For all other uses, loading facilities shall be provided in accordance
with the following schedule:
 
Gross Floor Area Of Establishments In Required Number  And Size Of Berths
Thousands Of Square Feet
7 to 60                               1 - (12 foot x 30 foot)
61 to 100                             2 - (12 foot x 30 foot each)
 
   For each additional two hundred thousand (200,000) square feet in gross
floor area or fraction thereof over one hundred thousand (100,000) square feet
of gross floor area, one additional loading berth shall be provided, such
additional berth to be at least twelve feet (12') in width by fifty five feet
(55') in length.
   (C)   Industrial District: Off street loading facilities accessory to uses
allowed in the industrial district shall be provided in accordance with the
following minimum requirements:
      1.   Any production, processing, cleaning, servicing, testing, repair, or
storage of materials, goods, or products: For buildings containing up to forty
thousand (40,000) square feet of gross floor area, one loading berth shall be
provided. For buildings containing forty thousand (40,000) to one hundred
thousand (100,000) square feet of gross floor area, two (2) loading berths
shall be provided, plus one additional loading berth for each additional one
hundred thousand (100,000) square feet of floor area or fraction thereof. Each
such loading berth for buildings in excess of ten thousand (10,000) square feet
of gross floor area shall be not less than twelve feet (12') in width by fifty
five feet (55') in length.
      2.   For uses listed hereunder, one loading berth shall be provided for
buildings up to one hundred thousand (100,000) square feet of gross floor area.
For each additional one hundred thousand (100,000) square feet of gross floor
area up to five hundred thousand (500,000) square feet, one additional loading
berth shall be provided, plus one additional loading berth for each additional
five hundred thousand (500,000) square feet of gross floor area or fraction
thereof in excess of five hundred thousand (500,000) square feet.
   Medical and dental clinics.
   Recreational buildings or community centers.
      3.   Motor freight terminals: For buildings containing five thousand
(5,000) to forty thousand (40,000) square feet of gross floor area, one loading
berth shall be provided. For buildings containing forty thousand (40,000) to
one hundred thousand (100,000) square feet of gross floor area, two (2) loading
berths shall be provided, plus one additional loading berth for each additional
one hundred thousand (100,000) square feet of gross floor area or fraction
thereof. Each such loading berth for buildings in excess of ten thousand
(10,000) square feet of gross floor area shall be not less than twelve feet
(12') by fifty five feet (55') in length.
      4.   Planned developments, industrial: Loading berths shall be provided
on the basis of the required berths for each individual use.
      5.   For all other uses, loading facilities shall be provided in
accordance with the following schedule:
 
Gross Floor Area Of Establishments In Required Number  And Size Of Berths
Thousands Of Square Feet
7 to 40                               1 - (12 foot x 30 foot)
41 to 100                             2 - (12 foot x 30 foot each)
 
   For each additional two hundred thousand (200,000) square feet in gross
floor area or fraction thereof over one hundred thousand (100,000) square feet
of gross floor area, one additional loading berth shall be provided, such
additional berth to be at least twelve feet (12') by fifty five feet (55') in
length. (Ord. 99-06, 6-21-1999)
CHAPTER 13
SIGNS
SECTION:
9-13-1: Title
9-13-2: Purpose
9-13-3: Definitions
9-13-4: Permit Required
9-13-5: Permitting Process; Appeals
9-13-6: Permit Denial
9-13-7: Permit Expiration
9-13-8: Nonconforming Signs
9-13-9: General Construction And Maintenance Standards
9-13-10: Appearance Standards
9-13-11: Prohibited Signs
9-13-12: Enforcement
9-13-13: Residential Districts
9-13-14: Commercial Districts
9-13-15: Industrial Districts
9-13-16: Agricultural Districts
9-13-17: Wayfinder Signs
9-13-18: FB-1 Route 50 Corridor District
9-13-1: TITLE:
This chapter shall be known and cited as the MANTENO SIGN ORDINANCE. (Ord. 08-
08, 7-21-2008)
9-13-2: PURPOSE:
The purpose of this chapter is to promote the use of signs in the village which
are safe, aesthetically pleasing, compatible with their surroundings and
legible in the circumstances in which they are seen. This chapter recognizes
the need for a well maintained and attractive physical appearance of the
community, the need to preserve the noncommercial character of residential
neighborhoods, and the need for adequate business identification for the
conduct of competitive commerce. Further, this chapter is adopted for the
purpose of reducing sign or advertising distractions that may increase traffic
accidents by distracting driver attention from the roadway. No provision of
this chapter is intended to prohibit or permit signs on the basis of content.
No provision of this chapter is intended to favor or permit commercial speech
at the expense of noncommercial speech. (Ord. 08-08, 7-21-2008)
9-13-3: DEFINITIONS:
For the purpose of this chapter, the following types of signs, parts of signs
or descriptions are defined as follows:
SIGN: Any object, device, display, or structure, or part thereof, situated
outdoors or indoors, which is used to advertise, identify, display, direct, or
attract attention to an object, person, institution, organization, business,
product, service, event, idea, position or location by any means, including
words, letters, figures, design, symbols, fixtures, colors, illumination, or
projected images.
   Animated Or Moving: Any sign that changes physical position or light
intensity by any movement or rotation or that gives the visual impression of
such movement or rotation.
   Awning, Canopy, Or Marquee: A sign that is mounted, painted, or attached to
an awning, canopy, or marquee that is otherwise permitted by ordinance.
   Billboard: A sign that directs attention to a business, commodity, service,
or entertainment conducted, sold, or offered at a location other than the
premises on which the sign is located.
   Business: A sign that directs attention to a business or profession
conducted, or to a commodity or service sold, offered, or manufactured, or to
an entertainment offered on the premises where the sign is located.
   Construction: A temporary sign erected on the premises on which construction
is taking place, during the period of such construction, indicating the names
of the architects, engineers, landscape architects, contractors or similar
artisans, and the owners, financial supporters, sponsors, and similar
individuals or firms having a role or interest with respect to the structure or
project.
   Directional: Signs limited to directional messages, principally for
pedestrian or vehicular traffic, such as "one- way", "entrance", and "exit".
   Electronic Message Board: Any sign that uses changing lights to form a sign
message or messages wherein the sequence of messages and the rate of change is
electronically programmed and can be modified by electronic process.
   Face: The area or display surface used for the message.
   Flashing: Any directly or indirectly illuminated sign that exhibits changing
natural or artificial light or color effects by any means whatsoever.
   Freestanding: Any nonmovable sign not affixed to a building, i.e., pole
sign, ground sign, and construction signs.
   Ground: Any sign, other than a pole sign, in which the entire bottom is in
contact with or is close to the ground and is independent of any other
structure.
   Identification: A sign giving the nature, logo, trademark, or other
identifying symbol; address; or any combination of the name, symbol, and
address of a building, business, development, or establishment on the premises
where it is located.
   Illuminated: A sign lighted by or exposed to internal or external artificial
lighting.
   Nameplate: A sign, located on the premises, giving the name or address, or
both, of the owner or occupant of a building or premises.
   Permanent: A sign that will be permanently affixed to the ground or
permanently affixed to another structure. For purposes of this chapter, a
"permanent sign" shall mean any sign that has a foundation, will be attached to
a structure with a foundation, and will be standing for more than one hundred
twenty (120) days.
   Pole: A sign that is mounted on a freestanding pole or other support so that
the bottom edge of the sign face is six feet (6') or more above grade.
   Portable: A sign that is not permanent, affixed to a building, structure, or
the ground, including, but not limited to, signs to be transported on wheels.
   Projecting: A sign that is wholly or partly dependent upon a building for
support and that projects more than twelve inches (12") from such building.
This type of sign is commonly known as a shingle sign.
   Roof: A sign that is mounted on the roof of a building or that is wholly
dependent upon a building for support and that projects: above the top walk or
edge of a building with a flat roof; above the eave line of a building with a
gambrel, gable, or hip roof; or, above the deck line of a building with a
mansard roof.
   Wall: A sign fastened to or painted on the wall of a building or structure
in such a manner that the wall becomes the supporting structure for, or forms
the background surface of, the sign and that does not project more than twelve
inches (12") from such building or structure.
SIGN AREA: The entire face of a sign, including the advertising surface and any
framing, trim, or molding, but not including the supporting structure.
SIGN PROJECTION: The distance from the exterior wall surface to the sign's
furthest physical point. (Ord. 08-08, 7-21-2008)
9-13-4: PERMIT REQUIRED:
Any person who desires to install, alter, enlarge, extend or relocate
(hereinafter "construct") a permanent sign, or a sign that will have electrical
service, must first obtain a permit by filing with the director of building and
zoning ("director") an application in writing, on a form to be furnished by the
director, which shall consist of the following information:
   (A)   Name, address, and telephone number of the applicant, which shall be
confirmed through the applicant's driver's license or state identification
card, articles of incorporation, or other legally recognized form of
identification;
   (B)   Proof of ownership or possessory interest in the land on which the
sign is to be erected;
   (C)   The address and legal description of the property on which the sign is
to be erected;
   (D)   Names and addresses of any contractors employed by the applicant to
erect the sign;
   (E)   Sealed building plans signed by a licensed architect setting forth the
specifications for the construction of the sign;
   (F)   Sealed site plans signed by a licensed land surveyor showing the
location of the sign in relation to other signs and structures sufficient to
ensure compliance with the standards of this chapter; and
   (G)   Proof of possession of any license or permit which, under federal,
state or local law, the applicant is required to have in order to erect a sign
under this chapter. (Ord. 08-08, 7-21-2008)
9-13-5: PERMITTING PROCESS; APPEALS:
The director shall complete an application review and notify an applicant of
his/her decision to grant or deny a permit within thirty (30) days of receipt
of the application. An applicant may obtain his/her permit from the village
hall once advised that a decision to grant the permit has been issued. A record
of all permits issued and denied pursuant to this chapter shall be maintained
by the director. Any permit not specifically approved or denied within thirty
(30) days of the application's submission shall be deemed denied as failing to
comply with the provisions of this chapter unless both parties agree to an
extension in writing. All extensions shall be signed by the director and the
applicant and shall specify the date upon which the extension is to terminate.
If the director has not granted or denied an application upon the expiration of
the time period so specified, the applicant may either consider such failure as
a denial of the permit or agree to a further extension of time. The director
shall not consider the sign's content as a part of his/her decision to grant or
deny a permit and shall limit his/her decision to compliance with this code.
The director shall use reasonable efforts to notify the applicant of his/her
decision to grant or deny a permit in writing. If an application is incomplete,
the director shall allow the applicant an opportunity to provide the
information necessary for his/her review. In the case of a denial, the director
shall advise the applicant why the sign cannot be constructed as proposed. The
notification shall be mailed to the applicant via U.S. mail at the address
contained on the application. The notification shall be postmarked no later
than three (3) business days subsequent to the expiration of the review period.
An applicant denied a permit under this chapter may appeal the director's
decision to the president and board of trustees for the village of Manteno.
Said appeal shall be filed in the office of the village clerk and stamped no
later than thirty (30) days subsequent to the date indicated on the director's
denial letter or the final date upon which the director's review has expired if
no letter is received. Upon receipt of an appeal, the village clerk shall
immediately send notice to the president and board of trustees of the appeal.
Within fourteen (14) days subsequent to the receipt of an appeal, the village
clerk shall send notice to the applicant setting forth the date, time and
location of the appeal hearing. The appeal shall be held within thirty five
(35) days of receipt of the applicant's appeal. The president and board of
trustees' review of the appeal shall be limited to whether the proposed sign
conforms to this code. The president and board of trustees may only reverse the
decision of the director upon a majority vote of the elected officials then
holding office. Upon a reversal, the director shall be obligated to issue a
permit to the applicant within seven (7) days. An applicant may appeal the
decision to deny a permit made by the president and board of trustees through
the Illinois administrative review law 1 . (Ord. 08-08, 7-21-2008)
 
Notes
1 1. 735 ILCS 5/3-101 et seq.
9-13-6: PERMIT DENIAL:
The director may only deny a permit if the sign, as proposed, fails to comply
with the standards set forth in this chapter. The director's denial and the
reasons for said disapproval shall be noted on the application. (Ord. 08-08, 7-
21-2008)
9-13-7: PERMIT EXPIRATION:
If work authorized under a sign permit has not commenced within ninety (90)
days of the date of issuance of that permit, said permit shall become void.
(Ord. 08-08, 7-21-2008)
9-13-8: NONCONFORMING SIGNS:
Any permanent sign or permanent sign structure lawfully existing or under
construction at the time of the adoption of this title, or of a later
amendment, but whose location or use does not conform with the regulations set
forth herein, shall be known as nonconforming. Nonconforming signs shall be
registered with the director. No billboards in existence at the time of the
adoption of this chapter shall be allowed to continue past January 1, 2001.
(Ord. 08-08, 7-21-2008)
9-13-9: GENERAL CONSTRUCTION AND MAINTENANCE STANDARDS:
All signs shall be constructed and maintained in accordance with the following
limitations and requirements:
   (A)   All signs shall be constructed in accordance with the minimum
requirements of the international building code in effect at the time of the
permit application. (Ord. 08-08, 7-21-2008)
   (B)   All signs which are illuminated or contain any electrical parts shall
be constructed in accordance with the national electrical code in effect at the
time of the permit application. (Ord. 08-08, 7-21-2008; amd. Ord. 14-05, 7-7-
2014)
   (C)   All signs shall be maintained in accordance with the minimum
requirements of the international property maintenance code. (Ord. 08-08, 7-21-
2008)
9-13-10: APPEARANCE STANDARDS:
All signs shall conform to the following appearance standards:
   (A)   All paint used must be weatherproof or covered by weatherproof
material.
   (B)   All lettering must be composed through the use of computer generation
or stencil.
   (C)   No signs shall be permitted that show wood in its natural exposed
condition.
   (D)   Spray paint may not be used on any signs.
   (E)   Every sign that requires a permit before its construction shall
contain an identification tag on the sign providing the name and telephone
number of the company constructing and maintaining the same.
   (F)   External lighting of signs shall be directed away from the public
right of way and from adjoining properties. (Ord. 08-08, 7-21-2008)
9-13-11: PROHIBITED SIGNS:
Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, the following signs and displays
shall be strictly prohibited throughout the village:
   (A)   Signs erected on or that project over public property or a public
right of way unless erected by or with the written permission of the village.
(Ord. 11-06, 6-20-2011)
   (B)   Signs that project beyond the property line on which the sign is
erected.
   (C)   Permanent signs on public utility easements.
   (D)   Signs placed within a natural waterway.
   (E)   Signs attached to trees, public utility poles, standpipes, gutter
drains or fire escapes, other than warning signs issued by government officials
or public utilities.
   (F)   Signs that block or impede the ingress or egress of any door, window,
or fire escape. No sign shall be erected so as to impair access to the roof of
a building.
   (G)   Signs (even temporary) that create a visual or physical hazard for
vehicles, pedestrians or children. (Ord. 08-08, 7-21-2008)
   (H)   Billboards, except for signs affixed to bus shelters erected in the
public right of way with the written permission of the village. (Ord. 11-06, 6-
20-2011)
   (I)   Signs which do not meet the standards of, or which otherwise violate,
the Illinois highway advertising control act of 1971, as amended.
   (J)   Signs not specifically allowed by this chapter. (Ord. 08-08, 7-21-
2008)
9-13-12: ENFORCEMENT:
   (A)   Unsafe And Unlawful Signs: If the director finds that any sign is
unsafe or insecure, is a menace to the public, or has been constructed,
erected, or stands in violation of the provisions of this chapter, he shall
give written notice to the owner of the property upon which the sign is
located. If the owner fails to remove or alter the sign so as to comply with
the standards set forth herein within ten (10) days after such notice, the
director may issue a citation and/or institute court proceedings for the
removal/repair thereof. Provided, however, the director may cause any sign
which is an immediate peril to person or property to be removed summarily and
without notice.
   (B)   Maintenance And Repair: Every sign, including, but not limited to,
those signs for which no permits or permit fees are required, shall be
maintained in a safe, presentable and good condition at all times. If the owner
fails to abate any maintenance issues within ten (10) days after notice by the
director, he may issue a citation and/or institute court proceedings for the
removal/repair thereof.
   (C)   Alterations: No display sign or outdoor device shall be altered,
rebuilt, enlarged, extended or relocated, except in conformity with the
provisions of this chapter. The repainting, changing of parts and preventative
maintenance of signs shall not be deemed to be alterations if performed by the
sign permit holder.
   (D)   Compliance: Nothing in this chapter shall limit the methods by which
the director ensures compliance with the standards set forth herein. The
director is authorized to take any measure not prohibited by law to obtain
compliance with this chapter. (Ord. 08-08, 7-21-2008)
9-13-13: RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS:
The following signs shall be permitted in residential districts except that no
sign shall be located closer than one-half (1/2) of the required setback
distance of the lot:
   (A)   Nameplates, identification, and construction signs subject to the
following:
      1.   Lots that contain single-family dwellings shall be permitted to have
two (2) nameplates not to exceed two (2) square feet in area.
      2.   Lots with multi-family dwellings shall be permitted to have one
identification sign not to exceed twelve (12) square feet in area.
      3.   In connection with the construction or remodeling (construction
sign) of a building or subdivision there shall be permitted one sign not to
exceed twenty-four (24) square feet in area; on corner lots two (2) signs will
be permitted provided they face different streets. All construction signs shall
be removed within fourteen (14) days after occupancy permits are granted for
the building or subdivision, whichever may be applicable. Provided, however,
for subdivisions this section shall only be interpreted as allowing one
construction sign (or 2 signs in the case of a corner lot) per subdivision.
   (B)   Temporary Signs: Subject to the following limitations, any lot not
containing or affiliated with single-family or multi-family dwelling(s) may
have erected a temporary sign such as a banner, arrow sign or portable
electronic message board thereon upon the issuance by the building and planning
department of a temporary sign permit (at no cost):
      1.   Not more than one temporary sign shall be erected on a lot at a
time.
      2.   Temporary signs shall be permitted only during a period authorized
by a temporary sign permit.
      3.   Temporary sign permits shall be valid for a period of thirty (30)
consecutive days.
      4.   No temporary sign permit shall be issued for a period of thirty (30)
days following the expiration of a previously issued temporary sign permit.
      5.   Temporary ground signs and banners shall not exceed twenty four (24)
square feet in dimension. Arrow boards and electronic message boards shall not
exceed forty (40) square feet in dimension.
      6.   Temporary signs shall be subject to and governed by all provisions
of this chapter of general applicability including, but not limited to,
sections
9-13-10 , "Appearance Standards", and
9-13-11 , "Prohibited Signs", of this chapter.
   (C)   Signs identified above in subsections (A) and (B) may be illuminated
by external means only (e.g., light bulb). Said illumination shall not be
flashing. (Ord. 08-08, 7-21-2008; amd. Ord. 23-06, 9-5-2023)
9-13-14: COMMERCIAL DISTRICTS:
All signs on a zoning lot shall conform to the homogenous signage system which
has been submitted to the village at the time of erection of the first sign on
the lot. In all commercial districts, the following signs shall be permitted on
a zoning lot, subject to the requirements set forth herein:
   (A)   Pole Signs:
      1.   Pole signs fronting Interstate 57 and Division Street (County
Highway 9) between South Creek Drive on the east to Spruce Street on the west
shall have a maximum surface area of three hundred (300) square feet per face,
with a maximum surface area of six hundred (600) square feet to include all
faces of the sign. Such signs shall not exceed a height of sixty feet (60') at
their highest point. (Ord. 08-08, 7-21-2008)
      2.   Pole signs fronting arterial roads Route 45 and County Highway 9
(other than those areas referenced in subsection (A)1 of this section) shall
have a maximum surface area of one hundred fifty (150) square feet per face,
with a maximum surface area of three hundred (300) square feet to include all
faces of the sign. Such signs shall not exceed thirty feet (30') at their
highest point. (Ord. 08-08, 7-21-2008; amd. Ord. 12-34, 2-19-2013)
      3.   Pole signs in all other areas shall have a maximum surface area of
thirty two (32) square feet per face, with a maximum surface area of sixty four
(64) square feet to include all faces of the sign. Such signs shall not extend
above the roofline or thirty feet (30') in height, whichever is the lowest.
      4.   No more than one pole sign shall be permitted on a zoning lot.
Provided, however, corner or double lots located in the area specified in
subsection (A)1 of this section may have two (2) signs, one facing each street,
provided that the total permitted square footage area and height of the signs
combined do not exceed the requirements as set forth above.
      5.   No pole or ground sign shall be located closer than fifty feet (50')
from another pole or ground sign regardless if located on the same zoning lot.
The signpost or other material used to support the sign shall not be included
in the calculation for sign area. Provided, however, any attachment or support
that functions as signage shall be included in the calculation for sign area.
Where the sign is placed at the top or side of a berm, the height of the sign
shall be measured from the base of the berm.
   (B)   Ground Signs:
      1.   Ground signs shall have a maximum surface area of thirty two (32)
square feet per face, with a maximum surface area of sixty four (64) square
feet to include all sides.
      2.   Ground signs shall not exceed a height of eight feet (8') at their
highest point.
      3.   No more than one pole sign or ground sign shall be permitted on a
zoning lot. Provided, however, corner or double lots located in the area
specified in subsection (A)1 of this section may have two (2) signs, one facing
each street, provided that the total permitted square footage area and height
of the signs combined do not exceed the requirements as set forth above.
      4.   No ground sign shall be located closer than fifty feet (50') from
another pole or ground sign regardless if located on the same zoning lot or
not.
   (C)   Business Developments: Signs for integrated planned business
developments in single ownership and management or under unified control:
      1.   Ground and pole signs shall have a maximum surface area of one
hundred fifty (150) square feet per face, with a maximum surface area of three
hundred (300) square feet to include all faces of the sign.
      2.   Signs shall not extend above the roofline or thirty feet (30'),
whichever is the lowest.
      3.   Signs are to be located on the zoning lot of the business
development.
      4.   Signage for individual establishments located within the business
development may be permitted on the integrated planned business development
sign. Provided, however, such signage shall be included in the calculation for
the permitted area.
      5.   Only one sign shall be permitted on zoning lots less than two and
one-half (2.5) acres. A maximum of two (2) signs shall be permitted on zoning
lots greater than two and one-half (2.5) acres.
The signpost or other material used to support the sign shall not be included
in the calculation for sign area. Provided, however, any attachment or support
that functions as signage shall be included in the calculation for sign area.
Where the sign is placed at the top or side of a berm, the height of the sign
shall be measured from the base of the berm.
   (D)   Premises Signs: Signs attached to the principal building for which the
use is devoted:
      1.   Number: One individual business identification sign shall be
permitted for each individual business establishment to identify the name,
location and nature of the business.
      2.   Maximum Area: No sign may exceed twenty percent (20%) of the area of
the face of the side of the building on which the sign is to be located or
sixty four (64) square feet in area, whichever is less.
      3.   Location: Signs may be located on the front, rear or side of the
principal building.
      4.   Maximum Height: No sign shall exceed fifteen feet (15') in height
above ground level or four feet (4') above the roofline, whichever is lower.
The bottom of the sign shall not be lower than seven feet (7') above the
finished grade of the sidewalk.
      5.   Marquees, Canopies And Awnings: Restrictions imposed on the
projection of signs over public ways shall not apply to signs located on
marquees, canopies, or awnings, provided that any sign located thereon shall be
affixed flat to the surface thereof and no sign shall extend vertically or
horizontally beyond the limits of said marquee, canopy or awning. Individual,
freestanding letters may project to a height not to exceed thirty inches (30")
above a marquee or canopy.
   (E)   Directional Signs: In addition to other signs allowed in commercial
districts, a maximum of two (2) directional signs shall be permitted per zoning
lot. Directional signs shall not exceed four feet (4') in height and shall have
a maximum surface area of six (6) square feet per face of a sign. (Ord. 08-08,
7-21-2008)
   (F)   Illumination:
      1.   A rotating beam, beacon or illumination device resembling an
emergency light or traffic signal shall not be affixed or otherwise attached to
any sign. (Ord. 11-05, 6-20-2011)
      2.   Electronic message board signs, including LED and similar changeable
electronic variable message signs, may only display time, temperature,
alphanumeric text, logos and graphics. Flashing lights, strobe lights, moving
lights, continuous scrolling, shaking of the sign's display and other
distractive effects are strictly prohibited. Electronic message board signs may
only be used to advertise business, products or services available on the
premises on which the sign is located, to display time and temperature, and to
promote charitable organizations or civic events. (Ord. 15-36, 12-21-2015)
   (G)   Signs Accessory To Commercial Use:
      1.   Outside Display Areas: Racks for the display of products may be
located outside in locations that allow for the safe and efficient access to
the property. No more than two (2) outside display areas shall be permitted on
the lot.
      2.   On Premises Locations: Items for sale on the premises may be
displayed within ten feet (10') of the principal building. Products may be
displayed under group island canopies or between pumps within the area of the
pump island base. (Ord. 08-08, 7-21-2008)
      3.   Temporary Signs: Subject to the following limitations, a business
may erect a temporary sign such as a banner, arrow sign or portable electronic
message board on a lot upon the issuance by the building and planning
department of a temporary sign permit (at no cost):
         (a)   Not more than one temporary sign shall be erected on a lot at a
time.
         (b)   Temporary signs shall be permitted only during a period
authorized by a temporary sign permit.
         (c)   Temporary sign permits shall be valid for a period of thirty
(30) consecutive days.
         (d)   No temporary sign permit shall be issued for a period of thirty
(30) days following the expiration of a previously issued temporary sign
permit.
         (e)   Temporary ground signs and banners shall not exceed twenty four
(24) square feet in dimension. Arrow boards and electronic message boards shall
not exceed forty (40) square feet in dimension.
         (f)   Temporary signs shall be subject to and governed by all
provisions of this chapter of general applicability including, but not limited
to, sections
9-13-10, "Appearance Standards", and
9-13-11, "Prohibited Signs", of this chapter. (Ord. 16-13, 8-15-2016)
   (H)   Signs Permitted In Commercial Districts: Signs as referenced in
subsections
9-13-13(A)3 and (C) of this chapter shall be permitted in commercial districts
subject to the standards set forth therein. (Ord. 08-08, 7-21-2008)
9-13-15: INDUSTRIAL DISTRICTS:
All signs permitted in commercial districts shall be permitted in industrial
districts. (Ord. 08-08, 7-21-2008)
9-13-16: AGRICULTURAL DISTRICTS:
Signs allowed in residential districts shall be allowed in agricultural
districts subject to the standards set forth therein. All signs that are
permitted as identified in subsection
9-13-14(A) of this chapter shall be allowed in agricultural districts as a
special use. (Ord. 08-08, 7-21-2008)
9-13-17: WAYFINDER SIGNS:
The village of Manteno is authorized to construct, operate and maintain
wayfinder signs on public property or in a public right of way for the purposes
of directing the public's attention to businesses, governmental buildings,
historical sites, hospitals, parks, public property, schools, streets, or other
similar locations within the corporate limits of the village of Manteno and
village owned property outside of village limits.
   (A)   The village of Manteno shall have the sole authority to determine the
location, number, size and style of wayfinder signs.
   (B)   The village of Manteno shall have the sole authority to determine the
location, number, size and style of the individual placards to be affixed to
wayfinder signs.
   (C)   Private entities may apply to the office of the village clerk to have
their business names placed on an individual placard at their own cost for the
reproduction and installation of the placard. The placard will be ordered
through the village of Manteno to ensure its conformity to other placards and
wayfinder signs throughout the village.
   (D)   Only those entities licensed to conduct business within the village of
Manteno, and currently in operation, may be granted the right to have a placard
affixed to a wayfinder sign.
   (E)   The village clerk shall have the right to deny any request for a
placard to be affixed to a wayfinder sign for any reason including, but not
limited to, lack of space, aesthetics, public/traffic safety, or nonconformance
with the rules established by the village administrator.
   (F)   Priority for placard space on a wayfinder sign shall be given to the
locations of governmental buildings, historical sites, parks, public locations,
streets and locations of public accommodation such as schools and hospitals.
   (G)   Priority for private entities shall be based upon the timeliness of
the application and payment. The village shall have the right to remove or move
the placard of a private entity, without prior notice, so as to make space for
placards identifying the locations specified in subsection (F) of this section.
Any placard so removed shall be affixed to another wayfinder sign as space
becomes available.
   (H)   The village administrator shall establish written rules for the
erection, maintenance and the removal of individual placards on wayfinder
signs. The village administrator shall establish a monthly fee to be paid by
private entities having their names affixed to a wayfinder sign for the
continued maintenance of wayfinder signs throughout the village. (Ord. 12-07,
5-21-2012)
9-13-18: FB-1 ROUTE 50 CORRIDOR DISTRICT:
All permitted signs in the Route 50 corridor district are subject to the
requirements set forth in section
9-10C-4 of this title. (Ord. 12-34, 2-19-2013)
CHAPTER 14
ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT
SECTION:
9-14-1: Administrative Organization Of Title
9-14-2: Office Of Code Enforcement Officer
9-14-3: Office Of The Planning Department
9-14-4: Office Of Village Clerk
9-14-5: Zoning Board Of Appeals (Rep. by Ord. 05-01, 5-16-2005)
9-14-6: Village Board Of Trustees
9-14-7: Planning Commission
9-14-8: Building Permits
9-14-9: Certificate Of Compliance (Rep. by Ord. 07-60, 2-19-2008)
9-14-10: Variances
9-14-11: Appeals
9-14-12: Special Use Permits
9-14-13: Amendments
9-14-14: Notice Provisions
9-14-15: Temporary Permits
9-14-16: Fees
9-14-17: Penalties
9-14-18: Reversion
9-14-19: Rehearings
9-14-1: ADMINISTRATIVE ORGANIZATION OF TITLE:
The administration of this title is vested in the following offices or
agencies:
The office of code enforcement officer (section
9-14-2 of this chapter).
The office of the planning department (section
9-14-3 of this chapter).
The office of village clerk (section
9-14-4 of this chapter).
The village board of trustees (section
9-14-6 of this chapter).
The village planning commission (section
9-14-7 of this chapter). (Ord. 99-06, 6-21-1999; amd. Ord. 05-01, 5-16-2005)
9-14-2: OFFICE OF CODE ENFORCEMENT OFFICER:
The code enforcement officer shall mean the director of building and zoning as
established in title 1, chapter 22 of this code. (Ord. 04-45, 4-4-2005)
9-14-3: OFFICE OF THE PLANNING DEPARTMENT:
The authorized organizational personnel of the planning department shall
administer that portion of this title as required, and shall:
   (A)   Prepare and cause to be published in a newspaper as a legal notice, on
or before April 30 of each year, maps showing the existing zoning uses,
divisions, restrictions, regulations and classifications in effect.
   (B)   Maintain permanent and current records of this title including, but
not limited to, all maps, amendments, special use permits, planned unit
developments, variations, appeals, and applications thereof.
   (C)   Advise all persons seeking zoning information of the existence of
official plans of the village and the relationship of these plans to zoning.
   (D)   Provide and maintain a source of public information relative to all
matters arising out of this title. (Ord. 99-06, 6-21-1999)
   (E)   Receive, file and forward to the village board (with copies to the
planning commission where applicable) all applications for amendments, special
use permits, planned unit developments and other matters on which the village
board is required to pass under this title.
   (F)   Receive, file and forward to the planning commission all applications
for variations and other matters on which the commission is required to pass
under this title. (Ord. 99-06, 6-21-1999; amd. Ord. 05-01, 5-16-2005)
   (G)   Keep the village board advised on zoning activities. (Ord. 99-06, 6-
21-1999)
9-14-4: OFFICE OF VILLAGE CLERK:
The village clerk and his/her authorized organizational personnel shall
administer that portion of this title prescribing duties for the village clerk,
and shall: (Ord. 99-06, 6-21-1999)
   (A)   Accept appeals filed in the village clerk's office and forward same to
the village planning commission for appropriate action. (Ord. 99-06, 6-21-1999;
amd. Ord. 05-01, 5-16-2005)
   (B)   Maintain copies of this title and the official zoning map for
reference by the public. (Ord. 99-06, 6-21-1999)
9-14-5: ZONING BOARD OF APPEALS:
(Rep. by Ord. 05-01, 5-16-2005)
9-14-6: VILLAGE BOARD OF TRUSTEES:
The village board shall establish the standards, procedures and contents of
this title and shall reserve certain matters of final decision to itself.
Decisions of the village board shall be subject to judicial review as the law
may provide, and the jurisdiction of the village board shall be: (Ord. 99-06,
6-21-1999)
   (A)   To decide variations, special uses, amendments (text and map) and
planned unit developments after report by the village planning commission.
   (B)   To confirm appointments to the planning commission. (Ord. 99-06, 6-21-
1999; amd. Ord. 05-01, 5-16-2005)
   (C)   To decide all matters required by this title.
   (D)   To initiate text and comprehensive amendments to this title. (Ord. 99-
06, 6-21-1999)
9-14-7: PLANNING COMMISSION:
The planning commission shall have the following jurisdiction and authority:
   (A)   Board Of Appeals: To hear and decide appeals from, and to review
orders, decisions, or determinations made by the director of building and
zoning and to that end have the power of the director of building and zoning
with respect to such order, decision, or determination.
   (B)   Variations: To hear, review, and offer its recommendations to the
village president and board of trustees on applications for variations from the
requirements of the Manteno zoning ordinance.
   (C)   Comprehensive Plan: To prepare and recommend a comprehensive plan,
including an official map, to the village president and board of trustees.
   (D)   Comprehensive Plan Amendments: To review, prepare, and recommend to
the village president and board of trustees changes in and amendments to the
comprehensive plan, including the official map.
   (E)   Zoning Ordinance Amendments: To initiate, hear, review, and offer its
recommendations to the village president and board of trustees on applications
for amendments to the Manteno zoning ordinance.
   (F)   Special Use Permits: To hear, review, and offer its recommendations to
the village president and board of trustees on applications for special use
permits.
   (G)   Planned Unit Development: To hear, review, and offer its
recommendations to the village president and board of trustees on applications
for planned unit development approval.
   (H)   Site Plan Approval: To hear, review, and offer its recommendations to
the village president and board of trustees on applications for, or appeals
from the director of building and zoning denial of, site plan approval made to
the village president and board of trustees. (Ord. 05-01, 5-16-2005)
9-14-8: BUILDING PERMITS:
   (A)   Requirements And Restrictions: The building permit purchaser shall
comply with all requirements and restrictions as set forth in this title, all
requirements and restrictions as set forth in title 8 of this code and all
requirements and restrictions that appear on the current building permit
application as approved by the village board.
   (B)   Penalties: Any person who, either intentionally or unintentionally,
disregards, disobeys, neglects, omits or refuses to comply with, or resists
enforcement of any provisions of this section shall be subject to a fine of not
less than fifty dollars ($50.00) nor more than seven hundred fifty dollars
($750.00) for each offense. Each day a violation exists shall constitute a
separate offense. Any work done, actions taken or projects completed without a
required permit or inspections shall, without exception, be subject to all
application requirements, fees, inspections and penalties as required by this
section. Any illegal work, action, project or use begun, continued or completed
that does not comply with this title or other village ordinance, shall be
stopped, removed, or altered by the order of the director of building and
zoning. (Ord. 07-60, 2-19-2008)
9-14-9: CERTIFICATE OF COMPLIANCE:
(Rep. by Ord. 07-60, 2-19-2008)
9-14-10: VARIANCES:
   (A)   Authority: The planning commission, after a public hearing, shall
recommend to the village board, any variance of the regulations of this title.
Variance may be requested only in cases where there are practical difficulties
or particular hardships in the way of carrying out the strict letter of the
regulations of this title relating to the use, construction or alterations of
buildings or structures or the use of land. The variance is intended as a
device for adjustment where this title creates unnecessary and undue hardship
in unusual cases, to give affected property owners rights as nearly equal as
possible to those of others in the same district. However, no variance shall be
granted under this section to allow a structure or use in a district restricted
against such structure or use. Variance may be recommended only where such
commission makes findings of fact in accordance with the standards hereinafter
prescribed, and further, finds that there are practical difficulties or
particular hardships in the way of carrying out the strict letter of the
regulations of this title.
   (B)   Application And Notice Of Hearing: An application for a variation
shall be filed in writing with the code enforcement officer. The application
shall contain such information as the planning commission and village board
may, by rule, require. Notice of the time and place of such public hearing
shall be published at least once in the official newspaper not more than thirty
(30) nor less than fifteen (15) days before the date of the hearing.
   (C)   Findings: The planning commission shall not recommend to vary the
provisions of this title as authorized in this section, unless it shall have
made findings based upon the evidence presented regarding the following points:
(Ord. 99-06, 6-21-1999; amd. Ord. 05-01, 5-16-2005)
      1.   That special conditions and circumstances exist which are peculiar
to the land, structure, or building involved and which are not applicable to
other lands, structures, or buildings in the same zoning districts. In
addition:
         (a)   Such hardship is not shared generally by other properties in the
same district and the same vicinity. (Ord. 99-06, 6-21-1999)
         (b)   The condition or situation of the property is not of so general
or recurring a nature as to make reasonably practicable the formulation of a
general regulation to be adopted as an amendment to this title. (In such cases,
the commission shall take steps to initiate consideration of such an
amendment.) (Ord. 99-06, 6-21-1999; amd. Ord. 05-01, 5-16-2005)
      2.   That the special conditions and circumstances do not result from the
actions of the applicant or by any person presently having an interest in the
property.
         (a)   The hardship is created by the physical character of the
property, including dimensions, topography, or soil conditions, or by other
extraordinary situation or condition of such property.
         (b)   Self-inflicted or personal hardship shall not be considered as
grounds for a variance, since the variance will continue to affect the
character of the neighborhood after title to the property has passed.
      3.   That granting the variance requested will not confer on the
applicant any special privilege or convenience that is denied by this title to
other lands, buildings, or structures in the same zoning district.
      4.   That literal interpretation of the provisions of this title would
deprive the applicant of rights commonly enjoyed by other properties in the
same zoning district under the terms of this title and would work unnecessary
and undue hardship on the applicant.
      5.   That the variance granted is the minimum variance that will make
possible the reasonable use of the land, building or structure.
      6.   That the granting of the variance will be in harmony with the
general intent and purpose of this title and that such variance will not be
injurious to the public welfare. Further, that the granting of the variance
will not be of substantial detriment to adjacent property values and that the
character of the district will not be changed by such granting. (Ord. 99-06, 6-
21-1999)
   (D)   Conditions And Safeguards: In recommending the granting of any
variance, the commission may specify appropriate conditions, safeguards and
restrictions upon the premises benefited by a variance as may be necessary to
comply with the standards set forth in this section to reduce or minimize the
effect of such variance upon other property in the neighborhood, and to
implement the general purpose and intent of this title. Violation of such
conditions and safeguards, when made a part of the terms under which the
variance is granted, shall be deemed a violation of this title.
   (E)   Restrictions: Under no circumstances except as permitted above shall
the commission recommend to grant a variance to permit a use not generally or
by special exception permitted in the zoning district involved or any use
expressly or by implication prohibited by the terms of this title in the zoning
district. No nonconforming use of neighboring lands, structures, or buildings
in the same zoning district and no permitted use of lands, structures, or
buildings in other zoning districts shall be considered grounds for the
authorization of a variance. (Ord. 99-06, 6-21-1999; amd. Ord. 05-01, 5-16-
2005)
   (F)   Effective Period: No order of the village board granting a variation
shall be valid for a period longer than one hundred eighty (180) days from the
date of such order, unless a building permit is obtained within such period and
the erection or alteration of a building is started or the use is commenced
within such period. The village board may grant one extension, valid for no
more than one hundred eighty (180) additional days, upon written application
and good cause shown, without notice or hearing, provided such application is
received before the expiration of the original effective period. If any of the
benefits conferred by a variation, whether heretofore or hereafter granted, are
abandoned, or are not utilized for any continuous period of one year, said
variation shall, to the extent of such abandonment or nonutilization, become
valid only after a public hearing as provided herein. (Ord. 99-06, 6-21-1999)
   (G)   Decisions: Not more than sixty (60) days after the close of the public
hearing, the planning commission shall make its findings of fact and its
recommendation, in writing, to the village board. The concurring vote of four
(4) members of the commission shall be necessary to grant a variance. The
village board may, through a motion passed by a majority of votes, accept or
reject the recommendation of the planning commission. (Ord. 99-06, 6-21-1999;
amd. Ord. 05-01, 5-16-2005)
9-14-11: APPEALS:
   (A)   Authority: The planning commission shall hear and make recommendations
to the village board from an administrative order, requirement or determination
under this title.
   (B)   Scope Of Appeals: An appeal, in which it is alleged that there is
error in any decision made by the code enforcement officer under this title,
may be taken to the planning commission by any person or governmental agency
aggrieved by such decision or by any department, or officer of the village.
Such an appeal shall be taken and filed with the village clerk within twenty
(20) days from the date of the action on which the appeal is taken specifying
the grounds thereof. The appeal shall specify the alleged error or errors in
such order, requirement, decision, or determination. The village clerk shall,
without delay, forward to the commission a copy of the notice of appeal
together with all the records pertaining to the decision on which the appeal is
made.
   (C)   Stay Of Proceedings: An appeal shall stay all proceedings in
furtherance of the decision appealed unless the code enforcement officer
certifies to the planning commission after the notice of the appeal has been
filed with him, that by reason of facts stated in the certificate, a stay
would, in his opinion, cause imminent peril to life or property. In this event,
the proceedings shall not be stayed unless by a restraining order, which may be
granted by the commission or by a court of record on application, on notice to
the code enforcement officer and on due cause shown.
   (D)   Hearing: The planning commission shall render a written recommendation
on the appeal within a reasonable time, but in no event more than sixty (60)
days after the closing of the public hearing, and shall promptly forward a copy
of the recommendation to the village board. The village board may affirm or may
reverse, wholly or in part, or modify the decision of the code enforcement
officer, as in its opinion ought to be done, and to that end shall have the
powers of the code enforcement officer. All decisions of the village board
shall, in all instances, be final administrative determinations and shall be
subject to judicial review only in accordance with applicable Illinois
statutes. (Ord. 99-06, 6-21-1999; amd. Ord. 05-01, 5-16-2005)
9-14-12: SPECIAL USE PERMITS:
   (A)   Purpose: This title is based upon the division of the village into
districts, within which the use of land, and the uses of bulk of buildings and
structures, are substantially uniform. However, within the village generally,
or within certain zoning districts, certain uses specified in this title are of
a nature requiring special and intensive review to determine whether they
should be permitted in specified locations, and to identify the special
conditions and safeguards which should be applied if permission is granted in
such locations. Special use procedures as provided herein are intended to
assure that such review is made and that appropriate conditions and safeguards
are attached. Special use procedures shall be applied, and special exceptions
granted, only as, and in cases, specified in this title.
   (B)   Categories: It is recognized that there are special uses which,
because of their unique characteristics, can only be properly classified in any
particular district or districts upon consideration in each case of the impact
of those uses upon neighboring land and of the public need for the particular
use at the particular location. Such special uses fall into three (3)
categories:
      1.   Uses publicly operated or traditionally affected with a public
interest;
      2.   Uses entirely private in character, but of such an unusual nature
that their operation may give rise to unique problems with respect to their
impact upon neighboring property, public facilities, or the village as a whole;
and
      3.   Uses, either public or private, that because of past or present
conditions, need special consideration. (Ord. 99-06, 6-21-1999)
   (C)   Authority: Special use permits shall be reviewed and heard by the
planning commission, but only in accordance with the requirements hereinafter
set forth. The planning commission shall make their recommendations to the
village board.
   (D)   Application And Notice Of Hearing: An application for a special use
permit shall be filed with the code enforcement officer, who shall forward a
copy of the application to the planning commission. The application shall be in
such form, contain such information, and be accompanied by such plans, as the
village board, planning commission, or code enforcement officer may deem
appropriate. Notice of the time and place of such hearing shall be published at
least once, not less than fifteen (15) nor more than thirty (30) days before
the hearing, in a newspaper of general circulation in the village. The
published notice may be supplemented by such additional form of notice as the
board may provide by rule. The appellant shall have notified all adjoining
owners by certified letter, return receipt requested, at least five (5) days
prior to the hearing. The letter shall indicate the time, place and date of the
public hearing and give a description of the request. (Ord. 99-06, 6-21-1999;
amd. Ord. 05-01, 5-16-2005)
   (E)   Application Standards: The application shall contain the following
information:
      1.   The extent to which the proposed special use departs from the zoning
and subdivision regulations otherwise applicable to the subject property,
including, but not limited to, the density, dimensions, area, bulk, and uses,
and the reasons why such departures are deemed to be in the public interest.
      2.   In what respects the proposed special use meets the requirements and
standards of the special use regulations.
      3.   The method by which the proposed special use makes adequate
provisions for public services, provided adequate control over vehicular
traffic, provides for and protects designated, common open space and furthers
the amenities of light and air, recreation and visual enjoyment.
      4.   The relationship and compatibility of the proposed special use to
adjacent properties and neighborhoods.
      5.   The desirability of the proposed special use to physical
development, tax base and economic well being of the village.
      6.   The conformity with the intent and spirit of the comprehensive plans
of the village. (Ord. 99-06, 6-21-1999)
   (F)   Recommendation By The Planning Commission: Within sixty (60) days
after the close of the hearing, unless the applicant shall have consented to a
longer period, the commission shall transmit to the village board a written
report giving its findings and recommendations for special use permits issued,
and on the restrictions to be imposed upon the premises benefited by the
special use permit. Where the special use is denied, the record of the
commission shall set forth, and the applicant shall receive notice of, the
specific grounds for denial.
   (G)   Action By The Commission, Findings Required:
      1.   Before granting any application for a special use, the commission
shall make written findings that it is empowered under specified sections of
this title to grant the special use and that the granting of the exception will
not adversely affect the public interest. The commission shall also make
written findings certifying compliance with the specific rules and requirements
governing individual special uses, and that, where applicable, satisfactory
provision and arrangement has been made concerning the following: (Ord. 99-06,
6-21-1999; amd. Ord. 05-01, 5-16-2005)
         (a)   Ingress and egress to the property and proposed structures or
uses thereon, with particular reference to automotive and pedestrian safety and
convenience, traffic flow and control, and access in case of fire or
catastrophe.
         (b)   Off street parking and loading areas, where required, with
particular attention to the items in subsection (G)1(a) of this section.
         (c)   Refuse and service areas.
         (d)   Control of noise, glare, odor, or other potentially adverse
effects of the proposed use on nearby property, and screening or buffering to
alleviate such effects. Control of drainage and erosion.
         (e)   Utilities, with reference to location, availability and
potentially adverse appearance or other effects on surroundings.
         (f)   Signs and lighting, with reference to glare, traffic safety, and
compatibility and harmony with adjoining properties and the character of the
area.
         (g)   Required yards and other open spaces.
      2.   No special use permit will be granted unless:
         (a)   The establishment, maintenance or operation of the special use
will not be detrimental to or endanger the public health, safety, morals,
comfort or general welfare.
         (b)   The special use will not be injurious to the use and enjoyment
of other property in the immediate vicinity for the purposes already permitted,
nor substantially diminish and impair values within the neighborhood.
         (c)   The establishment of the special use will not impede the normal
and orderly development and improvement of surrounding property for uses
permitted in the district. (Ord. 99-06, 6-21-1999)
      3.   The special use shall in all other respects conform to the
applicable regulation of the district in which it is located, except as such
regulations may in each instance be modified by the village board pursuant to
the recommendation of the planning commission.
   (H)   Conditions And Safeguards: The commission may impose such conditions
relating to the special use as it may deem necessary in the particular case to
protect the public interest, in relation to the items listed at subsection (G)1
of this section and as may otherwise be reasonably necessary, and may require a
guarantee or bond to ensure continued compliance with such conditions and
continued maintenance of such safeguards. Violations of conditions or
safeguards lawfully attached to any special use shall be deemed violations of
this title. (Ord. 99-06, 6-21-1999; amd. Ord. 05-01, 5-16-2005)
   (I)   Special Exceptions Apply To Property, Not Person: When granted, a
special exception, together with any conditions or safeguards attached, shall
apply to the land, structure or use for which it was issued, and not to a
particular person. (Ord. 99-06, 6-21-1999)
   (J)   Withdrawal Of Application; Rehearing If Withdrawn Or Denied: An
application for a special use may be withdrawn at any time, but if withdrawn
after the commission has convened the public hearing at which it was to be
considered, or if denied by the village board, substantially the same
application shall not be considered within twenty four (24) months from the
date of the withdrawal or denial. (Ord. 99-06, 6-21-1999; amd. Ord. 05-01, 5-
16-2005)
9-14-13: AMENDMENTS:
   (A)   Authority: The regulations and districts established by this title may
be amended from time to time by the village board through the enactment of an
amending ordinance. No such amendment shall be made without a public hearing
before the planning commission and a report of findings and recommendations
submitted to the village board by the planning commission.
   (B)   Initiation: Amendments may be proposed by the village board, planning
commission, code enforcement officer, and by any other person, firm or
corporation having a freehold interest, a possessory interest entitled to
exclusive possession, a contractual interest which may become a freehold
interest, an option to purchase, or any exclusive possessory interest in which
is specifically enforceable on the land which is described in the application
for an amendment.
No application for amendment to this title shall be made which proposes
reclassification of any of the same property within any zoning district that
has been subject of a public hearing held by the planning commission within
twenty four (24) months preceding the date of filing.
   (C)   Processing: The process for obtaining an amendment shall be as
follows:
      1.   An application for an amendment shall be filed with the code
enforcement officer and thereafter entered into the records of the first
meeting thereafter of the village board. The application shall be in such form
as to contain such information and be accompanied by such plans as the planning
commission and village board by rule may require.
      2.   A copy of such application shall thereafter be forwarded by the code
enforcement officer to the planning commission with a request to hold a public
hearing.
      3.   The planning commission shall hold a public hearing within ninety
(90) days after receiving the application from the code enforcement officer.
Notice of the time and place of such hearing shall be published at least once,
not less than fifteen (15) nor more than thirty (30) days before the hearing in
a newspaper of general circulation in the village. The published notice may be
supplemented by such additional form of notice as the planning commission and
village board may provide by rule. The appellant shall have notified all
adjoining owners by certified letter, return receipt requested, at least five
(5) days prior to the hearing. The letter shall indicate the time, place and
date of the public hearing and give a description of the request.
      4.   The planning commission shall, within sixty (60) days after the
hearing, transmit a written report giving its findings and recommendations to
the village board.
   (D)   Review Consideration:
      1.   In reviewing an amendment, the planning commission shall give
careful attention to the following:
         (a)   The effect of the proposed amendments on the comprehensive
planning of the entire village.
         (b)   The changes in community characteristics that may take place
because of the projected change.
         (c)   The relative effectiveness or ineffectiveness of the present
wording of the ordinance, and whether a justification for change exists because
of either special reasons or a change in conditions.
         (d)   Whether the amendment is designed to correct an improper
situation or would result merely in the granting of special privileges.
      2.   Where the purpose and effect of the proposed amendment is to change
the zoning classification of particular property, the planning commission shall
make findings based upon the evidence presented to it in each specified case
with respect to the following matters in addition to all points listed above:
         (a)   Existing uses of property within the general area of the
property in question.
         (b)   The zoning classification of property within the general area of
the property in question.
         (c)   The suitability of the property in question for the use
permitted under the existing zoning classification.
         (d)   The trend of development, if any, in the general area of the
property in question, including changes, if any, which may have taken place
since the day the property in question was placed in its present zoning
classification.
         (e)   Conformance or nonconformance with officially adopted plans of
the village.
         (f)   The proposed amendment is in the public interest and is not
solely for the interest of the applicant.
   (E)   Decisions: The village board, upon recommendation of the planning
commission, may grant or deny any proposed amendment in accordance with
applicable Illinois statutes, or may refer it back to the planning commission
for further consideration.
In cases of written protest against any proposed amendment, signed and
acknowledged by the owners of twenty percent (20%) of the frontage proposed to
be altered or by the owners of twenty percent (20%) of the frontage immediately
adjoining or across an alley therefrom, or by the owners of twenty percent
(20%) of the frontage directly opposite the frontage proposed to be altered,
such amendment shall not be passed except by the favorable vote of five (5)
members of the village board.
If no action is taken by the village board within six (6) months after the
report of the planning commission, the application shall be deemed to have been
denied and shall not thereafter be granted. (Ord. 99-06, 6-21-1999)
9-14-14: NOTICE PROVISIONS:
   (A)   Publication Of Notice: Notice of the time and place of the hearing of
any proposed variation, special use, amendment, or planned development shall be
given by the code enforcement officer not more than thirty (30) days nor less
than fifteen (15) days before the hearing by publishing such notice at least
once in one or more newspapers published in the village or in general
circulation within the village.
   (B)   Contents Of Notice: In each case where notice is required to be given
under this section, such notice shall contain the following information:
      1.   Time and place of public hearing.
      2.   Common street address and legal description of subject property.
      3.   A brief statement setting forth the nature of the proposed
variation, special use, amendment, or planned development.
      4.   The name of each applicant. (Ord. 99-06, 6-21-1999)
   (C)   Notice To Owners Of Nearby Property:
      1.   At the time of the filing of an application for any proposed
variation, special use, amendment or planned development, the applicant shall
furnish to the code enforcement officer a complete list of the names and
addresses of the owners of all property adjacent to or across from the subject
site within a one hundred fifty foot (150') radius from any property line. The
public roads, streets, alley, and other public ways shall be excluded in
determining this requirement. The property owners to be notified shall be those
whom were sent tax bills for the general taxes for the last preceding tax year.
The planning commission shall hear no case unless the applicant furnishes such
list. (Ord. 99-06, 6-21-1999; amd. Ord. 05-01, 5-16-2005)
      2.   The applicant for such zoning action shall send written notice by
return receipt certified mail to all persons whose names appear on the
adjoining property owner's list. The applicant shall be responsible for
providing the code enforcement officer with the receipts at least twenty four
(24) hours prior to the public hearing. (Ord. 99-06, 6-21-1999)
9-14-15: TEMPORARY PERMITS:
   (A)   Authority: The code enforcement officer is authorized by this title to
issue a temporary permit for uses specifically authorized in particular zoning
districts as temporary permit uses.
   (B)   Application: An application for a temporary permit shall be made to
the code enforcement officer in writing on a form provided by the village. The
code enforcement officer shall issue a permit only after he is satisfied that
the use allowed by the temporary permit will not adversely affect the public
health, safety or general welfare of the village and/or immediate neighborhood.
   (C)   Hearing: The code enforcement officer may, if he so desires, hold a
public hearing on the request for a temporary permit, or may contact the
property owners affected by the proposed use regarding their opinion of the
use.
   (D)   Conditions: The code enforcement officer may require that certain
conditions relating to the public health, safety or general welfare be complied
with before the issuance of a temporary permit.
   (E)   Decisions: The code enforcement officer shall render a written
decision on the application for a temporary permit within a reasonable time and
promptly forward a copy of the decision to the petitioner. Appeals from the
decision of the code enforcement officer can be made to the village board.
(Ord. 99-06, 6-21-1999)
9-14-16: FEES:
The village board shall establish and amend from time to time a schedule of
fees, charges and expenses required for building permits, zoning certificates,
certificates of occupancy, variation, special use permits, temporary use
permits, amendments, signs and other matters pertaining to this title.
Until all such required fees have been paid, no application for any of the
above shall be deemed to have been filed and no action shall be taken on such
application.
All fees shall be paid to the office of the code enforcement officer or the
office of the village clerk. (Ord. 99-06, 6-21-1999)
9-14-17: PENALTIES:
Any person who either intentionally or unintentionally violates, disobeys,
omits, neglects or refuses to comply with, or resists enforcement of any
provisions of this title, shall be subject to a fine of not less than fifty
dollars ($50.00) nor more than seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00) for each
offense and suffer the penalties herein provided. (Ord. 13-33, 2-18-2014)
Nothing herein contained shall prevent the village from taking such other
lawful action as is necessary to prevent or remedy any violation. (Ord. 99-06,
6-21-1999)
9-14-18: REVERSION:
   (A)   Scope Of Authority:
      1.   A variance, special use permit or change in zoning may be reverted
or revoked as provided in this chapter if the testimony upon which such
variance, special use permit or zoning change was falsely given.
      2.   A change of zoning shall be reverted as provided for in this chapter
if the permitted variance, special use or permitted use is not in full
compliance with the applicable requirements of this title.
      3.   A change of zoning may be reverted as provided for in this title if
the land zoned has not been put to use as allowed in such zoned district within
three (3) years of its change of zoning. (Ord. 99-06, 6-21-1999)
   (B)   Initiation: Reversions may be proposed by the village board, planning
commission, code enforcement officer or by any person aggrieved by a variance,
special use permit or change in zoning. (Ord. 99-06, 6-21-1999; amd. Ord. 05-
01, 5-16-2005)
   (C)   Processing: The process for reverting a variance or special use permit
or change in zoning shall be as follows: (Ord. 99-06, 6-21-1999)
      1.   An application for a reversion shall be filed with the code
enforcement officer and shall be in such form, contain such information and be
accompanied by such plans as the planning commission by rule may require.
      2.   A copy of such application shall thereafter be forwarded by the code
enforcement officer to the planning commission with a request to hold a public
hearing.
The planning commission shall hear special use requests, changes in zoning and
reversions of variances.
      3.   The planning commission shall hold a public hearing within ninety
(90) days after receiving the application from the code enforcement officer.
Notice of the time and place of such hearing shall be published at least once,
not less than fifteen (15) nor more than thirty (30) days before the hearing in
a newspaper of general circulation in the village. A copy of such notice shall
be mailed by registered letter, return receipt requested, to the current
interest holders of the land as found on the last tax assessment. (Ord. 99-06,
6-21-1999; amd. Ord. 05-01, 5-16-2005)
      4.   The public hearing shall be held in the village hall. (Ord. 99-06,
6-21-1999)
      5.   The planning commission shall, within sixty (60) days after the
hearing, transmit a written report giving its findings and recommendations to
the village board.
   (D)   Decision: The village board, upon recommendation of the planning
commission, may grant or deny any proposed reversion or may refer it back to
the planning commission for further consideration. (Ord. 99-06, 6-21-1999; amd.
Ord. 05-01, 5-16-2005)
9-14-19: REHEARINGS:
Once the village board has decided a case, substantially the same case shall
not be allowed to come before it again. All decisions of the village board
shall, in all instances, be final administrative determinations and shall be
subject to judicial review only in accordance with applicable Illinois
statutes.
   (A)   Applications For Rehearings: Applications for rehearings shall be
filed with the village clerk. Evidence in support of the application shall
initially be limited to that necessary to enable the village board to determine
whether there has been a substantial change in the facts, evidence, or
conditions in the case.
   (B)   Determination By The Village Board: Within thirty (30) days of
acceptance of the application by the village clerk, the village board shall
make its determination on the application for rehearing. The application shall
be denied if it is found from record that there has been no substantial change
in the facts, evidence, or conditions in the case. If the village board finds
that there has been a change, the applicant shall be authorized to submit a new
application or appeal and the appropriate procedures shall be followed to
continue the process. (Ord. 99-06, 6-21-1999)
CHAPTER 15
WIND ENERGY CONVERSION SYSTEMS
SECTION:
9-15-1: Purpose
9-15-2: Definitions
9-15-3: Standards
9-15-4: Maintenance And Operation
9-15-5: Noise Levels
9-15-6: Decommissioning Plan
9-15-1: PURPOSE:
It is the purpose of this chapter to regulate the location, installation, and
maintenance of wind energy conversion systems. The promotion of safe, effective
and efficient use of wind energy systems will be balanced against the need to
preserve and protect public health, safety and welfare. (Ord. 08-32, 4-6-2009)
9-15-2: DEFINITIONS:
APPLICANT: The person or entity filing an application under this chapter.
BUILDING MOUNTED: A wind energy conversion system that is mounted to the roof
or part of a house or building.
COMMERCIAL WIND ENERGY SYSTEM: A wind energy conversion system (WECS) or
combination of wind energy conversion systems that is designed to have a
capacity in excess of the amount needed for residential and agricultural uses
and that has a combined nameplate capacity of greater than one hundred (100)
kilowatts.
DROP LINE: The area surrounding the wind energy conversion system where the
tower would land if it were to fall.
MAST MOUNTED: Freestanding wind energy conversion system that is located near
the building(s).
OWNER: The individual or entity that intends to own and operate the wind energy
system in accordance with this chapter.
SMALL WIND ENERGY SYSTEM (NONCOMMERCIAL): A wind energy conversion system
consisting of a wind turbine, a tower, and associated controls or conversion
electronics, which has a rated capacity of not more than one hundred (100)
kilowatts and which is intended to primarily reduce on site consumption of
utility power.
TOTAL HEIGHT: The vertical distance from ground level to the center of the hub.
TOWER: Monopole structures only.
WIND TURBINE: A wind energy conversion system that converts wind energy into
electricity through the use of a wind turbine generator, and includes the
nacelle, rotor, tower, and pad transformer. (Ord. 08-32, 4-6-2009)
9-15-3: STANDARDS:
Minimum standards for special use permit. In addition to those requirements
specified in section
9-14-12 of this title, the following requirements shall be met before a special
use permit is granted to an applicant:
   (A)   Commercial Wind Energy Conversion Systems:
      1.   Building Permit: All wind energy conversion systems require a
building permit prior to the initiation of construction. Owners must comply
with all applicable building codes adopted by the village. A set of drawings
and engineering analysis that conforms to manufacturer's standards, which has
been certified by a licensed professional engineer, shall be submitted with the
building permit application.
      2.   Climb Prevention: All WECS project towers or poles must be
unclimbable by design or protected by anticlimbing devices such as:
         (a)   Fences with locking portals at least six feet (6') high; or
         (b)   Anticlimbing devices twelve feet (12') from base of pole.
      3.   Color: Towers and blades shall be painted a nonreflective,
unobtrusive color that blends into the surrounding landscape to the greatest
extent possible. Advertising, streamers and printing are prohibited.
      4.   Compliance With Additional Regulations: It shall be the
responsibility of the person in charge of the WECS project to contact the FCC
and FAA regarding additional permits necessary or any other applicable federal
or state regulations for the installation of a WECS project prior to the public
hearing before the plan commission. The WECS projects shall be UL approved and
ASEE certified or the equivalent.
      5.   Compliance With FAA: It shall be the responsibility of the person in
charge of the WECS project to complete the proper FAA applications and obtain
the proper permits for the WECS project. It shall also be the responsibility of
the person in charge of the WECS project to obtain a determination of no
significant impact to air navigation from the FAA.
      6.   Controls And Brakes: All WECS projects shall be equipped with manual
and automatic controls and mechanical brakes to limit rotation of blades to a
speed below the designed limits of a WECS. For purposes of this section,
"manual and automatic controls" mean controls which give protection to power
grids and limit rotation of a WECS' blades to below the designed limits of the
conversion system. The professional engineer or authorized factory
representative must certify that the rotor and overspeed control design and
fabrication conform to good engineering practices. No changes or alterations
from the certified design shall be permitted unless accompanied by a
professional engineer's or the authorized factory representative's statement of
certification.
      7.   Design Safety Certification: The safety of the design of all WECS
towers shall be certified by a licensed professional engineer. The standard for
certification shall be good engineering practices and shall conform to all the
village's officially adopted codes.
      8.   Height: Wind generator machine height must comply with all FAA
regulations.
      9.   Installation Certification: A licensed professional engineer or
certified manufacturer's representative or installer shall certify that the
construction and installation of the WECS project meets or exceeds the
manufacturer's construction and installation standards.
      10.   Lighting: Lighting for the towers shall be constructed in
accordance with the minimum requirements and standards allowed by the FAA or
other regulatory authority in an effort to minimize the visual impact of the
structures.
      11.   Migratory Birds: An avian study shall be conducted by a qualified
third party professional, such as an ornithologist or wildlife biologist, to
determine if there is any potential impact the WECS project may present to
migratory birds. The study must provide assurances that the WECS project does
not negatively impact the path of migratory birds. The results of the study
shall be made available at the hearing before the plan commission.
      12.   Mounting: All wind energy conversion systems shall be mast mounted.
Building mounted WECS will require an additional special use permit.
      13.   Roads: Any proposed access roads that will be used for construction
purposes shall be identified and approved by the township road commissioner or
the village engineer, whoever has jurisdiction, prior to the hearing before the
plan commission.
Any road damage caused by the transport of the facility's equipment, the
installation, or the removal, must be completely repaired to the satisfaction
of the township road commissioner or the village engineer, whoever has
jurisdiction.
      14.   Setbacks:
         (a)   Setbacks from public roads and property lines shall be
established in the underlying zoning district.
         (b)   All WECS towers shall be at least seven hundred fifty feet
(750') from any adjoining property's dwelling unit, and no less than 1.25 times
the tower height from the applying property owner's dwelling unit.
         (c)   The drop line for all WECS towers shall allow the tower, should
it fall, to remain on the owner's property in all directions.
         (d)   All WECS towers shall be set back a distance of at least 1.25
times the WECS tower height from the third party transmission lines and
telecommunications carrier facilities.
         (e)   Any variance of the applicable setback requirements, whether
required in this chapter or elsewhere in these regulations, shall be recorded
with the village clerk or Kankakee County recorder of deeds, whichever has
jurisdiction.
      15.   Warnings: A visible warning sign of "high voltage" must be placed
at the base of all WECS projects. The sign must have at a minimum six inch (6")
letters. Such signs shall be located a maximum of three hundred feet (300')
apart and at all points of site ingress and egress.
   (B)   Small Wind Energy Systems (Noncommercial):
      1.   Building Permit: All wind energy conversion systems require a
building permit prior to the initiation of construction. Owners must comply
with all applicable building codes adopted by the village. A set of drawings
and engineering analysis that conforms to manufacturer's standards, which has
been certified by a licensed professional engineer, shall be submitted with the
building permit application.
      2.   Color: Towers and blades shall be painted a nonreflective,
unobtrusive color that blends into the surrounding landscape to the greatest
extent possible. No advertising, streamers, or printing shall be allowed.
      3.   Height: The total height of a small wind energy system shall not
exceed sixty feet (60') on parcels of less than five (5) acres. For property
sizes greater than five (5) acres there is a height limitation of one hundred
feet (100'). The maximum height must be compliant with FAA standards.
      4.   Lighting: Lighting for towers shall be constructed in accordance
with the minimum requirements and standards allowed by the FAA or other
regulatory authority in an effort to minimize the visual impact of the
structures.
      5.   Installation: All noncommercial wind energy systems shall be
installed per the manufacturer's standards. The standards must include
compliance with all of the village's officially adopted codes.
      6.   Mounting: All wind energy conversion systems shall be mast mounted.
Building mounted WECS will require an additional special use permit.
      7.   Setbacks: All parts of the small wind energy conversion system shall
be subject to setback requirements, including those outlined in the underlying
zoning district and this section.
         (a)   Setbacks from public roads shall be established by the
underlying zoning district.
         (b)   Setbacks from property lines shall be a distance equal to 1.25
times the total height.
         (c)   Setbacks from the applicant's dwelling shall be a distance equal
to 1.25 times the total height.
      8.   Warnings: A visible warning sign of "high voltage" must be placed at
the base of all WECS projects. All signs, other than the manufacturer's or
installer's identification, appropriate warning signs, or owner identification
on a wind generator, tower, building, or other structure associated with a
small wind energy system, visible from any public road shall be prohibited.
      9.   Installation Certification: A licensed professional engineer or
certified manufacturer's representative or installer shall certify that the
construction and installation of the WECS project meets or exceeds the
manufacturer's construction and installation standards.
      10.   Compliance With Additional Regulations: It shall be the
responsibility of the person in charge of the WECS project to contact the FCC
and FAA regarding additional permits necessary or any other applicable federal
or state regulations for the installation of a WECS project prior to the public
hearing before the plan commission. All WECS projects shall be UL approved and
ASEE certified or the equivalent. (Ord. 08-32, 4-6-2009)
9-15-4: MAINTENANCE AND OPERATION:
   (A)   Annual Inspection: Every commercial WECS project must be inspected
annually by an authorized factory representative, at the owner's expense, to
certify that it is in good working condition and not a hazard to the public. A
copy of said annual inspection must be filed with the department of planning
and zoning within fifteen (15) days after the inspection report is received by
the WECS project owner/manager. Inspections and documentation, as specified
above, shall be required every three (3) years, at a minimum, for noncommercial
units.
   (B)   Interference: If the authorized factory representative determines that
the commercial WECS project causes severe interference with microwave
transmissions, residential television interference or radio reception, the
commercial WECS owner must take commercially reasonable steps to correct the
problem. Evidence that the authorized factory representative has determined
that no such interference will occur or that interference has been corrected
must be presented at the public hearing before the plan commission. A small
wind energy conversion system must submit to planning and zoning information
from the manufacturer that certifies that the system will not interfere with
microwave transmissions, residential television or radio reception.
   (C)   Fire Risk: All WECS projects must adhere to all applicable electrical
codes and standards and must remove fuel sources, such as vegetation, from the
immediate vicinity of electrical gear and connections. Every WECS project must
utilize twistable cables on turbines. (Ord. 08-32, 4-6-2009)
9-15-5: NOISE LEVELS:
Noise levels shall be regulated by the Illinois pollution control agency rules
and regulations and the applicant shall certify that applicant's facility is in
compliance with the same. Applicant shall provide certification from the
manufacturer that the noise level will not exceed sixty (60) decibels as
measured at the nearest property line. (Ord. 08-32, 4-6-2009)
9-15-6: DECOMMISSIONING PLAN:
   (A)   Commercial wind energy conversion systems: The WECS project must
contain a decommissioning plan to ensure it is properly decommissioned at the
end of the project life or facility abandonment. For purposes of this section,
"facility abandonment" shall mean a consecutive period of time of not less than
one year. Decommissioning shall include: removal of all structures (including
transmission equipment and fencing) and debris to a depth of four feet (4'),
restoration of the soil, and restoration of vegetation within six (6) months of
the end of project life or facility abandonment. The decommissioning plan shall
state how the facility will be decommissioned, the professional engineer's
estimated cost of decommissioning, the financial resources to be used to
accomplish decommissioning, and the escrow agent with which the resources shall
be deposited. The decommissioning plan shall be updated every six (6) years
regardless of the type of unit, at a minimum. The decommissioning plan shall
also include an agreement between the applicant and the village of Manteno
which states:
      1.   The financial resources for decommissioning, which shall be in the
form of a surety bond, or shall be deposited in an escrow account with an
escrow agent acceptable to the village board, shall be renewed annually.
      2.   If the applicant chooses an escrow agreement:
         (a)   A written escrow agreement will be prepared, establishing the
amount of disbursement; and
         (b)   The village shall have access to the escrow account funds for
the purpose of completing decommissioning if not completed by the applicant
within six (6) months of the end of project life or facility abandonment.
      3.   The village is granted the right of entry onto the site, pursuant to
reasonable notice, to effect or complete decommissioning.
      4.   The village is granted the right to seek injunctive relief to effect
or complete decommissioning, as well as the village's right to seek
reimbursement from applicant or applicant's successor for decommissioning costs
in excess of the amount deposited in escrow and to file a lien against any real
estate owned by applicant or applicant's successor, or in which they have an
interest, for the amount of the excess, and to take all steps allowed by law to
enforce said lien.
Financial provisions shall not be so onerous as to make WECS projects
unfeasible.
   (B)   Small wind energy conversion systems (noncommercial): The WECS project
application shall contain a notarized letter stating that a decommissioning
plan exists for a time when the WECS is no longer in operation. A facility
shall be deemed to have ceased operation if it has been idle for a period of
twelve (12) months. The owner must certify that decommissioning will include
removal of all structures (including transmission equipment and fencing) and
debris to a depth of four feet (4'), restoration of the soil, and restoration
of vegetation within six (6) months of the end of project life or facility
abandonment. In the event that decommissioning is not completed by the owner,
the village of Manteno is granted the right to seek reimbursement for
decommissioning costs and to file a lien against any real property owned by the
applicant or applicant's successor, or in which they have an interest, and to
take all steps allowed by law to enforce said lien. (Ord. 08-32, 4-6-2009)
CHAPTER 16
SOLAR ENERGY SYSTEMS
SECTION:
9-16-1: Purpose
9-16-2: Definitions
9-16-3: Private Solar Energy Facilities
9-16-4: Commercial Solar Energy Facility Siting Application
9-16-5: Design and Operational Standards for Commercial Solar Energy Facilities
9-16-6: Inspections
9-16-7: Commercial Solar Energy Facility Decommissioning
9-16-8: Indemnification
9-16-9: Change in Ownership or Operation
9-16-10: Violations
9-16-11: Penalties and Administration
9-16-1: PURPOSE:
It is the purpose of this chapter to regulate the siting, installation,
maintenance, operation, and decommissioning of solar energy facilities within
the corporate limits of the Village. (Ord. 25-18, 9-15-2025)
9-16-2: DEFINITIONS:
APPLICANT: Any person submitting a special use or building permit application
for the siting and installation of any SEF, as applicable.
BUILDING MOUNTED: Affixed to a principal or accessory building.
COMMERCIAL SOLAR ENERGY FACILITY (CSEF): Any device or assembly of devices
that:
   A.   Is ground installed; and
   B.   Uses solar energy from the sun for generating utility scaled
electricity for the primary purpose of wholesale or retail sale and not
primarily for consumption on the property on which the device or devices are
located. A CSEF shall include all supporting facilities.
DIRECTOR: The Director of Building and Zoning of the Village.
FACILITY OWNER:
   A.   A person with a direct ownership interest in a CSEF regardless of
whether the person is involved in acquiring the necessary rights, permits, and
approvals or otherwise planning for the construction and operation of the
facility; and
   B.   At the time the facility is being developed, a person who is acting as
a developer of the facility by acquiring the necessary rights, permits, and
approvals or by planning for the construction and operation of the facility,
regardless of whether the person will own or operate the facility.
GROUND MOUNTED: Being affixed to the ground, or attached to an antenna, light
pole, or utility facility, but not a building.
NONPARTICIPATING PROPERTY: Real property that is not a participating property.
NONPARTICIPATING RESIDENCE: A residence that is located on nonparticipating
property and that is existing and occupied on the date that an application for
a special use permit to site and develop a CSEF is filed.
OCCUPIED COMMUNITY BUILDING: Any one or more of the following buildings that is
existing and occupied on the date that an application for a special use permit
to site and develop a CSEF is filed with the Village:
   A.   A school;
   B.   Place of worship;
   C.   Day care facility;
   D.   Public library; or
   E.   Community center.
OPERATOR: The person responsible for the day-to-day operations and maintenance
of the CSEF, including any third-party subcontractors.
PARTICIPATING PROPERTY: The real property that is the subject of a written
agreement between a CSEF owner and the owner of the real property that provides
the facility owner with an easement, option, lease or license to use the real
property for the purpose of siting and developing a CSEF. Participating
property also includes real property that is owned by a CSEF owner for the
purpose of siting and developing a CSEF.
PARTICIPATING RESIDENCE: A residence that is located on participating property
and that is existing and occupied on the date that an application for a special
use permit to site and develop a CSEF is filed.
PERSON: Any individual, firm, association, partnership, corporation, or other
legal entity.
PRINCIPAL STRUCTURE: For each property, the structure that one or more persons
occupy the majority of time on that property for either business or personal
reasons. A principal structure excludes accessory structures.
PRIVATE SOLAR ENERGY FACILITY (PSEF): A solar electric system that is owned by
a property owner or a tenant of the property to provide solar electricity for
the property or its users, net metering, or for other commercial or non-
commercial purposes, but excluding the conversion of solar energy into
electricity for introduction to the grid for distribution and consumption
through an interconnect agreement. A PSEF shall include all supporting
facilities.
SOLAR ENERGY FACILITY (SEF): Any Commercial Solar Energy Facility or Private
Solar Energy Facility.
SUPPORTING FACILITIES: All accessory and subordinate equipment and
infrastructure of a SEF including, but not limited to, transmission lines,
substations, access roads, storage containers, and equipment associated with
the generation and storage of electricity.
VILLAGE: Village of Manteno, Kankakee County, Illinois. (Ord. 25-18, 9-15-2025)
9-16-3: PRIVATE SOLAR ENERGY FACILITIES:
The following requirements shall govern the siting, installation, maintenance,
operation, and decommissioning of any PSEF:
   (A)   A PSEF shall be owned, operated, and/or maintained individually or
collectively by the record owner the underlying property on which the PSEF is
sited and/or a tenant of or business operating within a principal or accessory
structure located on the underlying property or adjoining property under common
ownership.
   (B)   A PSEF shall be permitted in all zoning districts. Provided, however,
a ground mounted PSEF shall be prohibited in all residential zoning districts
and on any lot, or combination of adjoining lots under common ownership, of
less than twenty (20) acres in total in any other type of zoning district.
   (C)   The setback for building mounted PSEF shall be the same as buildings
in the applicable zoning district. The setback for a ground mounted PSEF shall
be measured from the nearest edge of any component of the PSEF, as follows:
      1.   One hundred feet (150') from any occupied community building or
residence on adjoining real property not owned by the owner of real property on
which the PSEF is located.
      2.   Zero feet (0') from the property line of real property under common
ownership with the real property on which the PSEF is located.
      3.   Fifty feet (50') from the nearest edge of a public road right-of-way
for a building mounted PSEF and two hundred fifty feet (250') from the nearest
edge of a public road right-of-way for a ground mounted PSEF.
      4.   Fifty feet (50') from the property line of real property adjoining
the real property on which the PSEF is located but not owned by the owner of
real property on which the PSEF is located.
   (D)   In residential zoning districts, a building mounted PSEF shall not
extend above the peak roof height of the building to which they are affixed,
except that on a flat roof the height of a building mounted PSEF shall be
permitted to extend not more than six feet (6') above the roof line, or above
maximum permitted height in the zoning district, whichever is less. In all
other zoning districts, the maximum permitted height of a PSEF is as follows:
      1.   A building mounted PSEF shall not extend more than ten feet (10')
above the roof line and no more than ten feet (10') above the maximum permitted
height in the applicable zoning district.
      2.   A ground mounted PSEF shall not exceed twenty (20') feet in height
when orientated at maximum tilt, excluding electric transmission lines and
utility poles.
   (E)   An applicant shall file a building permit application with the
Director for the siting and construction of a PSEF. The applicant shall submit
three (3) complete copies of the building permit application along with the
required building permit fee in the form of a certified check and all
supporting documentation. The building permit fee shall be an amount equating
to ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00) per megawatt of total nameplate capacity
of the PSEF. For a building mounted PSEF, the building permit application shall
contain or be accompanied by the information required in Section
9-16-4 (D), (I)(1), as applicable, and construction plans showing all
structural and electrical connections to the building. For a ground mounted
PSEF, the building permit application shall contain or be accompanied by the
information required in Section
9-16-4 (D), (K), (M), and (O), as applicable.
   (F)   A building mounted PSEF shall be installed by a State of Illinois
licensed electrician, and the safety of the design and installation shall be
certified by a State of Illinois licensed engineer. All wiring associated with
a PSEF shall be underground or contained within a raceway that complements the
building materials of the structure on which they are located. The
installation, design, and maintenance of a building mounted PSEF shall comply
with the technical codes adopted by the Village and any standards that may be
applicable thereto as imposed by a state of federal agency of competent
jurisdiction. A building mounted PSEF shall be decommissioned in the event they
are not used for twelve (12) consecutive months. Decommissioning shall be
completed within six (6) months and shall require the PSEF to be deconstructed
and removed from the property such that there is no evidence that a PSEF
existed on the property or building. Decommissioning will not be required in
the event a PSEF cannot be used for twelve (12) consecutive months for reasons
outside of the control of the owner/tenant and he/they are using commercially
reasonable means to place the PSEF back in use and service as expeditiously as
is reasonably possible. There shall be an inspection for compliance with the
above requirements by an inspector hired by the Village and reimbursed by the
property owner or tenant.
   (G)   Unless in conflict with a provision of this section, a ground mounted
PSEF shall be installed, designed, maintained and decommissioned in the same
manner as a CSEF and the provisions Sections 9-16-5 through 9-16-9 shall apply
to a ground-mounted PSEF; provided, however, a ground mounted PSEF shall not
require a special use permit or meet the conditions thereof, but the applicant
shall submit the information required by this section as a part of the building
permit process. (Ord. 25-18, 9-15-2025)
9-16-4: COMMERCIAL SOLAR ENERGY FACILITY SITING APPLICATION:
   (A)   A special use permit shall be required for the siting and operation of
any CSEF. Provided, however, CSEFs shall be prohibited in all residential
zoning districts and on any lot, or combination of adjoining lots under common
ownership, of less than forty (40) acres in total in any other type of zoning
district.
   (B)   An applicant shall file a special use application with the Director
for the siting and development of any CSEF. The applicant shall submit seven
(7) complete copies of the special use application along with the required fee
in the form of a certified check. An application shall be deemed complete when
the applicable fee is submitted and all supporting documents are included.
   (C)   Prior to processing any special use application for a CSEF, the
applicant shall submit a certified check to the Village in an amount equal to
five thousand dollars ($5,000.00) per megawatt (MW) of proposed nameplate
capacity, up to a maximum fee of two hundred and fifty thousand dollars
($250,000.00). These funds shall be placed in an FDIC insured money-market
account and used to pay the Village's costs and expenses to process the special
use permit application. The applicant shall supplement the special use
application fee in the event the Village's actual expenses exceed the amount of
the initial application fee. All fees not used shall be returned to the
applicant or credited to the decommissioning escrow.
   (D)   The special use permit application shall contain or be accompanied by
the following information, which shall be updated by the applicant no later
than ten (10) days following a change:
      1.   The name(s), address(es), phone number(s) and electronic contact
information of the applicant(s), facility owner and operator, and all property
owner(s). The applicant shall be required to include copies of all easements
identifying ownership or interest in the properties.
      2.   A CSEF summary, including a description of the project, its
approximate name plate generating capacity, the potential equipment
manufacturer(s), type(s) of CSEF(s), number of CSEF(s), and name plate
generating capacity of each CSEF, and the location of the project.
      3.   Sufficient documentation to verify that the applicant and facility
owner financial capability to complete and decommission the CSEF project as
proposed.
   (E)   The applicant shall provide the Village with a site plan showing the
following existing conditions:
      1.   Existing property lines and property lines extending one hundred
feet (100') from the exterior boundaries, including the names of adjacent
property owners and current use of those properties.
      2.   Exiting public and private roads, showing widths of the roads and
any associated easements.
      3.   Location and size of any abandoned wells, sewage treatments systems.
      4.   Existing buildings and any impervious surfaces.
      5.   A contour map showing topography at two-foot intervals. A contour
map of surrounding properties may also be required.
      6.   Existing vegetation (list type and percent of coverage: i.e.
cropland/plowed fields, grassland, wooded areas etc.).
      7.   Waterways, watercourses, lakes and public water wetlands.
      8.   Any delineated wetland boundaries.
      9.   A copy of the current FEMA FIRM map that shows the subject property.
And, the 100-year flood elevation and any regulated flood protection elevation,
if available.
      10.   Floodway, flood fringe and/or general flood plain district
boundary, if applicable and not provided on the copy of the current FEMA FIRM
map.
      11.   Mapped soils according to the Kankakee County Soil Survey.
      12.   Surface water drainage patterns.
   (F)   The applicant shall provide the Village with a site plan showing the
following proposed conditions:
      1.   Property lines, setback lines, and layout of all structures within
the geographical boundaries of any applicable setback.
      2.   Location and spacing of solar panels.
      3.   Location of access roads, access points, and turnout locations.
      4.   Planned location of underground or overhead electric lines
connecting the solar farm to a building, substation or other electric load.
      5.   New electrical equipment other than at the existing building or
substation that is to be the connection point for the solar farm.
      6.   Third-party transmission lines.
      7.   Sketch elevation of the premises accurately depicting the proposed
solar energy conversion system and its relationship to structure on adjacent
land.
      8.   A landscape plan.
      9.   Storm water management facilities, as required by Title 10,
Subdivisions, Chapter 10, Storm Water Management, as appropriate.
   (G)   The applicant shall include a weed control plan for property inside
and outside fenced area for entire property to be approved by the Director. The
property must be maintained to prevent fire hazards and be in compliance with
all local, state and federal environmental regulations. No soil sterilant shall
be permitted to be used on the property for weed control.
   (H)   The applicant shall submit a preliminary map and plan showing the
roads and rights-of-ways that will be utilized for both the construction and
the operation of the CSEF. Prior to the issuance of a building permit, the
applicant shall submit an executed agreement between the CSEF owner or operator
and any local jurisdictional road authority with infrastructure affected by the
CSEF. This agreement shall include at a minimum:
      1.   A final map identifying the routes that will be used.
      2.   A plan for maintaining and/or repairing the affected roads.
      3.   Other inclusions as specified by the Village, Village Engineer or
any affected jurisdictional road authority.
   (I)   The applicant shall submit the manufacturer's specifications and
recommended installation methods for all major equipment, including solar
panels, mounting systems and foundations for poles or racks.
   (J)   The applicant shall submit an itemized cost estimate of the entire
construction costs of the project.
   (K)   The applicant shall provide a description of the method of connecting
the array to a building or substation.
   (L)   The applicant shall provide a written demonstration that the applicant
is in the queue to acquire an interconnect agreement. Prior to pre-operation of
the project, a copy of an interconnect agreement with the appropriate electric
utility, or a written explanation outlining why an interconnection agreement is
not necessary shall be provided.
   (M)   The applicant shall include a decommissioning plan to ensure that the
solar facility shall be properly decommissioned. The decommissioning plan shall
include provisions for removal of all structures (including equipment, solar
panels, fencing, and access roads), foundations and cabling to a depth of
seventy-two (72") inches and a plan for the restoration of soil and vegetation
to the same condition that existed before the construction of such
improvements. Removal of solar panels must be in accordance with state and
federal EPA guidelines and the panels must not be left in any condition where
hazardous materials may leak into the environment. The Village reserves the
right to require additional information of components to the plan as the
Village deems necessary to ensure that an adequate proposal is in place to
decommission the facility in its entirety and those adequate funds are
available.
   (N)   Following special use application approval, the applicant is eligible
to apply for a building permit. The building permit fee shall be an amount
equating to ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00) per megawatt of total nameplate
capacity. The applicant shall pay the fee in the form of a certified check
payable to the Village.
   (O)   Prior to the issuance of a building permit and as part of the building
permit application submittal, a map showing the location of any and all
subsurface drain tiles shall be provided to the Director and the appropriate
drainage district, if any.
   (P)   An applicant shall notify the Director of any changes to the
information provided on the special use application or building permit
application that occur while the application is pending. Failure to notify the
Director shall constitute grounds for the immediate rejection of the
application and denial of the permit. (Ord. 25-18, 9-15-2025)
9-16-5: DESIGN AND OPERATIONAL STANDARDS FOR COMMERCIAL SOLAR ENERGY
FACILITIES:
   (A)   A licensed Illinois professional engineer shall certify that the
foundation and design of the CSEF is within accepted professional standards,
given local soil and climate conditions.
   (B)   A CSEF shall be designed, installed and conform to applicable industry
standards, including those of the American National Standards Institute
("ANSI").
   (C)   A CSEF and the property on which it is located shall be maintained in
compliance with all applicable local, state, and federal technical codes and
regulatory standards, as amended.
   (D)   A CSEF shall conform to the performance standards applicable in the
zoning district in which they are located.
   (E)   Power and communication lines running between banks of solar panels
and to electric substations or interconnections with buildings within the
perimeter of the solar energy development shall be buried according to the
National Electric Code (NEC) in effect at the time of application. All power
and communication lines outside the fenced perimeter of the solar energy
development shall be buried no less than six feet (6'). During the installation
and before wires and lines are covered there will be an inspection for
compliance by the Village. Exemptions or variances may be granted by the
Village Board in instances where shallow bedrock, water courses, or other
elements of natural landscape interfere with the ability to bury lines. All
power and communication lines shall be geo-located. J.U.L.I.E. shall be
contacted before commencing digging excavations. All electrical components of
the CSEF shall conform to the applicable local, state, and national codes, and
relevant national and international standards.
   (F)   All drainage tiles shall be repaired or restored to the same or better
condition as to when the project began. There will be an inspection for
compliance by an independent inspector chosen and hired by the Village and
invoiced and by the Village to the facility owner or operator. Local drainage
districts shall be contacted prior to beginning development to locate drainage
district tiles.
   (G)   Equipment and structures shall not exceed twenty feet (20') in height
when orientated at maximum tilt. Excluded from this height requirement,
however, are electric transmission lines and utility poles.
   (H)   An appropriate warning sign shall be provided at the entrance to the
facility and along the perimeter to the solar farm project. The sign at the
entrance to the facility shall include the facilities 911 address and a twenty-
four (24)-hour emergency contact number. A 911-compliant visible warning sign
concerning voltage must be placed at all CSEF(s), including the base of all
pad-mounted transformers, and supporting facilities. Warning signs identifying
underground wire locations shall be placed at all road crossings, creek,
waterway, and ditch crossings, and at the base of CSEF(s) and supporting
facilities. All underground wire locations shall be GPS mapped and given to the
Director.
   (I)   The regulations regarding the siting of a CSEF, with setback distances
measured from the nearest edge of any component of the facility, are as
follows:
      1.   One hundred fifty feet (150') from the nearest point on the outside
wall of the structure, measured from the nearest edge of any component of the
facility from occupied community building and dwellings on nonparticipating
properties.
      2.   Zero feet (0') from boundary lines of participating property.
      3.   Two hundred fifty feet (250') from the nearest edge of a public road
right-of-way.
      4.   Fifty feet (50') to the nearest point on the property line of a
nonparticipating property.
   (J)   The equipment and structures of the CSEF shall be fully enclosed and
secured by a chain-link or equivalent fence with a minimum height of eight feet
and not more than twenty-five feet (25') in height. Knox boxes and keys shall
be provided at locked entrances for emergency personnel access. The entirety of
the CSEF shall be enclosed with a living buffer of evergreen trees that must be
planted and maintained prior to construction and will meet or exceed the height
of the solar panels and all facilities equipment, including fencing.
Additionally, the applicant/owner must comply with any screening requirements
requested by the Director and consistent with state law and the provisions
hereof. An alternative buffer may also be considered. Earth berms or other
topographical features and existing wooded areas may be accepted in lieu or in
combination of the above requirements if they conceal the use from public view
and are maintained. The landscape plan shall also incorporate native grasses,
flowers and plants which will provide wildlife and pollinator habitat, soil
erosion protection and/or aid in strengthening the soil structure. This shall
not be part of the evergreen screen but shall be for all other areas of the
solar farm that will not interfere with the solar arrays.
   (K)   If lighting is provided at the site, lighting shall be shielded and
downcast such that the light does not spill onto the adjacent parcel or
residence.
   (L)   Noise levels measured at the property line shall not exceed fifty (50)
decibels when located adjacent to an existing residence or residential
district.
   (M)   Individual arrays/solar panels shall be designed and located in order
to prevent glare toward any inhabited buildings on adjacent properties as well
as adjacent rights-of-way.
   (N)   CSEF projects shall conform with site runoff storage requirements,
unless the solar panels are "disconnected." Solar panels will be considered
"disconnected" and therefore pervious, if the following criteria are met:
      1.   Pavement, gravel, bare ground, or impervious surfaces are prohibited
below panels or in spacer sections between rows of panels unless specifically
approved by the Village Engineer. All such areas shall be seeded with native
grass or other acceptable alternative. Landscaping shall be well-maintained and
annually seeded, as appropriate, to prevent soil compaction or bare ground
conditions. The growth of vegetation within the perimeter of CSEF assemblage
shall not exceed ten inches (10") in height. Tire rutting from maintenance or
other vehicles in spacer sections shall be monitored annually and regraded and
seeded, as appropriate, to mitigate soil erosion and storm water run-off.
      2.   The total proposed impervious area on the surface of the ground must
be less than twenty-five thousand (25,000) square feet.
      3.   The open space between panels must be equal to or greater than the
width of the row of panels. The runoff must sheet flow onto and across the
vegetated area to maintain the disconnection. Sheet flow is optimal on sites
with gradual slopes (<5%). Level spreaders, terraces, or berms may be used to
maintain sheet flow conditions if the average slope is steeper than five
percent (5%) and ten percent (10%). Installations on slopes less than ten
percent (>10%) will require a detailed engineering study to demonstrate the
safe and non-erosive conveyance of runoff to the property line or downstream
storm water management practice.
   (O)   The applicant, facility owner or operator shall submit to the local
fire department(s) with jurisdiction over the site, a copy of the existing and
proposed site plans. Upon request by the local fire department, the facility
owner or operator shall cooperate with the local fire department to develop the
fire department's emergency response plan. In addition, at no cost to the local
fire department, the facility owner or operator shall provide to the local fire
department any and all specialized and necessary new rescue or retrieval
equipment occasioned by the use of the particular solar panels being used at
the project (i.e., gurney, body harnesses, etc.). In addition, the facility
owner or operator shall have the responsibility to update, at no cost to the
local fire department, such equipment in possession of the local fire
department as any updates are presented to the facility owner or operator in
the normal course of business. Failure to comply shall be deemed a default
resulting in an immediate shutdown of the CSEF(s). Nothing herein shall
alleviate the need to comply with all other applicable fire laws and
regulations. (Ord. 25-18, 9-15-2025)
9-16-6: INSPECTIONS:
CSEFs shall be inspected by an independent certified inspector approved by the
Director upon the completion of installation. Thereafter inspections shall be
performed every three (3) years (triennially), unless otherwise determined by
the Director. All inspections shall be at the cost of the facility owner. (Ord.
25-18, 9-15-2025)
9-16-7: COMMERCIAL SOLAR ENERGY FACILITY DECOMMISSIONING:
   (A)   The decommissioning of a CSEF in accordance with the decommissioning
plan approved by the Village shall occur in the event it is not in use for
twelve (12) consecutive months. Decommissioning shall be completed within six
(6) months. Decommissioning will not be required in the event a CSEF cannot be
used for reasons outside of the control of the facility owner or operator and
it is using commercially reasonable means to put the CSEF back in use as
expeditiously as is reasonably possible.
   (B)   Prior to the issuance of building permits, financial assurances for
compliance with the decommissioning plan shall be made to the Village in a
minimum amount equal to two thousand dollars ($2,000.00) per acre. Additional
financial assurance shall be supplied, if necessary, to bring the total amount
of security to an amount equaling the Village engineer's estimate for
decommissioning. All cash security shall be paid into an escrow account
acceptable to and controlled by the Village. Said escrow shall be released when
the CSEF is decommissioned in accordance with the plan.
   (C)   The Village shall have the authority to decommission the site with the
security held in the event the facility owner or operator fails to do comply
with the decommissioning plan. In the event that escrow funds are not
sufficient to cover the cost of decommissioning, the shortfall shall be due and
owing to the Village by the landowner.
   (D)   A facility owner or operator shall submit an updated decommissioning
plan, including updating the escrow amount, to the Director for his approval
every three (3) years. (Ord. 25-18, 9-15-2025)
9-16-8: INDEMNIFICATION:
The applicant, facility owner or operator of any CSEF shall defend, indemnify
and hold harmless the Village, its officials and employees, from and against
any and all claims, demands, losses, causes of action, damages, injuries,
costs, penalties, expenses and liabilities whatsoever, including attorney's
fees, arising out of acts of omissions of the applicant, facility owner or
operator associated with the siting, construction, maintenance, operation, and
decommissioning of the SEF project. (Ord. 25-18, 9-15-2025)
9-16-9: CHANGE IN OWNERSHIP OR OPERATION:
The facility owner of a CSEF, as listed in the application, shall inform the
Director of all changes in ownership and operation during the life of the
project, including the sale or transfer of the same, within ten (10) days of
the effective date of such change. (Ord. 25-18, 9-15-2025)
9-16-10: VIOLATIONS:
It shall be unlawful for any applicant, landowner, tenant, facility owner, or
operator to:
   (A)   Misrepresent or falsify any information associated with a special use
permit and/or building permit for any SEF.
   (B)   Fail to site, design, install, operate, maintain, and/or decommission
ari SEF or SEF site in accordance with the provisions of this chapter, a
special use permit, and/or a building permit.
   (C)   Fail to comply with an approved landscaping plan.
   (D)   Fail to comply with an approved emergency response plan.
   (E)   Fail to comply with an approved decommissioning plan. (Ord. 25-18, 9-
15-2025)
9-16-11: PENALTIES AND ADMINISTRATION:
   (A)   Fines. Any person found to be in violation of any provision of this
chapter shall be subject to a fine of not less than two hundred fifty dollars
($250.00) nor more than seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00). Each violation,
or day said violation is permitted to continue, shall constitute a separate
offense.
   (B)   Permit Proceedings. Any person found in violation of the provisions of
this chapter shall, in addition to any fine that may be imposed, be subject to
special use permit revocation proceedings before the Village Board to the
extent applicable.
   (C)   The provisions of this chapter may be administered through the
provisions of Title 1, Administration, Chapter 17, Administrative Adjudication,
of the Manteno Municipal Code, or by any other means permitted by law. Nothing
in this Chapter shall be interpreted to limit the remedies or penalties
available to Village of Manteno. (Ord. 25-18, 9-15-2025)
CHAPTER 17
MEDICAL CANNABIS CULTIVATION AND DISPENSARIES
SECTION:
9-17-1: Purpose And Applicability
9-17-2: Process
9-17-3: Medical Cannabis Facility Components
9-17-4: Medical Cannabis Cultivation Center
9-17-5: Medical Cannabis Dispensing Organization
9-17-6: Additional Requirements
9-17-1: PURPOSE AND APPLICABILITY:
It is the intent and purpose of this chapter to provide regulations regarding
the cultivation and dispensing of medical cannabis occurring within the
corporate limits of the village of Manteno. Such facilities shall comply with
all regulations provided in the compassionate use of medical cannabis pilot
program act, as enacted by the state of Illinois, as may be amended from time
to time (the "act"), regulations enacted pursuant to authority granted through
the act, and the regulations provided herein. In the event that the act is
amended, the more restrictive of the state or village regulations shall apply.
(Ord. 13-29, 1-20-2014)
9-17-2: PROCESS:
Medical cannabis facilities shall be a special use in the I-1 light industrial
district and I-2 heavy industrial district and processed in accordance with the
provisions of section
9-14-12 of this title. No medical cannabis facility shall be opened or operated
unless specifically authorized under and pursuant to the act and this title.
(Ord. 13-29, 1-20-2014)
9-17-3: MEDICAL CANNABIS FACILITY COMPONENTS:
In determining compliance with section
9-14-12 of this title, the following components of the medical cannabis
facility shall be evaluated based on the entirety of the circumstances
affecting the particular property in the context of the existing and intended
future use of other properties in the vicinity:
   (A)   Impact of the proposed facility on existing or planned uses located
within the vicinity of the subject property.
   (B)   Proposed structure in which the facility will be located, total square
footage, security installations/security plan, and building code compliance.
   (C)   Hours of operation and anticipated number of customers/employees.
   (D)   Anticipated parking demand based and available private parking supply,
including any unique demand for handicapped parking.
   (E)   Traffic generation and adjacent roadway capacity.
   (F)   Site design, including access points, internal site circulation and
commercial vehicle loading, unloading and parking.
   (G)   Proposed signage plan.
   (H)   Compliance with all requirements provided in section
9-17-4, "Medical Cannabis Cultivation Center", or
9-17-5, "Medical Cannabis Dispensing Organization", of this chapter, as
applicable.
   (I)   Other criteria determined to be necessary to assess compliance with
section
9-14-12 of this title. (Ord. 13-29, 1-20-2014)
9-17-4: MEDICAL CANNABIS CULTIVATION CENTER:
In those zoning districts in which a medical cannabis cultivation center may be
located, the proposed facility must comply with the following:
   (A)   Facility (the enclosed, locked facility where medical cannabis will be
grown, harvested, manufactured, packaged, or otherwise prepared for
distribution) may not be located within two thousand five hundred feet (2,500')
of the property line of a preexisting public or private nursery school,
preschool, primary or secondary school, daycare center, daycare home, or
residential care home.
   (B)   Facility may not be located within two thousand five hundred feet
(2,500') of the property line for an area zoned residential.
   (C)   Facility may not conduct any retail sales.
   (D)   For purposes of determining required parking, medical cannabis
cultivation centers shall be classified under "class 24" per section
9-12-7 of this title. (Ord. 13-29, 1-20-2014)
9-17-5: MEDICAL CANNABIS DISPENSING ORGANIZATION:
In those zoning districts in which a medical cannabis dispensing organization
may be located, the proposed facility must comply with the following:
   (A)   Facility may not be located within two thousand five hundred feet
(2,500') of the property line of a preexisting public or private nursery
school, preschool, primary or secondary school, daycare center, daycare home,
residential care home, or public park.
   (B)   Facility may not be located within two thousand five hundred feet
(2,500') of the property line for any property used residentially or zoned for
a residential, commercial or specialty use.
   (C)   Facility may not have drive-through service.
   (D)   Facility must be a freestanding structure not occupied by any other
business or tenant, or used for any other purpose other than a medical cannabis
dispensing organization.
   (E)   Retail sales occurring within said facility shall be accessory to the
facility's intended use as a dispensing organization and shall not occupy
greater than ten percent (10%) of the total square footage of the facility. For
purposes of calculating the total square footage dedicated to retail sales,
that portion of the floor area dedicated to the distribution of medical
cannabis or medical cannabis infused products shall be excluded from this
calculation; all floor area dedicated to the sale of other medical cannabis
products and/or paraphernalia shall be included.
   (F)   For purposes of determining required parking, said facilities shall
be, at a minimum, classified as "class 24" per section
9-12-7 of this title. (Ord. 13-29, 1-20-2014)
9-17-6: ADDITIONAL REQUIREMENTS:
Petitioner shall install building enhancements, such as security cameras,
lighting, or other improvements, as needed or at the request of the village, to
ensure the safety of employees and customers of the medical cannabis
facilities. Said improvements may be required by the village in excess of those
security measures required by the act. (Ord. 13-29, 1-20-2014)
TITLE 10
SUBDIVISIONS
CHAPTER 1
GENERAL PROVISIONS
SECTION:
10-1-1: Title
10-1-2: Purpose
10-1-3: Jurisdiction
10-1-4: Scope
10-1-1: TITLE:
This title shall be known and may be cited or referred to as the SUBDIVISION
ORDINANCE FOR THE VILLAGE OF MANTENO, ILLINOIS. (Ord. 07-20, 9-4-2007)
10-1-2: PURPOSE:
   (A)   To promote the public health, safety, and general welfare; to
conserve, protect, and enhance property values; to preserve the natural beauty
and topography of the village and surrounding areas; to secure the most
efficient use of land; and to facilitate the adequate development of public
improvements;
   (B)   To provide for orderly growth and development; to afford adequate
facilities for the safe and efficient movement of traffic; to safeguard against
flood damage; and to guide and time the sequence of future growth and
development in accordance with the comprehensive plan and in accordance with
the financial ability of the village to provide essential off site public
services and capital improvements;
   (C)   To prescribe rules and regulations governing the subdivision,
resubdivision and platting of land; the preparation of plats; the location,
width and course of streets and highways; and the installation of utilities,
street pavements and other essential improvements;
   (D)   To establish procedure for the submission, consideration, approval,
and recording of plats, improvement plans; and to provide the means for
enforcement and nature of penalties for violation. (Ord. 07-20, 9-4-2007)
10-1-3: JURISDICTION:
This title shall apply to subdivision of lots and improvements constructed on
all lands within the village of Manteno or in any unincorporated area which is
located entirely or in part within one and one-half (11/2) miles of the nearest
limits of the village of Manteno. (Ord. 07-20, 9-4-2007)
10-1-4: SCOPE:
Until plats and plans for subdivisions and improvements are approved by the
village as specified in this title:
   (A)   No land shall be subdivided, nor any street laid out, nor any
improvements made to the natural land.
   (B)   No lot, tract or parcel of land within any subdivision shall be
offered for sale nor shall any transfer, lease, sale, contract for sale or
option be made or given.
   (C)   No improvements, such as sidewalks, storm water drainage, sanitary
sewerage facilities, gas service, electric service, lighting, grading, paving
or surfacing of streets, shall hereafter be made by any owner or owners or his
or their agent, or by any public service corporation at the request of such
owner, owners or agent. (Ord. 07-20, 9-4-2007)
CHAPTER 2
RULES AND DEFINITIONS
SECTION:
10-2-1: General Rules And Definitions
10-2-1: GENERAL RULES AND DEFINITIONS:
In an interpretation of this title, the rules and definitions contained in this
section shall be observed and applied, except when the context clearly
indicates otherwise.
   (A)   Rules:
      1.   Words used or defined in one tense or form shall include other
tenses and derivative forms.
      2.   Words in the singular number shall include the plural number, and
words in the plural number shall include the singular number.
      3.   The masculine gender shall include the feminine and neuter. The
feminine gender shall include the masculine and neuter. The neuter gender shall
include the masculine and feminine.
      4.   The word "shall" is mandatory. The word "may" is permissive.
      5.   The word "person" includes individuals, firms, partnerships, joint
ventures, trusts, trustees, estates, corporations, associations and any other
similar entities.
      6.   The word "lot" shall include the words "plot", "piece" and "parcel".
      7.   The phrase "used for" shall include the phrases "arranged for",
"designed for", "intended for", "maintained for", "created for" and "occupied
for".
      8.   In case of any difference of meaning or implication between the text
of this title and any caption, illustration or table, the text shall control.
   (B)   Definitions:
   ADJACENT: An area where the property lines are contiguous, or are separated
by a street, alley, easement, or right of way.
   ALLEY: A public right of way which affords secondary means of access to
properties abutting upon a street.
   APPLICANT: The person, corporation, firm, etc., seeking to develop a
property under this title.
   BERM: A mound of dirt used for screening of landscaping purposes which is
planted with low lying shrubs or ground cover so as to prevent erosion.
   BLOCK: A tract of land bounded by street rights of way, or by a combination
of street rights of way and public parks, cemeteries, railroad and utility
rights of way, bulkhead lines or shorelines of waterways, or corporate boundary
lines. The length of a block is determined by the distance along a roadway
beginning at the intersection with one through street and ending at the
intersection with another separate through street. An eyebrow, cul-de-sac or
change of direction on a single stretch of roadway does not constitute an
intersection or a separate through street.
   BUFFER: A visual screen constructed of wood, concrete block, or landscape
material in such a manner that adjacent property will be screened from the use
contemplated, so noise, solid waste, or other objectionable influences will be
avoided.
   BUILDING: An enclosed structure, constructed partially or wholly
aboveground, with a permanent roof, separated on all sides from adjacent open
space by exterior or party walls, which is permanently affixed to the ground.
   BUILDING SETBACK: The minimum horizontal distance between any property line
and a building on the property.
   COMPREHENSIVE PLAN: The current "village of Manteno, Illinois, comprehensive
plan".
   CUL-DE-SAC: A street permanently terminated by a vehicle turnaround.
   DATUM PLANE: A reference level from which ground elevations are based. The
datum plane is at mean sea level as established by the United States geological
survey cases NAVD88.
   DETENTION BASIN: A covered or uncovered reservoir designed to hold an
accumulation of storm water runoff so as to reduce peak flow in a storm water
drainage system. Detention basins often serve a secondary purpose, such as a
recreation area, when emptied of storm water, but this is not their primary
function.
   DEVELOPED AREA: That portion of a plot or parcel upon which a building,
structure, pavement or other improvements have been placed.
   DEVELOPER: A person, group of persons, organization, or other entity who
petitions the village according to this title for the purpose of improving or
subdividing land; may also be referred to as "owner" or "applicant" depending
on the context.
   DEVELOPMENT: Any subdivision or change to improved or unimproved real
property including single lots and shall not be limited to buildings or other
structures, mining, dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavation or drilling
operations located within the planning jurisdiction of the village.
   DIRECTOR OF BUILDING AND ZONING: The person designated by the village to
administrate the zoning ordinance and building regulations, serve as the plat
officer, review all applications to be heard by the plan commission, and assist
in preparation of annexation agreements.
   DRAINAGE EASEMENT: The no build easement of a property or subdivision
devoted to channeling storm water overflow where no aboveground structures or
obstructions may be installed.
   DWELLING UNIT: One or more rooms which, taken together, are intended as
living quarters for a person, a single family or for a group of people living
together as a family.
   EASEMENT: A grant by a property owner for the use of a portion of said
owner's property by another person or other legal entity or the general public
for a specified purpose or purposes.
   ELEVATION: The vertical distance of an existing point from a stated datum
plane.
   ENGINEER: An Illinois licensed professional engineer.
   FILL: Any act by which earth, sand, gravel, rock, or other material is
deposited, placed, replaced, pushed, dumped, pulled, transported or moved to a
new location and shall include the conditions resulting therefrom.
   FINAL PLAT: The plan or plat of subdivision intended for recording, and any
other accompanying material as described herein.
   FLOOD FRINGE: That area in the floodplain either side of the floodway where
flow velocities are low or zero.
   FLOOD ROUTE: The overland route that floodwaters would naturally flow.
   FLOODPLAIN: Those areas along rivers and streams subject to periodic
flooding. The floodplain is defined by the flood boundary and floodway map
prepared by the federal emergency management agency.
   FLOODWAY: The channel of the watercourse and those portions of the adjoining
floodplain which are reasonably required to carry and discharge the regional
flood.
   FRONTAGE: That portion of a property abutting a right of way along what
would be considered the front yard. In the case of corner lots, both portions
of property abutting rights of way are considered the front yard.
   GRADE: The slope of land, road, street, or other public way expressed in
percent.
   GROUND COVER: Low growing plants planted in such a manner as to form a
continuous cover over the ground.
   LANDSCAPE DEVELOPMENT: Trees, shrubs, ground cover, vines, grasses, or
earthen berms installed in planting areas for the purpose of fulfilling the
requirements of these regulations. (This shall not include rock nor artificial
plant materials.)
   LOT: A parcel of land comprising one unit of the several that are created in
the recorded division, subdivision, or resubdivision of land through the legal
subdivision process.
   LOT, CORNER: A lot situated at the intersection of two (2) or more streets.
   MORTON ARBORETUM: A privately endowed educational foundation for practical,
scientific research work in horticulture and agriculture, particularly in the
growth and culture of trees, shrubs, and vines by means of a great outdoor
museum arranged for convenient study of every species, variety, and hybrid of
the woody plants of the world able to survive the climate of Illinois.
   OFFICIAL MAP: The map showing the streets, highways and parks theretofore
laid out, adopted and established by law and any amendments or additions
thereto resulting from village board action or the approval of subdivision
plats.
   OUTLOT: A lot that shall not be developed but is reserved for a specific
purpose or purposes.
   OWNER: Any individual, firm, association, partnership, corporation, trust,
or any other legal entity having sufficient proprietary interest in particular
land to commence and maintain proceedings for subdividing or developing the
same under this title and development standards.
   PARCEL: A continuous area or acreage of land as described and provided for
in the plats act of the Illinois Compiled Statutes.
   PARKWAY: The part of the public street right of way not occupied by the
street pavement and located between the back of the curb and the sidewalk as
well as the dividing strip of a roadway.
   PAVED GROUND SURFACE AREA: Any paved surface area (excepting public right of
way) used for the purpose of driving, parking, storing, or displaying of
vehicles, boats, trailers and mobile homes, including new and used car lots and
other open lot uses.
   PAVEMENT: The portion of a street or access easement intended to bear
vehicular traffic, not including curbs.
   PEDESTRIAN WALKWAY OR CROSSWALK: A right of way across or within a block,
for use by pedestrians whether designated as a pedestrian walkway or crosswalk
or however designated; and may include utilities where necessary.
   PLAN COMMISSION: The words "plan commission" as used herein, refer to the
plan commission of the village of Manteno, Illinois.
   PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT (PUD): A parcel of and/or contiguous parcels of
land meeting the minimum size requirements of the zoning ordinance and
sufficient in size to create its own character controlled by a single landowner
or by a group of landowners in common agreement as to control, to be developed
as a single entity; the character of which is compatible with adjacent parcels
and with the intent of the zoning district or districts in which it is located.
The developers may be granted relief from specific land use regulations and
design standards, and may be granted a variation(s) in return for assurances of
an overall quality of development, including any specific features which will
be of exceptional benefit to the community as a whole and which would not
otherwise be required by the zoning ordinance. The area of a planned
development shall remain under one ownership or unified control unless
safeguards are provided that, in the opinion of the plan commission, will
provide for the continuation of the original planned unit development concept
and as modified from time to time by the plan commission and approved by the
village board.
   PLANS: Bound set of prints typically prepared by an engineer and/or
architect or similar professional depicting the work to be done to fully
construct the improvements proposed for a development.
   PLANTING AREA: Any area designed for landscape planting having a minimum of
twenty five (25) square feet of actual plantable area.
   PRELIMINARY PLAN: A plat showing proposed surveyor and engineering
subdivision data subject to village approval.
   PROTECTIVE COVENANTS: Contracts entered into between private parties and
constitute a restriction on the use of all private property within a
subdivision for the benefit of property owners; and to provide mutual
protection against undesirable aspects of development which would tend to
impair stability of values.
   RECONSTRUCTION: Rehabilitation or replacement of a structure or structures
on property which either have been damaged, altered, or removed.
   RECORD DRAWING (Also Referred To As AS CONSTRUCTED Or AS BUILT PLANS):
Construction plans, sealed by a registered professional engineer showing actual
locations and accurate measurements of improvements.
   RESUBDIVISION: The rearrangement of a portion of land previously subdivided,
subject to the same constraints that apply to subdivision.
   RETENTION BASIN: A covered or uncovered reservoir designed to hold an
accumulation of storm water runoff so as to reduce peak flow in a storm water
drainage system. Retention basins maintain a normal water level, even during
nonstorm events.
   RIGHT OF WAY: A general term denoting land, property, or interest therein,
acquired for or used as a roadway, pedestrianway, bike path, railroad route,
utility route, or other public or quasi-public use.
   SHRUB: A woody plant that usually remains low (minimum 2 feet in height) and
produces shoots or trunks from the base. It is not usually treelike nor single
stemmed.
   SITE: A lot or parcel of land or a contiguous combination thereof, where
grading work is performed as a single unified operation.
   SKETCH PLAN: A concept drawing and/or other accompanying information which
shows existing and proposed development conditions as proposed in this title.
   STREET: A publicly or privately owned right of way or easement which affords
a means of access by vehicles to abutting and local properties, whether
designated as a street, avenue, highway, road, boulevard, lane, or similar
terminology, but excepting driveways to buildings. Streets are generally
classified as follows:
      1.   Expressways: A street with considerable continuity which serves or
is intended to serve as a principal traffic artery between various
municipalities or states. Expressways are usually a state or federal numbered
route, and are limited access highways. Driveway access to expressways is
prohibited. Actual expressways are identified in the streets and alleys section
of technical standards.
      2.   Primary Routes: A street which is intended to serve as a large
volume trafficway for both the immediate village area and the county and as a
principal or major arterial, parkway, highway, or equivalent term to identify
those streets comprising the basic structure of the street plan. Driveway
access to primary routes shall be minimized. Actual primary routes are
identified in the streets and alleys section of technical standards.
      3.   Secondary Routes: A street whose primary function is to collect and
distribute local subdivision traffic to primary routes. Driveway access to
these streets shall be minimized. Actual secondary routes are identified in the
streets and alleys section of technical standards.
      4.   Local Streets: The following are local streets serving primarily a
land access function:
         (a)   Residential Street: A street of limited continuity used
primarily for access to abutting and local residential and commercial
properties.
         (b)   Industrial Street: A street of limited continuity used primarily
for access to abutting and local industrial or office research properties.
         (c)   Half Street: A street of less than the total required width
along one or more property lines of a subdivision.
         (d)   Private Street: A street which is not publicly owned or
dedicated for public use, including an easement of access to private property.
         (e)   Construction Route: A route designated for all construction
traffic.
   STRUCTURE: Anything constructed or erected, or any piece of work
artificially built up or composed of parts joined together in some definite
manner, the use of which requires permanent location on the ground or attached
to something having a permanent location on the ground. With reference to the
foregoing, a structure shall include, but not be limited to: buildings, fences,
parking lots, concrete or asphalt slabs and driveways, decks, patios, gazebos,
sidewalks, walls and signs.
   SUBDIVIDER: The person or persons responsible for preparing and recording
the plats of the subdivision and for carrying out all appropriate requirements
including responsibility for public improvements installation relating thereto
as outlined in the development standards.
   SUBDIVISION: The division of a parcel of land into two (2) or more lots or
parcels for the purpose of transfer of ownership or development for any future
use, either residential, commercial or industrial. The term includes
resubdivision and, when appropriate to context, shall relate to the process of
subdividing or to the land subdivided.
   TREE: Any self-supporting woody plant which usually produces one main trunk
and which normally grows to a minimum of fifteen feet (15') in height.
      Coniferous Tree: Evergreen tree.
      Overstory/Canopy Tree: Deciduous tree with a normal growth over thirty
feet (30').
      Understory/Ornamental Tree: Deciduous tree with a normal growth thirty
feet (30') or less.
   UTILITIES: Services provided by public or quasi-public agencies including,
but not limited to, telephone communication, electrical power, heating gas,
cable television signals, steam, telegraph signals, transportation, etc.
   UTILITY TRANSMISSION EASEMENTS: Those utility lines crossing or serving an
area larger than the village.
   VILLAGE: The village of Manteno, Kankakee County, Illinois.
   VILLAGE ADMINISTRATOR: The person designated by the board of trustees to
administer overall activities of the village and its subordinate departments,
as designated by the board of trustees.
   VILLAGE ATTORNEY: The person or firm designated by the village to administer
legal services for the village.
   VILLAGE BOARD: The president and board of trustees of the village of
Manteno, Kankakee County, Illinois.
   VILLAGE ENGINEER: The person or organization designated by the village to
administer the engineering activities of the village.
   VILLAGE FIELD INSPECTOR: The person designated by the village to
administrate and inspect the subdivision improvements, including water, sewer
and street construction and maintenance for the village.
   VILLAGE PLANNER: The person or organization designated by the village to
administer the planning activities of the village.
   VINES: Any of a group of woody or herbaceous plants which may climb by
twining, by means of aerial rootlets or by means of tendrils or which may
simply sprawl over the ground of other plants.
   ZONING ORDINANCE: The zoning ordinance of the village of Manteno as last
amended. (Ord. 07-20, 9-4-2007)
CHAPTER 3
ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT
SECTION:
10-3-1: Interpretations
10-3-2: Changes And/Or Alternative Methods
10-3-3: Vested Rights
10-3-4: Minimum Requirements
10-3-5: Cumulative Impact Of Limitations
10-3-6: Cost Of Compliance
10-3-7: Enforcement
10-3-8: Violations And Penalties
10-3-9: Fees
10-3-10: Appendices Incorporated By Reference
10-3-1: INTERPRETATIONS:
Any dispute arising from the interpretation of this title shall be resolved in
favor of the village interpretation. The village administrator shall be
authorized to interpret this title. The village administrator's interpretation
may be overruled by the president and village board of trustees. (Ord. 07-20,
9-4-2007)
10-3-2: CHANGES AND/OR ALTERNATIVE METHODS:
   (A)   The village staff and village consultants will review and possibly
permit changes and/or alternative methods to specific engineering requirements
of this title, as long as such revisions are approved by the village
administrator and are justified by a unique hardship on the part of the
subdivider or development property caused by conditions uniquely attributable
to the land under consideration. The understanding is that the intent of these
regulations, standards, and specifications shall not be compromised. The
village board may overrule any changes and/or alternative methods granted or
denied by the village staff or consultants.
   (B)   The village board shall review and decide proposed changes and/or
alternative methods deemed by the village administrator, by the plan
commission, or by the village staff to be significant.
   (C)   The developer shall request village review of significant changes and/
or alternative methods in writing, clearly stating the unique hardship and
specifications of the change or alternative that vary from the village
requirements.
   (D)   The village board may conduct public meetings for significant changes
and/or alternative methods. (Ord. 07-20, 9-4-2007)
10-3-3: VESTED RIGHTS:
Nothing contained in this title shall be interpreted to be a consent, license,
or permit to use any property; to locate any building, structure, or facility;
or to carry on any trade, industry, occupation, or activity. (Ord. 07-20, 9-4-
2007)
10-3-4: MINIMUM REQUIREMENTS:
In their interpretation and application, the provisions of this title shall be
held to be the minimum requirements for the promotion of the public health,
safety, comfort, morals and general welfare as set forth in the provisions
hereof. When the provisions of this title impose greater restrictions than
those of any statute, other ordinance or regulation, the provisions of this
title shall be controlling. Where the provisions of any statute, other
ordinance or regulation impose greater restrictions than this title, the
provisions of such statute, other ordinance or regulation shall be controlling.
(Ord. 07-20, 9-4-2007)
10-3-5: CUMULATIVE IMPACT OF LIMITATIONS:
The provisions of this title shall be interpreted to be cumulative of, and to
impose limitations in addition to, all other codes, laws and ordinances in
existence or which may be passed governing any subject matter of this title.
The provisions of this title shall also be interpreted to be cumulative of each
other. To the greatest extent possible, the provisions of this title shall be
construed to be consistent with, and not in conflict with, the provisions of
such other codes, laws and ordinances, to the end that all such provisions may
be given their fullest application. (Ord. 07-20, 9-4-2007)
10-3-6: COST OF COMPLIANCE:
Unless otherwise provided, the costs of complying with any of the standards in
this title shall be at the owner's expense. (Ord. 07-20, 9-4-2007)
10-3-7: ENFORCEMENT:
   (A)   The village administrator, village field inspector, and/or the village
engineer shall be responsible to alert the owner or developer to any violation
of this title. The village field inspector and the village engineer shall have
the power to make such decisions, order requirements, or determinations in
conformity with this title as are necessary to enforce this title, subject to
the approval of the village administrator.
   (B)   The village may take any lawful action it deems necessary to ensure
the enforcement of this title.
   (C)   Any appeal of a decision, order, or requirement of the village field
inspector or village engineer shall be in writing to the village administrator.
(Ord. 07-20, 9-4-2007)
10-3-8: VIOLATIONS AND PENALTIES:
   (A)   Any person, firm, company, or corporation who does not proceed in
compliance with the provisions of this title, whether intentionally or
unintentionally, shall be guilty of an offense hereunder, and shall be subject
to a fine not to exceed five hundred dollars ($500.00) with each and every day
that the violation is allowed to exist constituting a distinct and separate
offense under the terms of this title. In addition, the village of Manteno may
take whatever action it deems appropriate to enforce the terms of this title,
including action for injunction and a cease and desist or stop work order. All
attorney fees and costs incurred by the village of Manteno in enforcing this
title shall be paid by the violator.
   (B)   Should any improvement be implemented in violation of this title, the
village may take appropriate legal steps to remove such improvement, to correct
noncomplying aspects of such improvement, or to prevent the use of such
improvement. The violator shall be responsible for the cost of any such
enforcing action of the village.
   (C)   The director of building and zoning, village field inspector, village
engineer, village administrator, or a sworn peace officer of the police
department may halt any or all construction activity at a development site if
any construction activity is or would lead to a violation under this title.
(Ord. 07-20, 9-4-2007)
10-3-9: FEES:
The village of Manteno requires fees payable by the developer as part of the
subdivision process. Such fees include, but are not limited to: development
escrow, sketch plan application fee and final plat platting fees. More
information on fee amounts and timing of payment is found in chapter 4,
"Application And Approval Procedures", of this title. (Ord. 07-20, 9-4-2007)
10-3-10: APPENDICES INCORPORATED BY REFERENCE:
Any appendices referred to in this title are to be considered a part of this
title. (Ord. 07-20, 9-4-2007)
CHAPTER 4
APPLICATION AND APPROVAL PROCEDURES
SECTION:
10-4-1: Intent
10-4-2: Application And Review Fee
10-4-3: Pre-Application Conference
10-4-4: Sketch Plan
10-4-5: Preliminary Plat And Project Phasing
10-4-6: Final Plat
10-4-7: Resubdivision Exception
10-4-1: INTENT:
Before subdividing any tract or parcel of land within the corporate limits of
the Village of Manteno or the unincorporated areas within one and one-half (1½)
miles beyond the village limits, an owner or developer shall submit a concept
plan to be acted upon by the village in accordance with the procedures and
requirements of this title, in addition to any application and review fees as
prescribed by the terms of this title and any other village ordinance. (Ord.
07-20, 9-4-2007; amd. Ord. 22-02, 5-2-2022)
10-4-2: APPLICATION AND REVIEW FEE:
Prior to village review of a sketch plan, preliminary plat or a final plan of
subdivision, the developer shall have remitted all required fees and review
expenses to the village clerk. (Ord. 07-20, 9-4-2007; amd. Ord. 22-02, 5-2-
2022)
10-4-3: PRE-APPLICATION CONFERENCE:
   (A)   Prior to the developer's filing of an application for sketch plan
review it is recommended that the owner or developer consult with the village
administrator and/or the village director of building and zoning to secure
information relative to the land use and zoning requirements, development
regulations and standards, and other applicable regulations and standards. The
purpose of the pre-application conference is to afford the developer the
opportunity to obtain the advice and assistance of village officials, staff and
other advisors and to discuss the proposed development informally prior to the
preparation of the sketch plan to process approvals in a cost effective and
time efficient manner.
   (B)   Before the meeting, it is suggested that the developer prepare a site
plan of the proposed development on a topographic survey of the area showing
the proposed layout of streets, arrangement of lots, and other features in
relation to the existing conditions in accordance with the provisions of
chapter 5, "Project Documents", of this title. Upon receipt of any request for
a pre-application conference the village administrator shall schedule a
conference meeting with the developer and village representatives as deemed
necessary by the village administrator. (Ord. 07-20, 9-4-2007; amd. Ord. 22-02,
5-2-2022)
10-4-4: SKETCH PLAN:
   (A)   Sketch Plan Application: In order to discuss the general purpose of
the subdivision or development in the context of establishing planning policies
and practices of the village of Manteno and to ensure that the required data is
properly prepared and presented before expending the time and money in
preparation and review of a preliminary plan, any person desiring to subdivide
or develop land subject to this title, before filing a preliminary plan, shall
file a sketch plan of the subdivision or development with the village. After
review of the sketch plan by village staff and within thirty (30) days of
submittal, the sketch plan shall be placed on the agenda of a regular planning
commission meeting.
   (B)   Sketch Plan Copies: Five (5) full size twenty-four inch by thirty-six
inch (24" x 36") copies and twenty (20) eleven inch by seventeen inch (11" x
17") sets of the sketch plan shall be submitted to the village clerk along with
a completed subdivision sketch plan application and the required application
and review fees.
   (C)   Development Escrow:
      1.   Concurrently with the submission of a request for a sketch plan
review as provided herein, the applicant shall deposit with the village
treasurer, in escrow, a sum of money that shall be used by the village to
defray the cost and/or expense billed for staff, infrastructure mapping,
modeling, GIS and database updates, court reporters for appearance and
transcript fees, and such other consultants or professionals as are hired by
the village during the technical, preliminary, and final plat review process
and through the village's final acceptance of all public improvements. Said
escrow shall also be used to pay the cost of all special planning commission or
village board meetings if required in the subdivision process.
      2.   The amount to be deposited by the applicant shall be not less than
ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00). Said escrow funds shall be deposited and
held by the village in an interest-bearing account with the interest payable to
the Village of Manteno. The village shall make disbursements from said escrow
funds upon the receipt of billing statements, provided said statements have
been reviewed and approved by the village board. Notice to the applicant shall
not be a prerequisite to the village making said disbursements. If at any time
after commencement of the review process the amount deposited has been reduced
to a balance of three thousand dollars ($3,000.00) or less, the applicant shall
be required to deposit an additional amount with the village so that the escrow
balance is not less than the amount the applicant was originally required to
deposit. Said additional amount shall be deposited with the village treasurer
within fifteen (15) days after the applicant has been so notified. Notice shall
be deemed given as of the date that a written notice requesting an additional
amount is deposited by certified U.S. mail addressed to the applicant.
      3.   Any funds on deposit at the conclusion of the staff's involvement
with the development, provided all disbursements have been made, shall be
returned to the applicant. However, notwithstanding anything herein to the
contrary, no final village board approval shall be granted until all aforesaid
costs have been paid. All funds disbursed from the escrow fund shall be
itemized and only the remaining balance of the escrow account will be returned
to the applicant. There will be no refund of escrow funds already allocated for
expenses associated with the development if the development fails to complete
the subdivision process.
   (D)   Sketch Plan Application Fee: The sketch plan application fee of seven
hundred fifty dollars ($750.00) shall be submitted with all other required
documents prior to review by the village.
   (E)   Sketch Plan Review: Review of the sketch plan is limited in its scope
and is intended to provide the developer with direction and comments prior to
the financial undertaking of preparing additional engineered drawings. Review
may include:
      1.   Review the general feasibility of the proposal;
      2.   Review compliance with applicable statutes, administrative rules and
regulations and local ordinances and land use plans;
      3.   Review existing facilities and conditions;
      4.   Answer questions and address problem areas;
      5.   Provide the applicant with oral suggestions, comments and
recommendations;
      6.   Review emergency personnel, staff and local governmental body
comments;
      7.   Superficial review of compliance with basic design principles,
including:
         (a)   Conformance to zoning ordinance, comprehensive plan, applicable
regulations of county and state.
         (b)   General subdivision layout.
         (c)   Street access, layout, classification, width, intersections,
relationship to major utility lines, railroads, highways or boundaries,
connection/alignment with existing or future streets. Cul-de-sac placement.
         (d)   Block standards: lengths, widths, crosswalks.
         (e)   Lot standards: location, arrangement, size, dimensions.
         (f)   Public use facilities and areas.
         (g)   Easements: utilities, continuity, retention/detention areas,
drainage right of way.
         (h)   Drainage, storm water management and floodplain provisions.
         (i)   Natural features;
      8.   Review by an independent planning consultant, if necessary, as
determined by the village administrator.
   (F)   Sketch Plan; Planning Commission Recommendation: The planning
commission, in reviewing the sketch plan, shall discuss with the developer the
proposed plan and any requirements the village may want to have incorporated
into a preliminary plan, provided, however, that the village and planning
commission shall not in any way be subsequently prejudiced from making any
future recommendations or decisions on account of their review and comment on
the sketch plan. Sketch plan approval does not grant the developer relief or
variance from subdivision and zoning standards and requirements. (Ord. 07-20,
9-4-2007; amd. Ord. 22-02, 5-2-2022)
10-4-5: PRELIMINARY PLAT AND PROJECT PHASING:
   (A)   Preliminary Plan Application: The developer shall complete the
preliminary plan application, accompanied by the appropriate fee and required
documents, and submit the same to the village clerk. The developer shall cause
to be prepared by a registered professional engineer in the State of Illinois,
a preliminary plan, together with improvement plans and other supplementary
material as specified in chapter 5, "Project Documents", of this title. The
plan shall include all of the property owned or controlled by the applicant,
which is adjacent to or considered to be contiguous to the proposed
subdivision.
   (B)   Preliminary Plan Copies: Five (5) full size twenty-four inch by
thirty-six inch (24" x 36") copies and twenty (20) eleven inch by seventeen
inch (11" x 17") sets of the preliminary plan shall be submitted to the village
clerk along with a completed subdivision preliminary plan application and the
required application fee.
   (C)   Preliminary Plan Review: The village clerk shall distribute copies of
the preliminary plan and supplementary material for review and comment to the
village administrator, building and zoning director, village engineer and other
village and non-village departments and officials as determined by the village
administrator. Comments and recommendations shall be returned to the village
administrator within thirty (30) days. The village administrator shall promptly
consolidate all comments and recommendations and forward them to the planning
commission. The planning commission shall promptly review all the plans and
documentation required for preliminary plan approval in accordance with the
procedures in this section.
   (D)   Preliminary Plan; Planning Commission Recommendation: The planning
commission shall recommend approval or disapproval of the application for the
preliminary plan review within ninety (90) days from the date of the filing the
application or the filing by the applicant of the last item of required
supporting documents, whichever date is later, unless such time is extended by
mutual consent in writing. The approval recommendation of a preliminary plan by
the planning commission is strictly tentative, involving only the general
acceptability of the layout and proposals as submitted.
   (E)   Project Phasing: The owner or developer shall indicate on the
preliminary plan the phases of the project and schedule for development of each
phase, if any, and whether the developer will postpone final plan approval for
one or more of the phases to a later date. The village may at its discretion,
grant preliminary approval and/or final approval to one or more phases of the
proposed development and request the developer to submit other phases of the
development for final approval at a later date.
   (F)   Preliminary Plan Submittal To The Village Board: Following action by
the planning commission, the preliminary plan and the recommendation of the
planning commission shall be referred to the village board. If the planning
commission recommends approval of the plan, it shall be so noted on the plan;
if it recommends disapproval of such plan, it shall furnish the village board
and the applicant a written statement setting forth the reasons for its
disapproval recommendation. The village board shall accept or reject said plan
within sixty (60) days after its regular scheduled meeting following the action
of the planning commission.
   (G)   Preliminary Plan Approval: Approval of the preliminary plan shall be
effective for a maximum period of one year, unless upon application of the
developer, the village board grants an extension for one additional year. The
application for said extension shall not require an additional filing fee, or
the submittal of additional copies of the preliminary plan. (Ord. 07-20, 9-4-
2007; amd. Ord. 22-02, 5-2-2022)
10-4-6: FINAL PLAT:
   (A)   Final Plat Application: The owner or developer shall file an
application for approval of the final plat with the village clerk within one
year after approval of the preliminary plan. The final plat shall conform
substantially to the preliminary plan as approved, include all the information
as specified in chapter 5, "Project Documents", of this title and, if desired
by the developer, it may constitute only that portion of the approved
preliminary plan which they propose to record and develop at that time,
provided however, that such portion conforms to all requirements of these
regulations. Such portions of development shall be labeled and recorded with
the subdivision name and phase 1, phase 2, phase 3, etc., in order of their
final plat approval. Numbering of the lots shall be consistent with the manner
presented in the preliminary plan. Lots should not be renumbered for each
phase. Lots specified for multi-unit development (PUD, condo, apartment or
townhome, etc.) shall also include the maximum number of residential units on
each lot.
   (B)   Specifications: The final plat shall contain all engineering design
specifications for the subdivision as approved by the village engineer, village
staff, planning commission or other review body, as of the date of the
submittal by the developer.
   (C)   Final Plat Submittal: Five (5) full size twenty-four inch by thirty-
six inch (24" x 36") copies and twenty (20) eleven inch by seventeen inch (11"
x 17") sets of the final plat shall be submitted to the village clerk along
with a completed subdivision final plat application and the required fees.
   (D)   Final Plat Fees And Policy Of Insurance:
      1.   Platting Fee: The owner or developer of any property, which seeks
village board approval for a subdivision plat, shall submit a fee with the
final subdivision plat application. The platting fee shall be one thousand
dollars ($1,000.00) for every single-family residential lot. Where multiple
units (PUD, condo, apartment, townhome, etc.) are located on a single lot or
multiple lots, the platting fee shall be one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) for
each lot, plus one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) per additional unit constructed
over one. Additional platting fees over one per lot are payable when the
building permit is issued and shall be based on the total additional units
constructed over one. The platting fee shall be two thousand dollars
($2,000.00) per lot for commercial lots or industrial lots.
      2.   Policy Of Insurance: The policies of insurance required to be
purchased and maintained by the developer shall be furnished by insurers
holding an A.M. Best Company rating of at least A- (excellent), and a financial
category designation of IX or greater.
   (E)   Final Plat Review: Upon receipt of the final plat, the village clerk
shall distribute copies of said plat and all supporting documents to the
village administrator, director of planning & zoning, engineer, attorney and
any agency providing required facilities that should be consulted prior to
approval. All comments and recommendations shall be returned to the village
administrator within thirty (30) days. The village administrator shall promptly
consolidate all comments and recommendations and forward them to the planning
commission. The planning commission shall promptly review all the plans and
documentation required for final plat approval in accordance with the
procedures in this section.
   (F)   Final Plat; Planning Commission Recommendation: The planning
commission shall recommend approval or disapproval of the application for final
plat approval within ninety (90) days from the date of filing the application
or the filing by the applicant of the last item of required supporting
documents, whichever date is later, unless such time is extended by mutual
consent, in writing. When applicable, the planning commission may require the
developer to submit to the village, written statements from county, state or
other public officials as may be concerned, indicating that proposals for
roadway access, storm drainage, sewerage disposal and water supply meet the
minimum requirements for such installation and all necessary permits from these
agencies have been obtained. If the planning commission recommends approval, it
shall fix upon the plat the certifying signature of its chairman, if it
recommends disapproval, it shall set forth its reasons in its own records and
provide the applicant a copy.
   (G)   Final Plat Submittal to Village Board: After approval recommendation
of the final plat by the planning commission, it shall be submitted to the
village board for review and approval. The village board must act on the final
plat within sixty (60) days, unless this time period is extended by mutual
consent of the applicant and the village board in writing.
   (H)   Final Plat; Village Board Approval: Upon approval by the village
board, the developer shall, within thirty (30) days thereafter, deliver to the
village, two (2) fully executed original Mylar plats of subdivision, one for
the recorder's office and one for the developer's engineering firm, along with
the required number of copies for recording, together with five (5) additional
copies to be recorded and retained by the village. The village shall record the
plat of subdivision within sixty (60) days upon the earlier occurrence of the
following: 1) the developer's delivery of a performance guarantee for the
completion of the public improvements; or 2) the village's acceptance of all
public improvements in the subdivision. The final plat of subdivision, and
approvals granted therein, shall be null and void if neither of the
preconditions for recording of the final plat of subdivision have occurred
within one year of the date of final plat approval by the village board. No
extensions for approval of the final plat shall be considered unless a written
application signed by the owner and/or developer is submitted to the village
clerk within one year of the date of approval of the preliminary plan or unless
otherwise stipulated and agreed to in the property's annexation agreement.
(Ord. 07-20, 9-4-2007; amd. Ord. 17-26, 12-18-2017; Ord. 22-02, 5-2-2022)
10-4-7: RESUBDIVISION EXCEPTION:
   (A)   Expedited Subdivision Approval: Under the following circumstances, an
owner of land otherwise exempt from the platting requirements codified in the
Plat Act, may divide a legal and previously subdivided lot into four (4) lots
or less without complying with the full subdivision approval process prescribed
by this title if the division does not:
      1.   Alter existing infrastructure or involve additional infrastructure;
      2.   Involve road improvements;
      3.   Involve easements of access;
      4.   Create lots that violate or necessitate a variance to comply with
the code provisions applicable to the zoning district in which the lots are
located.
   (B)   Final Resubdivision Plat Application: The owner of land seeking to
divide a legal and previously subdivided lot under this section shall file an
application for approval of the division with the village clerk, accompanied by
the appropriate platting fee, and the following documents:
      1.   Ten (10) full size, twenty-four inch by thirty-six inch (24" x 36")
copies of the plat of survey for the division; and
      2.   One full size, twenty-four inch by thirty-six inch (24" x 36") copy
of the final plat of subdivision and any existing covenants or restrictions for
the subdivision previously approved for the subdivision in which the lot is
situated; and
      3.   Ten (10) copies of documentation including, but not limited to,
proposed covenants or restrictions, which shall address future maintenance of
common areas, structures, private infrastructure, or any other shared
components; and
      4.   Such other documentation requested by the village administrator.
   (C)   Platting Fee: The owner of any property, which seeks village board
approval for a re-subdivision plat, shall submit a fee with the subdivision
plat application. The platting fee shall be one thousand dollars ($1,000.00)
for every additional single-family residential lot. Where multiple units (PUD,
condo, apartment, townhome, etc.) are located on a single lot or multiple lots,
the platting fee shall be one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) for each additional
lot, plus one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) per additional unit constructed over
one. Additional platting fees over one per lot are payable when the building
permit is issued and shall be based on the total additional units constructed
over one. The platting fee shall be two thousand dollars ($2,000.00) per
additional lot for commercial lots or industrial lots.
   (D)   Plat Of Survey Review And Approval: The plat of survey and any
covenants or restrictions shall be reviewed by village staff and the village
engineer to ensure the division is eligible for expedited subdivision approval
and such other things as they deem pertinent. Upon its approval, the plat of
survey and any covenants or restrictions shall be submitted to the village
board for review and approval. The village board shall approve or disapprove of
the final subdivision plat within sixty (60) days after its receipt unless this
time period is extended by the mutual consent of the applicant and the village
board in writing. The village board's failure to approve or disapprove of a
plat of survey subdividing existing lots within the time prescribed shall
constitute a denial.
   (E)   Plat Of Survey; Village Board Approval: Upon approval by the village
board, the owner shall, within ninety (90) days thereafter, record the plat of
survey and any covenants or restrictions with the county recorder. If not
recorded within this time, the approvals shall be null and void. The owner
shall furnish the village clerk with five (5) additional recorded copies, one
to be retained by the village clerk and the others to be distributed to the
village administrator, director of building and zoning, village engineer. (Ord.
14-47, 4-6-2015; amd. Ord. 22-02, 5-2-2022)
CHAPTER 5
PROJECT DOCUMENTS
SECTION:
10-5-1: Intent
10-5-2: Applicability
10-5-3: Document Specifications And Standards
10-5-4: Sketch Plan Documents
10-5-5: Preliminary Plat, Plan And Supporting Documents
10-5-6: Final Plat And Plans
10-5-1: INTENT:
It is the intent of the following standards to provide for the thorough,
relatively uniform presentation of pertinent development information by
developers or others wishing to alter the present condition of real property.
It is the intent of these standards to provide clear documentary evidence of
what currently exists, what is proposed, what is constructed, and what all
parties agree to. It is the intent of these standards to provide for the
control of physical aspects of documentary material so that such material may
be conveniently archived by the village. (Ord. 07-20, 9-4-2007)
10-5-2: APPLICABILITY:
These standards and specifications shall apply to the documentation for all
subdivision and development activities within the village and within the one
and one-half (11/2) mile jurisdictional area surrounding the village with the
exception of architectural drawings having to do specifically with proposed
buildings or like structures. (Ord. 07-20, 9-4-2007)
10-5-3: DOCUMENT SPECIFICATIONS AND STANDARDS:
Documents shall conform to the following standards:
   (A)   Plans shall be presented in a clear and concise manner. Any submittals
forwarded to the village for review which, in the opinion of the village
engineer or village administrator, are not complete, will not be reviewed. If
plans are not reviewed, a letter will be sent to the developer's engineer
stating that the plans have not met the minimum village standards, and the time
period for a review has not started. Any review fees incurred for an incomplete
submittal will be charged to the developer and paid from the development escrow
as stated in section
10-3-9, "Fees", of this title.
   (B)   Documents that are primarily written, forms, correspondence, etc.,
shall be eight and one-half inches by eleven inches (81/2" x 11") except
certain legal documents may be eight and one-half inches by fourteen inches
(81/2" x 14").
   (C)   Plats and plans shall be standard size sheets (approximately 24 inches
x 36 inches) unless otherwise approved by the village engineer, village planner
and/or village administrator.
   (D)   Plans shall also be submitted to the village in an electronic format
acceptable to the village. The plans shall be generated with details as
specified by the village. The required information is available from the
village engineer in electronic format.
   (E)   Documents, plats, and plans that consist of more than one sheet shall
be bound at the top or left side. Bound sheets shall have a margin of one and
one-half inches (11/2") to two inches (2") on the bound side.
   (F)   Certain incidental documentation such as letters of transmittal,
receipts, etc., may vary from the above standards and specifications. Some of
the sketches or other early drawing items required in the conceptual stage of a
project may also vary from the above standards and specifications except that
no conceptual stage documentation shall be smaller than eight and one-half
inches by eleven inches (81/2" x 11").
   (G)   Documents that are eleven inches by seventeen inches (11" x 17") shall
be folded to eight and one-half inches by eleven inches (81/2" x 11").
   (H)   Information conveyed by radio, telephone or other verbal methods shall
not be considered binding unless documentation is also provided. The intent of
this provision is to encourage the conveyance of important information by
documentation so each transaction is as clear and unambiguous as possible.
   (I)   Documents conveyed through the use of facsimile transceivers are to be
considered as less binding than conveyance of original signature documents by
mail or by hand delivery. Legal documents involving the village shall all be
original signature documents. (Ord. 07-20, 9-4-2007)
10-5-4: SKETCH PLAN DOCUMENTS:
   (A)   Purpose And Objective: The purpose of sketch plan documentation is to
establish where the proposed project is located, whether the applicant owns or
is allowed to develop the property in question, the type and scope of the
project, and any potential problems with construction in the area of the
project. This information will determine whether or not the proposed project is
feasible, what level of planning will be necessary, the logistics related to
planning and constructing the proposed project, possible problems to be
addressed, and the level of village involvement that will be required. Sketch
plan approval does not grant the developer relief or variance from subdivision
and zoning standards and requirements.
   (B)   Required Documents: Twenty (20) copies of the following shall be
submitted to the village clerk:
      1.   Evidence Of Ownership: The applicant shall provide evidence of
ownership or evidence of approval of the owner to develop the proposed project
site. If the ownership is in a trust, the applicant shall provide the name of
the trustee(s), the name of the trust beneficiary(ies), and the trust number.
The applicant must also state the interest the applicant has in the property,
i.e., attorney/client privilege, an option to purchase, direct ownership, etc.
      2.   Location Map: The applicant shall provide a map showing the location
of the proposed project site as well as nearby transportation routes and other
significant features. The location map shall include a north arrow, title, bar
scale, and date.
      3.   Concept Plan: The applicant shall provide the general concept plan
at one inch equals two hundred feet (1" = 200') scale, colored to designate
requested zoning and open space. This plan shall include lot numbering and
street layout to allow an overall view of the development.
      4.   Topographical Plat: The applicant shall provide a topographical plat
of the proposed project site showing all existing zoning, land use, land
characteristics, woods, wetlands, floodplains, pertinent nearby municipal
improvements, public utilities, easements, buildings, etc., in and within two
hundred fifty feet (250') of the site. The topographical plat shall include a
north arrow, title, bar scale and date. The scale (1:20, 1:40, 1:50, 1:100) of
the plat shall be appropriate to the size of the site and/or as requested by
the village. Contours shall be at no more than one foot (1') intervals and
shall be based on bench mark elevations using the USGS datum. Portions of this
provision may be waived at the option of the village engineer, village planner
and/or village administrator based on the scope of the proposed project. The
village may require additional topographical data, particularly if there
appears to be problems with drainage.
      5.   Site Plan: The applicant shall provide a series of drawings or
sketches made on copies of the topographical plat showing the proposed layout
of streets, lots, and site improvements in relation to the existing features,
showing the following:
         (a)   Boundary lines of the site with dimensions.
         (b)   Proposed lots, easements, building setback lines, building
locations and separations, and pedestrian considerations, with the approximate
dimensions of each lot as well as size shown in square feet and in acres. Lots
shall be numbered for the whole development in a consecutive and logical order.
         (c)   Proposed street layout, sidewalks, off street parking, loading
spaces, fire lanes, and exterior street improvements such as turning lanes. All
proposed streets shall also indicate widths.
         (d)   Proposed open spaces, school sites, park sites, and private
recreation facilities.
         (e)   Zoning of lots and of all adjoining areas.
         (f)   Alternate designs or layouts with only enough detail to make the
alternatives understandable.
         (g)   Proposed drainage and storm water detention/retention locations
including a narrative describing how storm water runoff control will be
provided for.
         (h)   Proposed sewer and water locations.
      6.   Land Use Schedule: The following information shall be provided on
the plan maps or other documents submitted:
         (a)   Total acreage of site.
         (b)   Proposed land use by acreage, units and percent of total. For
park and school areas, include required acreage as well as proposed acreage.
         (c)   Proposed gross, net residential density for residential portions
of the proposed project.
         (d)   Proposed floor area ratio and land coverage in percent for
nonresidential portions of the proposed project.
      7.   Subdivision And Street Naming:
         (a)   New subdivisions will provide a theme unused in other
subdivisions for determining street names within the subdivision. The intent is
to establish unique identification of the subdivision through the theme and
street names. Repetition of portions of existing subdivision names shall not be
allowed (such as Brookridge, Brook Fields, Brookgate, Stonebrook, etc.).
Repetition creates confusion for residents and emergency personnel. Both the
theme and actual street names are subject to approval of the village of
Manteno, and must be permanently identified prior to preliminary plat approval.
         (b)   New street names shall not duplicate the themes or names of
existing streets, but streets that are continuations of others already in
existence and named shall bear the name of the existing street.
         (c)   A street running in one direction will have one name only and
should have the same name throughout its entire length.
         (d)   A street which jogs sharply shall be given a different name
beginning at the location of the jog and continuing in the different direction.
The angle of deviation and the distance for which it continues will be
determining factors for a name change requirement.
         (e)   If a street ends in a backtracking curve, that circle, loop,
bend or way may be designated with the same name as the main street. Example:
Leahy Circle is off of the dead end Leahy Avenue; White Tail Bend is at the end
of White Tail Drive.
         (f)   Definitions:
            AVENUE: Street running east-west.
               BEND: Sharp "U" at end of a street.
               BOULEVARD: Street divided by a landscaped center island.
               CIRCLE OR LOOP: Secondary street that begins and circles back to
terminate on the same road.
               COURT: Permanently closed street such as a cul-de-sac.
               DRIVE: Winding thoroughfare that meanders about and continues
through to other rights of way.
               LANE: Minor street less than one thousand feet (1,000').
               PARKWAY: Unusually wide, scenic thoroughfare with shade trees
and shrubbery in the center plat, or sided on at least one side by a park,
waterway or wooded area for its entire length.
               PATH: Minor diagonal street, usually between a north-south
street and an east-west avenue.
               PLACE: A short curvilinear or diagonal street or a cul-de- sac
or permanent dead end road.
               ROAD: Diagonal, frequently used street, longer than one thousand
feet (1,000'), connecting with primary streets.
               RUN: Minor diagonal street or one which changes direction.
               STREET: Street running north-south.
               TRAIL: Curvilinear street.
               TURN: A minor street that sharply curves, beginning and ending
on different streets.
               WAY: A minor street under one thousand feet (1,000') that may
change direction. (Ord. 07-20, 9-4-2007)
10-5-5: PRELIMINARY PLAT, PLAN AND SUPPORTING DOCUMENTS:
   (A)   Purpose And Objective: The purpose of preliminary stage documentation
is to establish planning and design solutions to the problems posed by the
project as conceived. In this stage, other agencies will be provided the
opportunity to comment on the project from their own perspective. The village
will finalize its requirements related to the project and will review the
proposed planning and design solutions.
   (B)   Preliminary Plat And Plan: When any owner of land lying within the
corporate limits of the village of Manteno or within one and one-half (11/2)
miles of the corporate limits desires to subdivide such lands, the owner shall
submit to the village administrator twenty (20) standard size copies and one
eleven inch by seventeen inch (11" x 17") copy of:
      1.   Preliminary plat drawn to a scale of not less than one inch equals
one hundred feet (1" = 100') with supporting sheets which shall constitute a
part thereof, and
      2.   Preliminary engineering improvement plan drawn at a scale of not
less than one inch equals one hundred feet (1" = 100') showing all proposed
improvements. The preliminary plat shall show all land owned, options, or
proposed to be developed by the subdivider. Such plat and plan shall show and
give the following information.
   (C)   Required Information:
      1.   Preliminary Plat:
         (a)   The length and bearing of external boundaries, including such
curve data as radius, chord length and bearing, of the proposed subdivision,
the total acreage contained therein, along with a legal description of the
property to be subdivided;
         (b)   The name of the proposed subdivision; the name, address and
phone number of the subdivider; the name of the surveyor who prepared the plat;
         (c)   The location of existing corporate boundaries at or near the
subdivision;
         (d)   The subdivision of lands within and immediately adjoining for a
distance of one hundred fifty feet (150') from the boundary of the proposed
subdivision and the names, location and dimensions of all existing public
streets, railways, watercourses or other such public or private easements and
rights of way within the adjoining lands and proposed subdivision;
         (e)   The existing zoning district classification under the village of
Manteno or the Kankakee County zoning ordinance for adjoining lands and the
land to be subdivided;
         (f)   The names, locations, dimensions, widths, bearings, and curve
data within the proposed subdivision of all proposed streets, alleys,
construction routes, easements, parks, playgrounds, and other open spaces
proposed to be dedicated to the public use;
         (g)   The blocks and/or lots into which the project is proposed to be
subdivided, all dimensions thereof including, but not limited to: width of each
lot at the front line, length and location of building setback line, length of
side lot lines, all lots consecutively numbered within the entire development;
the purpose of each lot not dedicated to residential use; area of lots in
square feet;
         (h)   All preliminary plats shall be at a scale not less than one inch
equals one hundred feet (1" = 100') and shall be complete with north arrow, bar
scale, date of preparation, and any other information or data that the village
may require for full and complete consideration of the proposed preliminary
plat for the subdivision;
      2.   Preliminary Improvement Plan:
         (a)   The length and bearing of external boundaries, including such
curve data as radius, chord length and bearing, of the proposed subdivision,
and the total acreage contained therein;
         (b)   The name of the proposed subdivision; the name, address and
phone number of the subdivider, developer, and the name of the engineer who
prepared the plan;
         (c)   The character of lands within and immediately adjoining for a
distance of one hundred fifty feet (150') from the proposed subdivision
boundaries, showing the subdivision thereof, if subdivided, and the location
and dimensions of existing public streets, alleys, sanitary and storm sewers,
culverts and drain tile, water supply mains, gas and/or petroleum pipelines,
underground electrical and telephone lines, bridges, watercourses, railways,
permanent historical features, park and school sites, public utility easements
or other then dedicated properties, if any, called out as "existing" on the
plan and shown in such a manner as to be differentiated from proposed
improvements;
         (d)   Existing ground contours at vertical intervals of not more than
one foot (1') intervals based on the United States geological survey datum
(contours of 2 foot intervals shall be allowed only when and if unusual
topographic features limit plan clarity); environmental or distinguishing
natural features, wetlands, trees of six inches (6") or more in diameter
measured four and one-half feet (41/2') above the ground with common tree
names, existing buildings and present use, bodies of water, with the elevation,
if any, shown in such a manner as to be differentiated from proposed
improvements;
         (e)   The existing zoning district classification under the village of
Manteno or Kankakee County zoning ordinance for adjoining lands and the land to
be subdivided;
         (f)   The names, locations, widths, and other general dimensions of
proposed streets, alleys (if allowed and approved by the village), easements,
parks, playgrounds, school sites, and other open spaces proposed to be
dedicated to the public use;
         (g)   The blocks and lots into which the project is proposed to be
subdivided, with dimensions, the numbering of all lots in a consecutive manner
for the entire subdivision, the maximum number of residential units (PUD,
condo, apartment, townhome, etc.) on each multi-unit lot, the purpose and area
in acreage of all lots not dedicated for residential use;
         (h)   A general description of the type, kind, character, extent and
location of all improvements as proposed to be constructed or installed along
with sufficient detail as may be required to convey the general basis of design
for sewer, water and other improvements both on site and off site for the
development of the subdivision according to this title;
         (i)   A general description of the type, character, extent and
location of all storm water runoff control facilities, including critical spot
elevations, according to this title and the village of Manteno storm water
management ordinance and other applicable village ordinances, including a
summary of storm water control data;
         (j)   Typical street cross sections showing curbs, pavement width,
sidewalks, width of right of way, street name and classification; general
description of proposed street grades, drainage facilities and easements;
         (k)   All preliminary plans shall be at a scale of one inch equals one
hundred feet (1" = 100') and shall be complete with north arrow, bar scale,
legend, and any other information or data that the village engineer or planning
commission may require for full and complete consideration of the proposed
preliminary plan for the subdivision. Said plan shall be provided in a format
approved by the village;
         (l)   A location map at a scale of not less than one inch equals two
thousand feet (1" = 2,000') showing the relationship of the subdivision to its
surroundings within one-half (1/2) mile including section lines, primary and
collector roads;
         (m)   Proposed phasing of the development of the proposed subdivision,
if any, and the corresponding phasing of any and all improvements thereof;
         (n)   A preliminary landscaping plan;
         (o)   All streetlights, street signs and pavement markings as required
by the village engineer.
      3.   Supporting Documents:
         (a)   Annexation or development agreement with the village of Manteno,
if contiguous, or a letter of intent signed by the owners stating the desires
of the owners of the property or the subdivider pertaining to annexation to the
village if said property is not presently within the corporate boundary;
         (b)   A complete listing of all existing covenants which apply to the
land to be subdivided. Proposed covenants for the subdivision, to be reviewed
by village staff, engineer and attorney. Summary of all restrictions intended
to be imposed by the final plat or by deeds of conveyance as to the use of all
property within the subdivision, including area of buildings for residential
use, if any;
         (c)   A watershed map such as the flood insurance rate map (FIRM) and
flood insurance study published by the Federal Emergency Management Agency, on
site wetlands areas, and any other pertinent watershed information;
         (d)   Review and report by the applicable soil and water conservation
district;
         (e)   Soils report which is to be used in the bearing capacity design
for foundations, sewers, pavement subgrades and for environmental concerns;
         (f)   Preliminary design calculations and drawings for stormwater
runoff and control facilities as required herein;
         (g)   Traffic study prepared by a qualified independent professional
or professional firm, for all proposed residential developments with greater
than one hundred (100) units and for all commercial and industrial development
when requested by the Village Engineer. (Ord. 07-20, 9-4-2007)
10-5-6: FINAL PLAT AND PLANS:
The subdivider shall, within one year after approval of the preliminary plat
and improvement plans, file with the Village two (2) Mylar copies with original
signatures, and twenty (20) standard size copies and one (1) eleven inch by
seventeen inch (11" x 17") copy of a final plat, and eight (8) copies of the
final improvement plans, each complete with all supporting documents as
required herein, all provided in electronic format approved by the Village.
(Ord. 17-26, 12-18-2017)
The said final plat and improvement plans shall be in strict conformance with
the preliminary plat and preliminary improvement plans, shall be in final form
for recording and shall include all of the property included in the preliminary
plat and improvement plans, unless, prior to the expiration of the aforesaid
one year, the subdivider shall request and the Village Board shall grant to the
subdivider permission to submit a final plat and improvement plans as aforesaid
covering only a portion of the property included in the preliminary plat and
improvement plans; provided, however, that nothing hereinabove set forth shall
prevent the Village Board from requiring that final approval be considered for
only a portion of the property covered by the preliminary plat and improvement
plans due to the inability of the Village to meet the needs created by final
approval of the entire parcel.
No extensions for approval of final plat shall be considered unless a written
application signed by the owners and developers is submitted to the Village
Clerk within one year of the date of approval of the preliminary plat or unless
otherwise stipulated and agreed to in the property's annexation agreement.
   (A)   Final Plat:
      1.   The final plat shall be drawn in black ink on tracing cloth or Mylar
to a scale of not less than one inch equals one hundred feet (1" = 100') and
shall show the following information thereon:
         (a)   The name or names of the owners of the property;
         (b)   The name, seal and signature of the registered land surveyor who
prepared the plat and date thereof;
         (c)   The precise legal description of the property to be subdivided;
         (d)   The boundary of the plat based on accurate traverse, with
angular and linear dimensions;
         (e)   Location of all permanent monuments;
         (f)   North arrow, and bar scale;
         (g)   Vicinity map;
         (h)   All other measurements, dimensions, data, and certificates
required by the Illinois Plat Act;
         (i)   Name of subdivision and phase number;
         (j)   The name, purpose, and exact width of all easements and rights-
of-way including streets and alleys;
         (k)   The dimensions of all lots; area of all lots in square feet;
         (l)   All lots numbered as in the preliminary plat and the purpose of
all nonresidential lots;
         (m)   The number of degrees, minutes and seconds of all lot angles
other than ninety degrees (90°), except that when the lines in any tier of lots
are parallel, it shall be sufficient to mark only the outer lot. When any angle
is between a curve and its tangent, the angle shown shall be that between the
tangent and the main chord of the curve. When between curves of different
radii, the angle between the main chords shall be shown;
         (n)   When a street is on a circular curve, the main chord of the
centerline shall be drawn as a dotted line in its proper place; and, either on
it or, preferably, in an adjoining table, shall be noted its bearing and
length, the radius of the circle of which the curve is a part, and the central
angle subtended. The lot lines on the street sides may be shown in the same
manner, or by bearings or angles of distances. When a circular curve of thirty
foot (30') radius or less is used to round off the intersection between two (2)
straight lines, it shall be tangent to both straight lines; it shall be
sufficient to show on the plat the radius of the curve and the tangent
distances from the points of curvature to the point of intersection of the
straight line;
         (o)   Street names as approved by village;
         (p)   Certification as required.
      2.   On any such plat showing a tract or tracts of land dedicated for
park, playground, or other public use, if such tract or tracts are not located
within the corporate limits of the village of Manteno, the certificate of
dedication shall provide that the future official act of annexation of such
tract or tracts to the village of Manteno shall constitute a transfer of the
title to such tract or tracts to the village of Manteno for such public use.
   (B)   Final Improvement Plans:
      1.   Intent: The improvement plan stage is for the purpose of accurately
showing how the improvements will be constructed in order to conform to the
layout and design objectives of the preliminary plan. As such, the improvement
plan process is an extension of the preliminary plan process. Where conditions
so warrant, the village may require that portions of improvement plans be
submitted during the preliminary plan review process in order to determine the
land's suitability for the preliminary plan design. Any required off site
improvements and engineering studies shall be provided and paid for by the
owner and/or subdivider upon request by the village. Where the subdivision is
to be developed in phases, and where soil and/or topographical conditions so
warrant, the village may require that improvement plans for the entire
preliminary plan area be submitted prior to the construction of improvements.
      2.   Filing: Prior to the submittal of the final plat, the applicant
shall submit five (5) complete sets of plans and specifications for the
construction of the proposed site improvements. Following approval by the
village engineer, eight (8) copies of the final improvement plans shall be
submitted to the planning commission with the final plat. Improvement plans
shall not be approved until after the site has been zoned according to the uses
proposed in the approved preliminary plan. Said plans shall be prepared by an
Illinois registered professional engineer on twenty four inch by thirty six
inch (24" x 36") quality sheets, and be designed in accordance with applicable
village ordinances.
      3.   Final Engineering Plans: Final engineering plans shall, as a
minimum, consist of the following:
         (a)   Title Sheet:
            (1)   Subdivision name and unit number or phase number;
            (2)   Location map;
            (3)   Seal, signature, address, and phone number of the registered
professional engineer who prepared the plans and the person or firm that
prepared the topographic surveys;
            (4)   Developer's name, address, and phone number;
            (5)   Index of sheets;
            (6)   A minimum of three (3) bench marks;
            (7)   Dates of preparation and any revisions;
            (8)   Summary of quantities for each division of improvement work;
            (9)   Standard legend.
         (b)   Project Specifications And General Construction Notes: Project
specifications (may be separately bound) and general construction notes shall
include the following provisions:
            (1)   All on site and off site improvements shall be constructed in
accordance with the requirements of the "village of Manteno";
            (2)   Permits shall be obtained from all outside governmental
agencies having jurisdiction;
            (3)   All structure adjustments shall be accomplished with concrete
or preformed rubber adjusting rings;
            (4)   Existing field tiles encountered during construction shall be
either integrated into the storm sewer system, removed, plugged or rerouted in
a manner deemed appropriate by the village engineer;
            (5)   The developer shall be responsible for all adjustments before
and after final inspection, prior to final acceptance by the village of
Manteno;
            (6)   The village must have forty eight (48) hours' notice prior to
the initiation of construction activity;
            (7)   Material specifications comply with village standards and
include:
               A.   Paving base materials;
               B.   Paving surface materials;
               C.   Concrete materials;
               D.   Pipe materials;
            (8)   All restoration work in the public right of way is subject to
the specific approval of the village engineer;
            (9)   Village police department, fire district and Aqua Illinois
shall be notified a minimum of forty eight (48) hours prior to road or water
main shutdowns;
            (10)   Contractor shall contact JULIE (1-800-892-0123 or 811) prior
to any excavation work (including section, township, and range numbers of
property with note);
            (11)   Contractor shall maintain pavement crossing cuts until final
pavement restoration is complete and accepted by the village engineer;
            (12)   Sanitary sewer plans and specifications shall conform to the
latest edition of "Standard Specifications For Water And Sewer Main
Construction In Illinois" and village ordinances. If a conflict arises, the
more stringent specifications shall govern;
            (13)   Pavement, curb and gutter, sidewalks, and storm sewer shall
conform to the latest edition of "Standard Specifications For Road And Bridge
Construction", IDOT;
            (14)   A reproducible Mylar set and five (5) copies of "record
drawings" shall be submitted to the village in a format approved by the village
prior to any final acceptance and in an electronic format approved by the
village. Said "record drawings" shall indicate the exact final location and
layout of all improvements, include verification of all building pad, top of
foundation, invert, rim and spot grade elevations, and incorporate all field
design changes approved by the village.
         (c)   Geometric Plan:
            (1)   The geometric plan to show site boundaries and lot layout
shall be a copy of the final plat, reduced if required, without the
certificates;
            (2)   All necessary geometric data required to layout the proposed
improvements;
            (3)   Show all streets adjacent to and within one hundred feet
(100') of project site;
            (4)   Show all site access roadways and driveways within one
hundred feet (100') of project site;
            (5)   All necessary geometric data required to show existing and
proposed easements;
            (6)   Street right of way width;
            (7)   Street centerline and radii and curve data;
            (8)   Right of way radii and curve data;
            (9)   Street pavement width;
            (10)   Location of curb and gutter;
            (11)   Intersection geometric data;
            (12)   Parking lot dimensioning and data including: lot aisle
widths, space dimensions, handicap space dimensions; loading berth dimensions,
curb radii, angle of parking, throat width of drives, angle of driveway at
street intersection;
            (13)   Setback lines and distances for all proposed buildings,
parking lots, etc.;
            (14)   Proposed building footprint outlines;
            (15)   Nonresidential site area in square feet:
               A. Office building area in square feet (if applicable);
               B. Warehouse building area in square feet (if applicable);
            (16)   Building envelope:
               A.   Distance to front lot line, rear lot line, interior side
lot line, and exterior lot line (if applicable);
               B.   Distance to all existing off site buildings within one
hundred feet (100') of the subject site.
         (d)   Grading Plan: Grading plan, which includes the street paving
plan, all storm sewer lines and structures, storm water retention/detention
facilities, erosion control measures, floodplain and wetland protection
measures;
            (1)   Existing and proposed finished ground topography of the site
at one foot (1') contour intervals extending for one hundred feet (100') onto
adjacent properties;
            (2)   All existing structures located and described;
            (3)   All streets, driveways, parking lots, and other paved areas;
            (4)   Longitudinal slope of parkways and driveways where required;
            (5)   Locations of all trees exceeding six inches (6") in diameter;
            (6)   Flood hazard and wetlands delineation:
               A.   Floodway delineation;
               B.   100-year floodplain delineation;
               C.    Drainage watershed delineation;
               D.   Wetlands and other flora areas delineation;
               E.   Delineation of all major watercourses;
            (7)   Curb and gutter, sidewalks;
            (8)   Typical street cross section:
               A.   Transverse slope;
               B.   Superelevation;
               C.   Pavement design and structural calculations, if required by
the village engineer;
            (9)   Storm and sump pump drainage appurtenances:
               A.   Number of all storm sewer structures;
               B.   Rim and invert grades and pipe sizes noted for all drainage
structures;
            (10)   All elevations including contours shall be referenced to
USGS datum NAVD 88:
               A.   Existing contours to be shown as light dashed lines;
               B.   Proposed contours to be shown as heavy solid lines;
            (11)   Spot elevations at break points, all lot corners, top curb
elevation at all property lines extended to curb line, profiles (cross section
break points) of drainage paths and at any other location as required to
demonstrate proper drainage or as required by the village engineer;
            (12)   Proposed building footprint with top foundation elevation
and garage floor elevation. Basement floor elevation for proposed building with
walkout basement or lowest unprotected opening adjacent to flood hazard area;
            (13)   Drainage arrows around all proposed building foundations,
along lot lines, swales, ditches, and wherever else required to delineate
surface drainage direction and pattern;
            (14)   Retaining wall and details with indication of lot ownership;
            (15)   Storm water overflow routing with applicable cross sections
and profiles;
            (16)   Storm water retention or detention storage basin:
               A.   Outline of the storage basin with finished contours at one
foot (1') intervals;
               B.   Typical cross sections showing the degree of side slopes,
top of bank elevations, bottom elevations and proposed storage elevations;
               C.   Finished surface restoration including any slope
stabilization or protection;
               D.   Inlet and release structures with details;
               E.   Any subsurface (bottom) drainage system;
               F.   Designation if a dry or wet bottom basin;
               G.   High and, where applicable, normal water storage elevation;
               H.   Calculated and required water storage volume in acre-feet;
               I.   Any retention basin shall have the following note in the
plans:
   DURING RETENTION BASIN CONSTRUCTION, THE DEVELOPER SHALL HAVE HIS SOILS
ENGINEER INSPECT THE SOIL TO DETERMINE IF THE RETENTION BASIN WILL HOLD WATER
AT THE NORMAL WATER LEVEL. ALL NECESSARY PROVISIONS WILL BE MADE TO ASSURE THE
RETENTION BASIN HOLDS WATER, INCLUDING A CLAY BARRIER, BENTONITE TREATMENT OR
LINER. A REGISTERED PROFESSIONAL ENGINEER FROM THE SOILS ENGINEERING FIRM SHALL
SUBMIT A SIGNED AND SEALED LETTER CERTIFYING THAT THE RETENTION BASIN WILL HOLD
WATER AT THE NORMAL WATER LEVEL.
            (17)   Erosion and sedimentation control measures applicable to
site grading.
         (e)   Master And Detailed Utility Plan: Master and detailed utility
plan, which shows all storm sewers, sump pump drain lines, sanitary sewers,
water main and any other public utility lines with appurtenant structures:
            (1)   Location and size (if applicable) of all existing utility
lines and their appurtenant structures located on site or within the
construction limits of proposed off site improvements;
            (2)   Location and size of all proposed on site and off site water
mains, sanitary sewers, storm sewers, and sump pump drain lines, and their
appurtenant structures (hydrants, valves, manholes, etc.) which shall be
numbered for reference;
            (3)   The finished frame elevation and invert elevations shall be
given for all structures;
            (4)   The plan shall indicate size, slope, purpose, length, and
type of material of all proposed utility lines;
            (5)   Show all locations where granular trench backfill is
required;
            (6)   All existing structures which require adjusting,
reconstruction, or filling shall be noted on plan;
            (7)   The plan shall conform to overall village plans for any trunk
lines, existing or proposed, which traverse the subdivision;
            (8)   Depict adjacent properties for proper utility and street
match;
            (9)   Provide vertical and horizontal clearance between water main
and sanitary/storm sewer in accordance with standard specifications.
         (f)   Lighting Plans: Lighting plans shall include the layout for
lighting standards and underground conduits and unit duct for off street
parking lighting and/or public street lighting systems:
            (1)   Light pole locations, heights, and spacing;
            (2)   Control system and underground site wiring diagram specifying
conduit or unit duct and wire size, locations, and other materials;
            (3)   Typical installation section showing:
               A.   Type of base and pole;
               B.   Bracket or arm;
               C.   Luminaire wattage type lamp and ballast provided;
               D.   Mounting height;
            (4)   Catalog cuts and specifications from manufacturer shall be
submitted for approval if requested by the village engineer, or if village
approved specialty lights or poles are different from the lights and poles
specified in the technical standards.
         (g)   Street Plan And Profiles:
            (1)   Plan view of all proposed street and sidewalk improvements
showing, but not limited to, street name, centerlines with stationing,
incrementally progressing from the bottom or left of the page to the top or
right of the page, respectively, and horizontal curve data, right of way lines
and widths, pavement outline and widths, sidewalks, curb and gutter, return
radii, all storm sewers and other drain lines with structures, and, where
applicable, shoulders and drainage ditches;
            (2)   Plan view shall show all locations where granular trench
backfill is required;
            (3)   Centerline profile of existing ground line with elevations
shown at fifty foot (50') intervals, or as needed to indicate changes in
gradient;
            (4)   Centerline profile of proposed pavement surface with grades,
vertical curve data, and elevations shown at fifty foot (50') intervals, or as
needed to indicate changes in gradient;
            (5)   Profile of all proposed storm sewers, sanitary sewers, water
mains and other drain lines with structures within the plan view area showing
pipe size, slope, length, type of material, and finished frame and invert
elevations for structures;
            (6)   Profile of all utility crossings where a grade conflict may
occur;
            (7)   Typical street cross sections showing all proposed street
construction within the right of way and the calculated pavement structural
number;
            (8)   Street cross sections at fifty foot (50') intervals, or as
requested by the village engineer;
            (9)   Plan view scale shall be one inch equals forty feet (1" =
40'), and profile scales shall be the same as the plan view for the horizontal
and for the vertical, one inch equals forty feet (1" = 40'), unless different
scales are allowed or required by the village engineer.
         (h)   Construction Details: Construction details shall be of the type
standard with the village of Manteno including, but not limited to:
            (1)   Manholes, inlets, vaults;
            (2)   Standard utility structure covers;
            (3)   Drainage structures;
            (4)   Concrete curb and gutter;
            (5)   Service connections;
            (6)   Paving installation.
         (i)   Water Main, Sanitary And Storm Sewer Profiles: Water main,
sanitary and storm sewer profiles shall be shown unless deemed unnecessary in
writing by the village engineer.
         (j)   Landscaping Plan: Landscaping plan shall include trees to be
preserved, screening where required, the restoration of site flora and other
areas to be stabilized and enriched according to this title and all other
village requirements.
         (k)   Soil Erosion And Sedimentation Plan: Soil erosion and
sedimentation plan shall include the location, type, and details of all
required site soil erosion control measures, and shall show any proposed ground
cover areas such as seeding, sodding, etc.
      4.   Plan Sheet Contents: Each plan sheet shall include the following
information:
         (a)   A title block that includes the project name, job number, sheet
title (geometric, grading, etc.), sheet number, date of preparation, and latest
revision date;
         (b)   North arrow, directed to the top or right of the page, and bar
scale;
         (c)   Additional general plan notes and legend as may be required;
         (d)   Legible text not covered by other text, symbols, or line work;
         (e)   Text displayed to be read from the bottom or right of the page;
         (f)   Text at a legible size, to be determined by the village
engineer.
   (C)   Supporting Documents:
      1.   A detailed statement by the subdivider setting forth the nature,
kind, character, and extent of all improvements that will be constructed within
the subdivision, together with complete plans, profiles, and specifications
clearly describing the same, with agreement to construct same in accordance
therewith.
      2.   A statement by a professional engineer registered in the state of
Illinois giving a detailed estimate of the total cost of construction for all
proposed improvements.
      3.   Any and all documents as may be required by the village of Manteno
to ensure that the dedication of all required rights of way and the granting of
all required easements has been or will be established.
      4.   Any covenants or other documents which place certain restrictions on
the use and development of the property and is intended to be recorded with the
final plat.
      5.   Five (5) completed copies of all permit application forms (IEPA,
IDOT, IDOWR, etc.) required for construction of the proposed improvements.
      6.   Proof of compliance with all applicable impact fee ordinances.
      7.   Proof of compliance with all applicable ordinances.
      8.   Final studies, reports, drawings, and calculations for all proposed
storm water sewers, drain lines, culverts, retention or detention storage
basins, flood routing, and any other site storm water management facilities.
(Ord. 07-20, 9-4-2007)
CHAPTER 6
CONSTRUCTION, INSPECTION, AND UTILITY ACCEPTANCE PROCEDURE
SECTION:
10-6-1: General Considerations
10-6-2: Preconstruction Meeting
10-6-3: Insurance Certificates
10-6-4: Notice Of Commencement
10-6-5: Periodic Progress Meetings
10-6-6: Inspection, Compliance, And Correction Notice Procedures
10-6-7: Term For Completion Of Public Improvements
10-6-8: Performance Guarantee
10-6-9: Final Inspection
10-6-10: Protection Of Existing Improvements
10-6-11: Maintenance Of Required Utilities Prior To Village Acceptance
10-6-12: Acceptance Of Improvements
10-6-13: Warranty Period And Maintenance Bond
10-6-14: Record Drawings
10-6-1: GENERAL CONSIDERATIONS:
   (A)   Design Engineer: The subdivider shall be represented by the
subdivision design engineer to interpret the plans and specifications, make
design changes and prepare record drawings. (Ord. 07-20, 9-4-2007)
   (B)   Improvements: The developer shall commence with, and continue
diligently thereafter, with the construction and installation of the
subdivision's public improvements upon approval by the Board of Trustees of a
final plat of subdivision. (Ord. 17-26, 12-18-2017)
   (C)   Preliminary Grading And Preparation Of The Property For Development:
The developer shall, at his own risk, have the right, prior to obtaining
approval of the final engineering drawings and prior to approval of a final
plat, undertake preliminary grading work, temporary detention, filling and soil
stockpiling on the property in preparation for the development, upon submittal
of a grading plan, soil erosion plan, and a restoration bond all subject to the
review and approval of the Village Engineer.
   (D)   Resident Project Representative: The Village Engineer and/or Village
field inspector shall perform the duties of resident project representative and
conduct periodic observations of the public improvements, witness the tests of
the public improvements, review and recommend action relative to construction
guarantee, advise the Village of potential problems, conduct semifinal and
final inspections of the improvements. Upon completion of the public
improvements and receipt of the record drawings, the Village Engineer shall
update the Village atlas maps. Services and costs of the engineer incurred by
the Village shall be paid from the developer's established escrow account.
(Ord. 07-20, 9-4-2007)
10-6-2: PRECONSTRUCTION MEETING:
After a general contractor has been engaged but before construction shall
begin, the developer shall convene a preconstruction meeting. Representatives
of the general contractor and the Village must attend. Representatives of other
public or quasi-public agencies shall be invited by the Village Engineer and
may attend at their option. The objective of the meeting is to review the scope
of the project, establish review/inspection points, coordinate schedules and
identify "key" concerns. (Ord. 07-20, 9-4-2007)
10-6-3: INSURANCE CERTIFICATES:
   (A)   The developer shall, prior to commencing construction work, file with
both the Village and the Village Engineer, certificates of insurance showing
coverage of all insurance required, signed by the insurance companies or their
authorized agents. The certificate of insurance shall cover their employees,
the Village of Manteno and the Village Engineer, and including their respective
officers, directors, employees, agents and other consultants, with rated
companies, in amounts as noted below. Insurance covering the Village and the
Village Engineer, as "additionally insured" parties shall not be modified by
riders that reduce the protection provided the Village and the Village
Engineers to less than that afforded the applicant and his/her employees.
   (B)   The developer shall provide and maintain comprehensive general
liability insurance which will protect the Village of Manteno, the Village
Engineer and each of their officers, employees, agents and consultants from
claims which may arise out of or result from the performance of work by anyone
directly or indirectly employed by the contractor or subcontractor, or by
anyone for whose acts the contractor may be liable. Comprehensive general
liability insurance including automobile shall provide coverage in the amount
of one million dollars ($1,000,000.00) per accident for property damage and one
million dollars ($1,000,000.00) per person and three million dollars
($3,000,000.00) umbrella liability aggregate, per accident for bodily injury,
sickness of disease, or death of any person and provide workers' compensation
insurance at a minimum of one hundred thousand dollars ($100,000.00).
   (C)   The policies of insurance so required above to be purchased and
maintained shall be furnished by insurers with A.M. Best Company rating of at
least A- (excellent), and a financial category of IX or greater.
   (D)   With respect to comprehensive general liability insurance, the
insurance shall remain in effect at least until final release of the
performance guarantee letter of credit and at all times thereafter when the
developer may be correcting, removing or replacing defective work in accordance
with this title. Thirty (30) day written notice to each additional insured is
required prior to cancellation of policy. (Ord. 07-20, 9-4-2007)
10-6-4: NOTICE OF COMMENCEMENT:
   (A)   The developer shall not commence work until the notice of commencement
is provided, pursuant to this section and not until the certificates of
insurance showing coverage of all insurance required, signed by the insurance
companies or their authorized agents has been filed with both the Village and
the Village Engineer. Each certificate shall provide that coverage and shall
not be terminated or reduced without thirty (30) days' advance written notice
to the Village Clerk and the Village Engineer.
   (B)   The developer or the contractor shall notify the Village field
inspector and the Village Engineer at least forty eight (48) hours before
construction is to begin. This provision shall apply also to the resumption of
construction after a break of three (3) or more working days and to the
temporary halting of construction; except for holidays. Significant changes in
the construction schedule shall be reported to the Village field inspector and
Village Engineer. (Ord. 07-20, 9-4-2007)
10-6-5: PERIODIC PROGRESS MEETINGS:
Additional progress meetings may be convened by the Village as deemed
necessary. Periodic progress meetings shall be scheduled as part of the
preconstruction meeting. (Ord. 07-20, 9-4-2007)
10-6-6: INSPECTION, COMPLIANCE, AND CORRECTION NOTICE PROCEDURES:
   (A)   During the course of construction, the Village Engineer or Village
field inspector shall provide construction observation of the work in order to
ensure compliance with the Village approved plans and specifications, this
title, and according to good engineering and construction practices.
   (B)   Upon notification of noncompliance, the developer shall immediately
suspend work on that portion of the development identified by the Village
Engineer or Village field inspector as not in conformance to the terms of this
title or the Village approved plans and specifications and correct all
nonconformity within forty eight (48) hours, or other time period as agreed
upon, in writing, by the Village Engineer. (Ord. 07-20, 9-4-2007)
10-6-7: TERM FOR COMPLETION OF PUBLIC IMPROVEMENTS:
A developer shall complete all public improvements within two (2) years of the
approval of the final plat of subdivision or within such alternative time-
period as may be approved in writing by the Board of Trustees. (Ord. 17-26, 12-
18-2017)
10-6-8: PERFORMANCE GUARANTEE:
   (A)   Requirement: No later than the earlier of the developer's instruction
to the Village to record the final plat of subdivision or an application being
submitted for a building permit for work in the subdivision other than
preliminary grading or for the construction of public improvements, the
developer shall deliver to the Village a fully executed performance guarantee
in the amount of one hundred twenty five percent (125%) of the total estimated
costs of completion of all public improvements as determined by the Village
Engineer, whether or not completed at such time. Such guarantee shall be
subject to the approval of the Village Attorney, and shall be in one of the
following forms: 1) an irrevocable letter of credit for the benefit of the
Village; or 2) a cash escrow agreement or other financial assurance acceptable
to the Village.
   (B)   Letter Of Credit Requirements: Each letter of credit shall be issued
by a sound and reputable banking or financing institution authorized to do
business in the State of Illinois in favor of the Village. The letter of credit
shall specify that its purpose is to guarantee developer's completion of all
public improvements of the subdivision as depicted in the final plat and site
improvement plans approved by the Village. The letter of credit shall specify
that said funds are available at the surety, to be drawn upon by the Village at
sight, without notice to, or consent of, the developer. The letter of credit
shall be valid and shall not expire for a minimum of two (2) years or such
longer period as shall be jointly agreed. Notwithstanding the expiry date, the
letter of credit shall provide that it shall not expire, and will continue to
be valid and honored until, the later of the expiration date or ninety (90)
days after the Village receives prior written notice of said expiration by
certified mail, return receipt requested. The letter of credit shall not be
cancelled or released prior to its expiry date without the expressed written
consent of the Village.
   (C)   Reduction: All requests for reduction in amounts of performance
guarantees shall be in writing and shall be filed with the Village Clerk, with
a copy to the Village Administrator. Such requests shall include an itemized
list of the work fully completed to date, costs associated with such, and
certification from the developer and his project engineer that the public
improvements included under the construction guarantee have been constructed in
substantial compliance with the Village approved improvement plans and
specifications. The Village Engineer shall inspect such improvements and costs,
and if satisfactory, shall recommend any and all reductions to the amount of a
performance guarantee in writing to the developer and to the Board of Trustees
for final approval. No reduction, however, shall reduce the performance
guarantee below the greatest of twenty five percent (25%) of the original
guarantee or the cost to complete any remaining improvements as determined by
the Village Engineer taking into account any increased costs of construction.
Reduction in performance guarantee does not constitute formal acceptance of any
part of the development and therefore does not mark the beginning of the
required two (2) year warranty period for individual improvements. (Ord. 17-26,
12-18-2017)
10-6-9: FINAL INSPECTION:
The Village field inspector, Village Engineer, subdivider, and contractor(s)
shall make a final inspection of the completed work. The final inspection shall
not be scheduled until the contractor certifies that all punch list items have
been completed and all waivers of lien have been received by the Village
Engineer. (Ord. 07-20, 9-4-2007)
10-6-10: PROTECTION OF EXISTING IMPROVEMENTS:
The developer, his contractors, and his suppliers shall be jointly and
severally liable for damage of any nature to existing improvements and Village
property. Developer and/or owner shall be required to deposit, with the
Village, security in an amount to be determined by the Village Engineer to
guarantee that developer and/or owner repair any potential damage. Said
security is separate from any required maintenance warranty and shall be
deposited before construction of any Village improvements commences. (Ord. 07-
20, 9-4-2007)
10-6-11: MAINTENANCE OF REQUIRED UTILITIES PRIOR TO VILLAGE ACCEPTANCE:
Prior to Village acceptance all utilities including, but not limited to,
sanitary and storm sewers, streets and streetlights, shall be maintained in
good repair and working order so that they function safely and effectively
without threat to health and safety. (Ord. 07-20, 9-4-2007)
10-6-12: ACCEPTANCE OF IMPROVEMENTS:
Once all items of the final punch list letter have been attended to or
corrected to the satisfaction of the Village Engineer, but no sooner than the
Village's receipt of a maintenance bond for the public improvements, the
Village Engineer shall submit an approval letter to the Board of Trustees
recommending acceptance of the public improvements. If not already done, the
Village shall record the final plat of subdivision. The Board of Trustees shall
accept any land dedicated on the final plat of subdivision, and any personal
property conveyed by bill of sale, by resolution. The Village shall release any
remaining balance of the developer's original performance guarantee upon
acceptance of the public improvements. No public improvements shall be accepted
until the developer delivers to the Village a maintenance bond therefor. (Ord.
17-26, 12-18-2017)
10-6-13: WARRANTY PERIOD AND MAINTENANCE BOND:
   (A)   Warranty Period: The developer shall maintain all public improvements
for a period of two (2) years after acceptance by the Village.
   (B)   Maintenance Bond: The developer's obligation to maintain all public
improvements for a period of two (2) years shall be secured by a performance
guarantee in substantially similar form as the original performance guaranty in
the amount of twenty five percent (25%) of the original performance guarantee.
Such guarantee shall be subject to the approval of the Village Attorney, and
shall be in one of the following forms: 1) an irrevocable letter of credit for
the benefit of the Village valid for a period of not less than two (2) years;
or 2) a cash escrow agreement or other financial assurance acceptable to the
Village. (Ord. 17-26, 12-18-2017)
10-6-14: RECORD DRAWINGS:
   (A)   During construction an accurate record of all construction work
performed shall be kept by the contractors. Upon completion and prior to
acceptance by the Village of the completed public improvements, the developer
shall prepare and submit to the Village "record drawings" showing complete "as
constructed" information for all improvements in compliance with the
requirements in section
10-8-4, "General Construction", of this title.
   (B)   The record drawings shall be prepared and sealed by a registered
professional engineer and shall contain thereon a certification that all
improvements have been constructed in accordance with the approved final
engineering plans or with approved changes thereon. (Ord. 07-20, 9-4-2007)
   (C)   The record drawings furnished to the Village by the developer shall
consist of one set of reproducible Mylar drawings, two (2) sets of prints or
copies, and in an electronic format approved by the Village. Record drawings
shall be received prior to the release of the performance guarantee. (Ord. 17-
26, 12-18-2017)
CHAPTER 7
BUILDING AND OCCUPANCY PERMITS
SECTION:
10-7-1: Issuance Of Building Permits
10-7-2: Issuance Of Occupancy Permits
10-7-1: ISSUANCE OF BUILDING PERMITS:
   (A)   No building permit shall be issued for the construction of any
building, structure or improvement on any parcel:
      1.   Unless the parcel is a properly created lot of record, and
      2.   Final subdivision plan and/or development plan, made necessary by
the development standards of this title, has been approved and recorded in the
office of the recorder of deeds of the county, and
      3.   Until all requirements of this title and development standards have
been fully complied with, or stipulated by written agreement between the
village board of trustees and the developer, and
      4.   Until all requirements as detailed under section
8-1-4, "Permits", of this code have been complied with.
      5.   If early building is allowed in a written agreement between the
village board of trustees and the developer, a minimum of a construction access
road, all public utilities (water, sewer, storm, electric, gas), curbs and base
stone for streets have been constructed and approved by the village.
   (B)   No construction can occur until a suitable access road is in place
able to carry fire department vehicles and emergency vehicles and the water
system serving the subdivision has obtained an operating permit from the
Illinois environmental protection agency. (Ord. 07-20, 9-4-2007)
10-7-2: ISSUANCE OF OCCUPANCY PERMITS:
No structure or building shall be occupied or used unless and until an
occupancy permit is issued therefor by the director of building and zoning.
   (A)   No occupancy permit shall be issued for any structure within a
subdivision approved for platting or replatting until all utility facilities
have been installed, approved and made ready to service the structure, until
said structure or building is in compliance with all applicable laws and
ordinances, and until all public improvements intended to serve said structure
or building are installed and approved as provided in this title. Specific
requirements are detailed under section
8-1-12, "Certificate Of Occupancy", of this code.
   (B)   In the event that winter weather conditions prevent completion of all
exterior concrete work or lot grading, and at the discretion and approval of
the director of building and zoning, a cash escrow payment, or letter of
credit, equal to one hundred twenty five percent (125%) of the amount of all
incomplete improvements, as determined by the director of building and zoning,
shall be filed with the village to ensure that improvements will be completed
by June 1 of the next building season. The filing of this cash escrow and
written guarantee shall allow for the issuance of a temporary certificate of
occupancy. Improvements not completed by the June 1 date shall be considered a
violation of this provision, subject to fines for each and every day that the
violation is allowed to continue. (Ord. 07-20, 9-4-2007)
CHAPTER 8
REQUIRED IMPROVEMENTS, DESIGN AND TECHNICAL STANDARDS
SECTION:
10-8-1: General Provisions
10-8-2: Required Improvements
10-8-3: Minimum Standards And Specifications
10-8-4: General Construction
10-8-5: Block Standards
10-8-6: Lot Standards
10-8-7: Easements
10-8-8: Building Setback Lines
10-8-9: Streets And Alleys
10-8-10: Curbs And Gutter
10-8-11: Street Installation, Testing And Acceptance
10-8-12: Driveways, Sidewalks And Bike Trails
10-8-13: Street Lighting
10-8-14: Parkway And Outlot Restoration
10-8-15: Site Grading And Drainage
10-8-16: Public Utilities
10-8-17: Storm Sewers And Sump Pump Drains
10-8-18: Erosion And Sediment Control Plan
10-8-19: Floodplain Regulations
10-8-20: Sanitary Sewer System
10-8-21: Landscaping And Trees
10-8-1: GENERAL PROVISIONS:
   (A)   Conformance To Applicable Rules And Regulations: The design of
subdivisions and improvements shall comply with the laws, ordinances, rules and
regulations set forth in this section including, but not limited to, the
following:
      1.   Provisions of 65 Illinois Compiled Statutes municipal code, as
amended from time to time.
      2.   Village of Manteno comprehensive plan and official map.
      3.   Village of Manteno ordinances.
         (a)   Zoning ordinance.
         (b)   Subdivision ordinance.
         (c)   Storm water management ordinance.
         (d)   Development in floodplain areas ordinance.
      4.   Village technical standards as amended from time to time.
      5.   All state of Illinois and Kankakee County applicable rules and
regulations.
   (B)   Conflicts: In all instances where a requirement of this title is
similar to or in conflict with other provisions of the village, township,
county or state ordinances, rules or regulations, the most restrictive shall
apply and prevail.
   (C)   Oversized Design: Where required in the overall planning as dictated
by the village's engineer for sewer or streets, or the official village plan,
the subdivision improvements shall be designed and constructed in accordance
with the community's anticipated needs. An agreement between the subdivider and
the village may be made allowing the subdivider to recapture added construction
costs resulting from an increased design capacity beyond that necessary for the
immediate subdivision. This shall apply but not be limited to: collector
sewers, lift stations, disposal facilities, pumping facilities, storage tanks,
culverts, storm sewers, and streets.
   (D)   Off Site Improvements/Existing Infrastructure Modifications:
      1.   The subdivider shall improve or provide escrow funds for future
improvements to any existing platted road adjacent to the proposed subdivision.
The road may be under the jurisdiction of the state, county, township or
village. This improvement shall conform to the design specified in this title
for the type of road specified, as shown in the general development plan. The
subdivider will be required to construct these improvements for the half of the
road adjacent to the proposed subdivision. The remaining half of the road may
be improved by the agency having jurisdiction or by a subdivider adjacent to
the road on the opposite side of the road, and these improvements may be
constructed at a later date. Cost estimates may be provided by the developer,
but actual escrow amounts shall be determined by the village engineer.
      2.   If it is determined that any existing infrastructure including, but
not limited to, sanitary sewers or other wastewater treatment facilities, storm
sewers or other storm water management facilities, roads and curbs and gutters,
which may be situated either in part or entirely off site, are inadequate to
facilitate a proposed subdivision when completely (100 percent) built out, then
improvements to any one or more or all of such facilities will be required.
   (E)   Boundary, Lot, And Right Of Way Line Monumentation:
      1.   Permanent monuments shall be placed at a minimum of two (2) exterior
points of all subdivisions, and as provided by 765 Illinois Compiled Statutes
205.
      2.   Permanent monuments shall be of concrete having a six inch (6")
minimum diameter with one #4 vertical bar in its center, and be at least thirty
six inches (36") in length. Monuments shall be set flush with adjacent ground.
      3.   Iron pipe markers not less than three-fourths inch (3/4") in
diameter and twenty four inches (24") in length shall be set at all lot corners
and all other required points not marked by permanent monuments. The iron pipes
shall be set flush with the finished ground elevation.
      4.   After construction of all improvements and before final acceptance
by the village, the subdivider shall replace or verify the existence of all
monuments and markers. (Ord. 07-20, 9-4-2007)
10-8-2: REQUIRED IMPROVEMENTS:
The following improvements shall be provided as part of the development of a
proposed subdivision:
   (A)   Street pavement structure improvements shall be bituminous concrete
flexible type pavement or Portland cement concrete rigid type pavement
consisting of the following:
      1.   Concrete curb and gutters.
      2.   Stable and compacted subgrade.
      3.   Base and subbase course, as required.
      4.   Bituminous concrete binder and surface courses for flexible type
pavement, or Portland cement concrete surface course for rigid pavement;
   (B)   Portland cement concrete sidewalks;
   (C)   Street and parking lot lighting;
   (D)   Landscaping and trees;
   (E)   Street signs and pavement markings;
   (F)   Any traffic safety installation such as guardrailing, etc.;
   (G)   Public utilities for telephone, electric, cable, television, and
natural gas;
   (H)   Site and lot grading;
   (I)   Storm sewer systems and sump pump drainage system;
   (J)   Storm water storage and management;
   (K)   Erosion control;
   (L)   Sanitary sewer system;
   (M)   Water distribution system. (Ord. 07-20, 9-4-2007)
10-8-3: MINIMUM STANDARDS AND SPECIFICATIONS:
All construction of improvements covered by this section shall be in accordance
with, and materials used shall be in compliance with, the methods and materials
required in the appropriate sections of the latest editions, amendments or
revisions of the following:
   (A)   All applicable village ordinances, standards, and specifications as
adopted;
   (B)   "Standard Specifications For Road And Bridge Construction", Illinois
department of transportation (IDOT);
   (C)   "Standard Specifications For Water And Sewer Main Construction In
Illinois", Illinois Society of Professional Engineers et al;
   (D)   "Illinois Design Standards For Sewage Works", IEPA, division of water
pollution control;
   (E)   "Technical Policy Statements", IEPA, division of public water supply;
   (F)   "Recommended Standards For Water Works", Great Lakes Upper Mississippi
River board of state sanitary engineers ("10 States Standards");
   (G)   "Procedures And Standards For Urban Soil Erosion And Sedimentation
Control In Illinois", the urban committee of the Association of Illinois Soil
and Water Conservation Districts ("Green Book");
   (H)   "Standards And Specifications For Soil Erosion And Sediment Control",
IEPA ("Yellow Book");
   (I)   "U.S. Soil Conservation Service Field Engineering Handbook";
   (J)   Municipal standards and specifications as adopted;
   (K)   Illinois department of transportation design manual;
   (L)   "American National Standard Practice For Roadway Lighting" (ANSI/IES
RP-8, latest edition);
   (M)   Illuminating Engineering Society of America "Lighting For Parking
Facilities" (IESNA RP-20, latest edition);
   (N)   The national electrical code (NEC, NFPA 70, latest edition);
   (O)   "Recommended Standards For Wastewater Facilities" (wastewater
committee of the Great Lakes - Upper Mississippi River, board of state and
provincial public health and environmental managers).
Where standards are not specifically set forth, improvements shall comply with
standards established by the village board. (Ord. 07-20, 9-4-2007)
10-8-4: GENERAL CONSTRUCTION:
   (A)   General:
      1.   All construction within the village should be completed in
accordance with the standards contained in this section.
      2.   Specification references made herein for manufactured materials
refer to designations of the American Society for Testing and Materials (ASTM),
the American Water Works Associations (AWWA), and the American National
Standards Institute (ANSI).
      3.   All plans submitted shall include standard construction detail
sheets as provided and required by the village of Manteno.
      4.   In all instances, anywhere within this chapter, the words
"acceptable", "or equal", "or approved equal", "or as approved by village" or
any other wording which indicates an alternate may be utilized, the full
meaning shall include and require approval in writing from the village, the
village field inspector, or the village engineer for any product or
manufacturer not specifically identified. The developer or contractor shall
present to the village in writing any request for consideration of an alternate
product or manufacturer. Such submittal shall include documentation supporting
the request. The final determination shall be with the village as to
establishing "equal" criteria for alternates or substitutes.
   (B)   Basic Standards:
      1.   Construction Roads:
         (a)   All developments of property which are subject to this title
shall, whenever practicable, provide a construction road over the private
property being developed for the use of all vehicles and equipment used in
connection with such development and the making or delivery of materials and
supplies thereto. The construction road shall be continuously maintained by the
developer in a dust free manner. The construction road entrance shall be
constructed in accordance with the village of Manteno's subdivision
specifications as specified in subsection (B)1(c) of this section. All
construction roads must be identified by appropriate signage as deemed
necessary by the village engineer.
         (b)   If the development requires the use of existing village streets,
a construction route shall be submitted to the village for review and approval.
Any existing streets approved for use as a construction route and that must be
used by the developer, contractors, or suppliers shall be kept free of debris,
dirt, dust, and mud. Streets shall be left in a clean condition at the end of
each day's work. Developers and contractors who fail to keep streets clean
shall be assessed a penalty for each occurrence and shall be responsible for
street cleaning expenses incurred by the village.
         (c)   Each site shall have graveled (or equivalent as approved in
writing by the village) entrance roads, access drives, and parking areas within
the development of sufficient length and width to prevent sediment from being
tracked onto public or private roadways. Any sediment reaching a public or
private road shall be removed by shoveling or street cleaning (not flushing)
before the end of each workday and transported to a controlled sediment
disposal area.
         (d)   Erosion and sediment control plan (see stabilized construction
entrance detail).
         (e)   Every construction road herein required shall be depicted on the
preliminary and final plat of development.
      2.   Water Main Protection And Sewer Separation:
         (a)   Protection and separation of water mains from sewers shall
comply with the Illinois environmental protection agency (IEPA) division of
public water supplies technical policy statements, latest edition and the
Illinois plumbing code, latest edition.
         (b)   Wherever water mains cross storm sewers, sanitary sewers, or
sewer service connections:
            (1)   Lay the water main so that the bottom of the pipe is at least
eighteen inches (18") above the top of the sewer.
            (2)   Maintain this vertical separation for that portion of the
water main located within ten feet (10') perpendicular to any sewer or drain
crossed.
            (3)   Center a length of water main pipe over the sewer to be
crossed with joints equidistant from the sewer or drain.
         (c)   When it is impossible to maintain the minimum eighteen inches
(18") vertical separation, or when it is necessary for the water main to pass
under a sewer or drain:
            (1)   Construct the sewer or drain of pressure pipe, conforming to
the specification for water main materials.
            (2)   Extend the sewer construction on each side of the crossing
until the perpendicular distance from the water main to the sewer or drain is
at least ten feet (10').
            (3)   As an alternate, install either the water main or sewer
inside a water main quality casing for a distance of ten feet (10') measured
perpendicular to the sewer on each side of the crossing.
         (d)   Where a water main must cross under a sewer:
            (1)   Maintain a minimum vertical separation of eighteen inches
(18") between the bottom of the sewer and the crown of the water main.
            (2)   Support the sewer or drain line to prevent settling and
breaking of either pipe.
      3.   General Site: The developer shall be responsible to maintain the
property as required by village ordinance. It shall be unlawful for the
development to permit debris to accumulate or to permit any weed, grass or
plant, other than trees, bushes, flowers, or other ornamental plant to grow to
a height exceeding eight inches (8"). Property that is not maintained creates
safety, health and vision hazards for the existing developed areas.
   (C)   General Material Specifications:
      1.   Underground Elements: All underground elements shall conform to the
following specifications.
      2.   Materials Manufactured: All materials shall be manufactured in the
United States of America.
      3.   Casing Pipe:
         (a)   Materials:
            (1)   Steel casing pipe shall conform to ASTM A139 grade A with
continuous field welded butt joints in accordance with AWWA C206, a minimum
yield strength of thirty five thousand (35,000) psi, and the following minimum
wall thickness for a thirty six inch (36") casing pipe:
               A.   Highway crossing: As required by the jurisdictional
authority, but shall not be less than specified in table below.
               B.   Railroad crossing: As required by the jurisdictional
railroad authority, but shall not be less than specified in table below.
TABLE FOR CASING PIPE THICKNESS
Nominal Casing Diameter (Inches) Nominal Thickness (Inches)
                                 Railroad Roadway
Nominal Casing Diameter (Inches) Nominal Thickness (Inches)
                                 Railroad Roadway
12 and under                     0.250    0.250
14                               0.250    0.250
16                               0.281    0.250
18                               0.312    0.250
20 and 22                        0.344    0.250
24                               0.375    0.312
26                               0.406    0.312
28                               0.438    0.375
30                               0.469    0.375
32                               0.500    0.375
34 and 36                        0.532    0.375
38                               0.562    0.375
40                               0.594    0.375
42                               0.625    0.375
44 and 46                        0.657    0.500
48                               0.688    0.500
50                               0.719    0.500
52                               0.750    0.500
54                               0.781    0.500
56 and 58                        0.812    0.500
60                               0.844    0.575
62                               0.875    0.575
64                               0.906    0.575
66 and 68                        0.938    0.650
70                               0.969    0.650
72                               1.00     0.650
 
            (2)   Casing spacers shall be molded high density polyethylene, 304
stainless steel, or 14-gauge (minimum) hot rolled and pickled steel.
               A.   Acceptable products: PSI, Advance, Cascade, or approved
equal.
            (3)   Casing end seals shall be synthetic rubber with stainless
steel banding as manufactured by Pipeline Seal and Insulator, Inc. (PSI),
Cascade Waterworks Manufacturing Company model CCES, or approved equal.
      4.   Pipe Bedding And Backfill: Provide well graded, washed, mixture of
gravel or crushed stone aggregate free of clay, loam, dirt, calcareous, or
other foreign matter conforming to the IDOT "standard specification" gradation
no. CA-7.
      5.   Special Granular Trench Backfill: Provide granular material: Use one
hundred percent (100%) crushed stone or gravel complying with the IDOT
"standard specification" gradation no. CA-7 material. No slag usage shall be
allowed.
   (D)   Construction Inspection Standards:
      1.   Approval And Permits:
         (a)   Construction of underground improvements shall not commence
until engineering plans and specifications have been approved in writing by the
village engineer.
         (b)   No construction shall commence until a copy of all needed
permits are filed with the village and village engineer.
            (1)   IEPA construction permits.
            (2)   NOI.
            (3)   IDOT.
            (4)   ACOE.
            (5)   IDNR.
            (6)   SWCD.
            (7)   All other applicable permits.
      2.   Preconstruction Conference: Every unit of development will require a
preconstruction meeting with the village engineer, village field inspector and
other appropriate village personnel.
      3.   Notification: Prior to beginning the mass grading or any utility
installation, the contractor shall give the village forty eight (48) hours'
notice of the intended time of starting work.
      4.   Conformance: The contractor shall be responsible for providing a
competent individual on site during trenching operations to ensure that all
OSHA and other applicable safety standards are met by the construction means
and methods.
      5.   Traffic Control: All traffic control prior to dedication of the
improvements to the village is the responsibility of the developer, including
barricades, flagmen, traffic cones, signage, lane closures, etc., and shall be
in accordance with the Illinois department of transportation standards.
      6.   Topsoil: Prior to any grading, all topsoil within rights of way,
building setbacks or pavement areas shall be stripped and stockpiled at
locations shown in the plans. The topsoil shall be protected from erosion by
meeting all applicable subsections of section
10-8-18, "Erosion And Sediment Control Plan", of this chapter.
   (E)   CAD Requirements:
      1.   All applications for plat approval shall be drawn in Illinois state
plane coordinate system NAD 83 and NAVD 1988 datum, and include a CD-ROM in an
applicable CAD format (submitted both to the village and review engineer)
showing the following minimum information on different levels:
         (a)   Preliminary plat and improvement plans: Information as specified
in chapter 5, "Project Documents", of this title.
         (b)   Final plat and record drawings (as built plans): Information as
specified in chapter 5, "Project Documents", of this title.
      2.   Prior to final acceptance of the work, record (as built) drawings
shall be submitted to the village and village engineer. One Mylar reproducible,
two (2) twenty four inch by thirty six inch (24" x 36") copies, and a CD-ROM
with data referenced to state plane coordinates and in an applicable CAD format
(submitted both to the village and review engineer) showing all the information
from the approved final plat and final improvement plans and the following
minimum information on different levels:
         (a)   Sanitary sewer:
            Rims and inverts.
            Structure locations.
            Pipe sizes.
            Service locations (from nearest downstream manhole).
         (b)   Storm sewer:
            Rims and inverts.
            Structure locations.
            Pipe sizes.
            Sump service locations (from nearest downstream manhole).
            Restrictor location.
            Spot elevations and dimensions of storm water detention facilities.
            Elevations to confirm proposed grading for emergency overland
release routes.
            Pond NWL and HWL elevations; pond volume provided and volume
required.
         (c)   Water main:
            Structure locations.
            Pipe sizes.
            Service locations (from nearest downstream valve).
         (d)   Street lighting:
            Light locations.
            Buried conduit locations.
            Disconnect locations.
         (e)   Street elevations: Centerline of pavement and top of curb on
both sides of road (every 100 feet), and all radii returns at intersections.
         (f)   Bench marks: Chiseled "X" in top of curb at every intersection
and every five hundred feet (500') along all roadways.
            All inverts, structure locations, pipe sizes, slopes, service
locations must be submitted prior to street construction to check the
installation of the underground utilities.
   (F)   Details:
      Casing pipe.
      Casting installation and adjusting. (Ord. 07-20, 9-4-2007)
10-8-5: BLOCK STANDARDS:
   (A)   Determination Of Block Dimensions: The length, widths, and shapes of
blocks shall be determined with due regard to:
      1.   Provision of adequate building sites suitable to the special needs
of the type of use contemplated.
      2.   Zoning requirements as to lot sizes and dimensions within the
corporate limit of the village of Manteno.
      3.   Needs for convenient access, circulation, control and safety of
pedestrian and street traffic.
      4.   Limitations and opportunities of topography.
   (B)   Block Dimension Restrictions: The length, width, and shape of blocks
shall be such as are appropriate for the locality and the type of development
contemplated, but block length in residential areas shall not be less than four
hundred feet (400') nor exceed one thousand two hundred feet (1,200'), nor have
less than sufficient width to provide two (2) tiers of lots of appropriate
depth between street lines, except for blocks with one tier of lots which meet
the double frontage requirements of this title.
   (C)   Block Length: Block length is determined by the distance along a
roadway beginning at the intersection with one through street and ending at the
intersection with another separate through street. An eyebrow, cul-de-sac or
change of direction on a single stretch of roadway does not constitute an
intersection or a separate through street.
   (D)   Pedestrian Crosswalks: Pedestrian crosswalk rights of way not less
than twelve feet (12') wide shall be required at centers of blocks having a
length in excess of nine hundred feet (900') and where deemed necessary by the
plan commission to provide for pedestrian circulation or access to schools,
playgrounds, shopping centers, transportation and other community facilities.
   (E)   Blocks Located In Industrial/Commercial Areas: Blocks or portions
thereof intended for commercial or industrial use shall be designated as such
and the plans shall show adequate off street areas to provide for parking,
loading docks, and other such facilities, as provided in the village zoning
ordinance. (Ord. 07-20, 9-4-2007)
10-8-6: LOT STANDARDS:
   (A)   Lot Arrangement: The lot arrangement shall be such that there will be
no foreseeable difficulties, for reasons of topography, soils, flooding or
other conditions, in securing permits to build on all lots in compliance with
the zoning ordinance, the floodplain ordinance, and wastewater treatment and
disposal system rules and regulations. Subdivisions shall contain no leftover
pieces, corners, or remnants of land. Lots shall not cross municipal nor county
boundary lines.
   (B)   Lot Size Requirements:
      1.   Lot dimensions and areas within the village corporate limits and the
one and one-half (11/2) mile jurisdictional boundary shall conform to the
requirements of the village zoning ordinance. If the appropriate county zoning
ordinance is more restrictive with regard to a lot in the one and one-half (11/
2) mile jurisdictional boundary, then the county zoning ordinance shall apply.
No lot shall be created for residential or nonresidential use that does not
comply with the minimum lot area and width of the zoning district in which it
is located, unless otherwise granted as part of a planned development or
special use.
      2.   Excessive depth in relation to width shall be avoided. A proportion
of two and one-half to one (21/2:1) shall normally be considered a desirable
maximum.
      3.   Lots shall be of sufficient size and area to provide for all
required activities such as, but not limited to, parking and loading as
required by the zoning ordinance.
      4.   Angular lots in residential zones shall be a minimum width of
seventy feet (70') measured at the building setback line.
   (C)   Lots Affected By Surface Water:
      1.   Lots abutting a storm water retention/detention pond, watercourse,
drainageway or easement, channel or stream shall have a minimum width or depth
as required to provide an adequate building site and to afford the minimum
usable area required in this title or the Manteno zoning ordinance for front,
side and rear yards.
      2.   Watercourses, stream channels, floodways and water storage areas
shall not be included in the computation of required lot areas where it is
proposed that such watercourses are to traverse the lot interiors. Whenever
possible, lot lines shall center on said watercourses.
   (D)   Lot Drainage: Lots shall be laid out so as to provide positive
drainage away from all building sites and individual lot drainage shall be
coordinated with the general storm drainage pattern for the area.
   (E)   Proximity To Dedicated Street: All lots, tracts and parcels shall
front on a publicly dedicated street as required by the village zoning
ordinance. Residential lots which abut upon major streets shall also abut upon
a local street. Vehicular access to such lots shall be to the local street
only.
   (F)   Double And Reverse Frontage: Reverse frontage lots are forbidden.
Double frontage lots are forbidden except where lots back upon an arterial or
major collector street; and in such instance, vehicular access between the lots
and the primary street is prohibited.
   Double frontage lots are forbidden except in instances where the plan
commission considers such arrangement as essential to provide separation of
residential development from highways or primary thoroughfares or to overcome
specific disadvantages of topography and orientation. In such instances, a
planting screen easement of at least thirty feet (30'), and across which there
shall be no right of vehicular access, shall be provided along the line of lots
abutting such highways and primary thoroughfares or other disadvantageous use.
Said easement shall be fully landscaped by the developer and conveyed to a
homeowners' association for future maintenance responsibility or, at discretion
of village, a special service area created to maintain said easements.
   (G)   Side Lot Line: Side lot lines shall be approximately at right angles
or radial to the front lot line and/or at right angles to the back lot line.
   (H)   Corner Lots: Corner lots shall be sized to accommodate the building
setback lines on both streets as set forth in the zoning ordinance. A corner
lot shall be deemed to have two (2) front yards, with the required building
setback line in effect for all structure placement. The classification of the
remaining two (2) yards shall be determined by the location of the front door
entrance, and each yard shall begin no closer to the street than the building
setback line. The rear yard shall be the yard opposite of the front door
entrance and the remaining yard shall be considered a side yard. In instances
where the front door entrance is not clearly identifiable, the final
determination shall be made by the director of building and zoning.
   (I)   Flag Lots: Lots which meet the minimum area and dimension provisions
of the zoning ordinance except that the buildable portion of the lot is
accessible to a street right of way by means of a narrow strip of land shall be
prohibited unless otherwise approved by the village. (Ord. 07-20, 9-4-2007)
10-8-7: EASEMENTS:
   (A)   Utility Easements: Easements for the installation, operation and
maintenance of utilities shall be provided as follows:
      1.   Public utility easements shall be provided along all boundary lines
of the subdivision, along all back of lot lines, and other locations as
required. If landscape or drainage easements are required, the public utility
easements shall be located closer to the front of the lot, with the landscape
or drainage easement along the rear of the lot. Public utility easements shall
have a width of not less than twelve feet (12'). After the public utility
easement subgrade has been prepared, acceptable topsoil material shall be
placed to a minimum depth of six inches (6") and brought to final grade prior
to installation of the public utilities.
      2.   Separate and exclusive easements shall be provided for village
utilities such as sanitary sewer, storm sewer, and streetlights. Village
utility easements, except streetlight easements, shall have a minimum width of
twelve feet (12') or shall be based upon one and one-half (11/2) the depth of
the utility, whichever is greater. Streetlight easements shall have a width of
ten feet (10'). Village utility easements may be combined, if approved by the
village engineer, and if enough width is provided to allow proper separation of
the utilities.
      3.   Where possible, easements shall be centered on lot lines, such that
half of the easement is on two (2) abutting lots. If public utility and village
utility easements are adjacent to each other where two (2) lots abut, each
easement shall be entirely in one lot.
      4.   All utility easements shall be laid out so as to provide continuity
from block to block.
      5.   On wooded sites, utility easements shall be located and be of
sufficient width so as to minimize environmental damage.
      6.   Utility easements and any easement provisions to be incorporated
into the final plat or in the deed documents shall be reviewed and approval by
the utility companies responsible to furnish the proposed services. The wording
of the utility easement certificate on the final plat shall be approved by the
village administrator and the village engineer.
   (B)   Utility Transmission Easements: The area contained in utility
transmission easements (those utility lines crossing or serving an area larger
than the village) shall not count towards the minimum lot width, depth, or
area. In addition, the lot setbacks shall be measured from the edge of the
utility transmission easement within the lot, and not the lot line itself.
Encroachment of any type - digging, over digging, structure placement,
landscaping, grading changes, etc. - is not allowed into the utility
transmission easement without written approval from the affected utility.
   (C)   Drainage And Storm Water Management Easements:
      1.   The area contained in drainage easements shall not count towards the
minimum lot width, depth, or area. In addition, the lot setbacks shall be
measured from the edge of the drainage easement within the lot, and not the lot
line itself. Encroachment of any type - digging, over digging, structure
placement, landscaping, grading changes, etc. - is not allowed into the
drainage easement. The village may require the developer to provide concrete
bottoms to drainage easements prior to acceptance of subdivision improvements.
      2.   Where a subdivision is traversed by a watercourse, drainageway,
channel or stream, or other body of water, appropriate dedications or
easements, with adequate width to accommodate observed computed or anticipated
storm water drainage through and from the subdivision, shall be made. The width
of the easement or dedication shall be dependent on the area of land drained by
the watercourse and shall allow access for construction and maintenance
equipment. In general the easement shall conform substantially with the lines
of the watercourse and shall include the floodplain, where applicable, plus an
additional area not less than twenty feet (20') wide adjoining both edges of
the floodplain.
      3.   All permanent storm water management facilities for a subdivision
shall be protected by easements or dedications for drainage and shall permit
ingress and egress for maintenance. If required, all lot lines adjacent to
nonsubdivided lands shall have a drainage easement to direct the off site flow
through the development.
      4.   No construction of structure, dams, embankments or channels (except
as indicated on the improvement plans) and no planting of trees, shrubbery or
other vegetation, which hinder the flow of water or otherwise inhibit the
intended purposes, shall be allowed within any drainage or storm water
management facility easement. In the event the area within such easements is
obstructed, reshaped, regraded or restricted for uses other than as intended or
as shown on the improvement plans, the village will cause to have any
alterations corrected at the expense of the party or parties causing said
obstruction, restriction, regrading, or alteration.
      5.   Drainage easements shall be separate and distinct from utility
easements.
      6.   Drainage and storm water management easements shall be adequately
maintained so as to provide for removal of accumulation of vegetation, silt,
debris or other material that may interfere with the flow characteristics of
drainageways or the essential features of retention or detention facilities.
Drainage and storm water management easements shall be seeded and lined with
silt fence prior to village acceptance.
      7.   When a subdivision drainage plan proposes, and the village approves,
use of retention basins or ponds which are to be dedicated for public use, a
public access easement shall be provided to connect the facility to a public
street.
   (D)   Landscaping And Conservation Easements:
      1.   A screen planting easement shall be required between residential and
commercial or industrial lots or along lot lines to discourage the undesirable
development of residential lots fronting on traffic arteries. If such easement
is to be used for public utilities, the easement shall be of sufficient width
to accommodate appropriate screen planting without interfering with utility
service or maintenance.
      2.   Easements shall be required to protect areas designated for the
restoration of site flora as referenced in the village zoning ordinance
requirements for greenbelt and open space protection.
      3.   Said easements shall be fully landscaped by the developer and
conveyed to a homeowners' association for future maintenance responsibility or,
at discretion of village, a special service area created to maintain said
easements.
   (E)   Temporary Turnaround Easements: Temporary easements shall be provided
for construction of temporary turnarounds on streets which are designed to have
temporary terminus and are to be extended in the future. When the street is
extended, said temporary easements shall be considered voided and released for
other uses and purposes.
   (F)   Pedestrianway Easements: Easements or dedications shall be provided
for pedestrianways where deemed appropriate by the village plan commission.
Pedestrianway easements shall be maintained to permit their continued use.
   (G)   Line Of Sight Easements At Intersections: At all intersections, line
of sight easements shall be granted to the village to protect clear sight
distance not to exceed two feet (2') above centerline grade within the
triangular area formed at the intersection of any street right of way lines by
a straight line drawn between said right of way lines at a distance along each
line of thirty feet (30') from their point of intersection. No obstructions
will be permitted within said easement that exceed two feet (2') above
centerline grade. (Ord. 07-20, 9-4-2007)
10-8-8: BUILDING SETBACK LINES:
   (A)   Building setback lines in residential areas of new subdivisions shall
conform to the front yard provisions of the zoning ordinance.
   (B)   A corner lot shall maintain not less than the minimum building setback
lines required on both streets on which the lot abuts. (Ord. 07-20, 9-4-2007)
10-8-9: STREETS AND ALLEYS:
The subdivision of land, including the arrangement, character, extent, width,
grade and location of all streets, alleys, or other land to be dedicated for
public use, shall conform to the standards and details of this title.
   (A)   General:
      1.   Required Provisions: All developments shall include provisions for
the construction of streets and appurtenances designed in accordance with this
section.
      2.   Street Construction: All streets shall be constructed in accordance
with the latest version of the Illinois department of transportation's
"Standard Specifications For Road And Bridge Construction", latest edition,
unless otherwise noted in this section. The design period shall be twenty (20)
years and the estimated ADT shall be subject to the approval of the village
engineer.
      3.   Public Streets: A public street shall be provided for convenient
access to all property within the subdivision. No private street or
thoroughfare shall be permitted.
      4.   Street Designation: The following streets are designated as:
         (a)   Expressways:
            Interstate 57
         (b)   Primary routes:
            County Highway 9 (county)
            Illinois Route 50 (state)
            U.S. Route 45/52 (state maintained)
         (c)   Secondary routes: All other one mile roads including, but not
limited to:
            Amberstone Road
            Cypress Street
            Maple Street
            Ronnie Gray Drive
            Spruce Street
            Sycamore Street
         (d)   Class III truck routes:
            County Highway 9
            Illinois Route 50
            Interstate 57
            Sycamore Street (north of County Highway 9)
   (B)   Basic Design Standards:
      1.   General:
         (a)   The arrangement, character, extent, width, grade, and location
of all streets shall conform to the comprehensive plan, and shall be considered
in their relation to existing and planned streets; to reasonable circulation of
traffic within the subdivision and adjoining lands; to topographical
conditions; to runoff of storm water; to public convenience and safety; and in
their appropriate relations to the proposed uses of the area to be served.
         (b)   Expressways, primary routes, and class III truck routes shall
meet the requirements of the jurisdictional authority.
         (c)   All streets in a subdivision abutting a state or county highway
shall meet all the requirements of the state or county regulations pertaining
thereto as well as meeting the requirements of this title. Where such
requirements are in conflict, the most restrictive shall apply.
         (d)   Where a subdivision borders on or contains a railroad, highway,
or utility transmission line or pipe, the plan commission may require a street
approximately parallel to and on each side of such railroad, highway, line or
pipe at a distance suitable for the appropriate use of the intervening land, as
for park purposes in residential districts, or for commercial or industrial
purposes in appropriate districts. Such distances shall also be determined with
due regard for the requirements of approach grades and future grade
separations.
         (e)   Design of the pavement structure shall conform to the Illinois
department of transportation design manual, latest edition. The design period
shall be twenty (20) years, and the estimated ADT shall be subject to the
approval of the village engineer.
         (f)   Where existing streets are dedicated (whether used or not), but
not improved to the standards of this title, and border on, or are wholly
within, the proposed subdivision land, they shall be improved by the developer
to the standards of this title.
         (g)   Provision shall be made so that all proposed streets shall have
a direct connection with or be continuous and in line with existing, planned or
platted streets with which they are to connect. In subdivisions adjacent to
undeveloped property, the plan commission shall require streets extended to the
boundary lines in strategic locations for future development connection.
      2.   Right Of Way And Pavement Widths: All right of way and pavement
widths shall conform to the standards in the following table. Additional right
of way may be required at intersections to accommodate turn lanes.
TABLE 1
MINIMUM STANDARDS FOR STREET DESIGN
Street Type Right Of Way Width1 Pavement Width (Back To Back Of Curb)1
Street Type                Right Of Way Width1 Pavement Width (Back To Back Of
                                               Curb)1
Primary route              See note 1          See note 1
Secondary route            100'                41'
Industrial and commercial  70'                 39'
street
Collector street           70'                 39'
Minor residential street   60'                 35'
Cul-de-sac (commercial and 140'                113'
industrial)
Cul-de-sac (residential)   130'                103'
Alley (commercial)         30'                 28'
Alley (residential)        30'                 20'
Utility easement           12' minimum         n/a
 
Note:
   1.   The jurisdictional authority will determine right of way or pavement
width.
      3.   Collector Street: A collector street may be required by the village
board:
         (a)   In a residential subdivision containing twenty (20) acres or
more in area and where the lots are one-half (1/2) acre or less in area,
         (b)   In any subdivision as an extension of a collector thoroughfare
in an adjacent subdivision,
         (c)   In any manufacturing or business subdivision.
      4.   Residential Streets: Minor streets shall be so aligned that their
use by through traffic will be discouraged.
      5.   Cul-De-Sac Streets:
         (a)   Single-family residential district cul-de-sac streets shall be
not more than five hundred feet (500') in length, measured along the street
centerline from the centerline of the street of origin, to the center of the
circle.
         (b)   The village board may allow single-family residential district
cul-de-sac streets to be longer than five hundred feet (500') in length,
provided not more than fifteen (15) lots abut upon its right of way line.
         (c)   Multiple-family residential district cul-de-sac streets shall
not exceed three hundred feet (300') in length.
         (d)   Each cul-de-sac shall have a terminus of nearly circular shape.
         (e)   A temporary cul-de-sac street, or a cul-de-sac street having not
more than three (3) lots fronting on its right of way may have a "tee" type
terminus or other variation of the circular shape, subject to requirements of
emergency vehicles and as approved by the plan commission and village engineer.
      6.   Alleys:
         (a)   Alleys are not permitted in residential subdivisions unless
deemed necessary by the plan commission.
         (b)   Alleys, when permitted, shall have a minimum of thirty feet
(30') right of way and pavement shall not be less than twenty feet (20').
         (c)   Alleys may be permitted by the plan commission where other
definite and assured provisions are not made for service access, such as off
street loading, unloading and parking, consistent with and adequate for the
uses proposed.
         (d)   Alley intersections and sharp changes in alley alignment shall
be avoided, but where necessary, corners may be modified to allow the vehicle
types anticipated adequate space to perform turning maneuvers safely.
         (e)   Dead end alleys are prohibited.
      7.   Half Streets: Half streets are prohibited.
      8.   Reserve Strips: No strip or area shall be reserved along any portion
of a street or alley which will prevent adjacent property owners access
thereto. (Ord. 07-20, 9-4-2007)
      9.   Entrances:
         (a)   Entrances on primary roads are to be a minimum of one hundred
forty feet (140') from an intersection or another entrance.
         (b)   Entrances on secondary roads are to be a minimum of one hundred
forty feet (140') from an intersection or another entrance.
         (c)   Residential driveways shall not be allowed direct access to
primary or secondary roads.
         (d)   Entrance restrictions apply as described, unless otherwise
approved by the village chief of police and the village engineer. Any entrance/
exit access that does not meet the distance requirement may be evaluated by the
village chief of police for traffic and safety concerns, and by the village
engineer to determine if a shorter distance would be acceptable based on the
particulars of the location. (Ord. 15-38, 12-21-2015)
      10.   Geometrics And Design:
         (a)   Street layout design must provide intersections and confluences
that encourage safe and efficient traffic flow at or near right angles, with no
intersections at less than sixty degrees (60°).
         (b)   Intersections of more than two (2) streets shall be avoided
unless specific conditions of design indicate otherwise and with the village
approval.
         (c)   Where streets intersect primary or secondary routes, their
alignment shall be continuous.
         (d)   Standard sight distances are included in table 2 of this
section.
         (e)   Street jogs with centerline offsets of less than one hundred
fifty feet (150') shall be prohibited.
         (f)   Where there is a deflection in horizontal centerlines in excess
of one degree (1°), within a given block at any given point, a curve shall be
inserted according to the table below or as directed by the village engineer.
         (g)   Broken back curves are discouraged for horizontal alignment.
Where they must be used, a one hundred foot (100') minimum tangent length shall
be introduced between reverse curves on all secondary and collector
thoroughfares; fifty foot (50') minimum tangent length on all local and cul-de-
sac streets.
         (h)   Minimum horizontal centerline curve at "L" intersections shall
be ninety feet (90').
         (i)   Gradients of all streets shall be at least 0.5 percent.
         (j)   Pavement design shall be in accordance with the standard details
supplemented with site specific pavement borings in accordance with Illinois
department of transportation policies and procedures unless an equal
alternative is requested in writing by the developer, approved by the village
and waived in writing by the village engineer.
         (k)   Vertical curves are required on all streets per IDOT design
guidelines, and all collector, minor residential, cul-de-sac, and alleys where
the grade change is greater than 1.00 percent.
TABLE 2
MINIMUM STANDARDS FOR STREET DESIGN
                   Tangent
       Clear Sight Property Lines Radius Of     Length Of       Tangents
Street Distance    At Street      Horizontal    Vertical Curves Between Reverse
       (Feet)      Intersections1 Curves (Feet) (Feet)          Curve (Feet)
                   (Feet)
                        Tangent        Radius Of                Tangents
            Clear Sight Property Lines Horizontal Length Of     Between
Street      Distance    At Street      Curves     Vertical      Reverse Curve
            (Feet)      Intersections1 (Feet)     Curves (Feet) (Feet)
                        (Feet)
Primary     The jurisdictional authority will determine geometrics on a case
route       by case basis.
Secondary   500         50             600        200           200
route
Industrial
and         500         25             500        200           150
commercial
street
Collector   300         20             400        150           100
street
Minor
residential 200         15             300        150           50
street
Cul-de-sac  200         15             200        100           50
Alley       100         15             100        100           50
 
Notes:
   1.   "Tangent property lines at street intersections" is the distance
required from the radius point at the intersection to the first allowable
horizontal curve.
   (C)   Street Material Specifications:
      1.   All roadway construction materials and methods shall be in
accordance with the Illinois department of transportation "Standard
Specifications For Road And Bridge Construction", latest edition.
      2.   Bituminous concrete mix designs shall be submitted to the village
engineer prior to scheduling paving work and shall be IDOT approved.
      3.   All plant load tickets shall be clearly marked with an approved
asphalt mix design code or mix type. Any bituminous material delivered without
proper load tickets may be rejected.
      4.   Base course materials shall be crushed stone or crushed gravel and
shall conform to IDOT gradation CA-6.
      5.   Material testing in accordance with Illinois department of
transportation bureau of materials and physical research "Project Procedures
Guide" shall be provided by an independent testing firm approved by the village
and paid for by the developer; unless deemed unnecessary and put into writing
by the village engineer.
      6.   Asphalt pavement cores and additional testing may be required at the
discretion of the village engineer if pavements have failed, if minimum density
requirements are not met or if the pavement slope is inadequate.
      7.   Geotechnical fabric for ground stabilization shall be used
underneath the base course for all village streets.
         (a)   The purpose and intent of the fabric is to improve the quality
and longevity of the pavement. It is not intended to ease the requirements for
subgrade preparation. Fabric is not to be placed until the subgrade has passed
the proof roll test as witnessed by the village engineer.
         (b)   The fabric shall be a woven geotechnical fabric meeting the IDOT
specifications for fabric to be used for separation and stabilization, with
minimum average roll values of two hundred (200) pound grab tensile strength at
fifteen percent (15%) maximum elongation. The fabric shall be installed with
proper overlaps in accordance with the manufacturer's requirements and shall
extend to a width that is wider than the curbed street by at least one foot
(1') behind the back of curb on each side of the street.
         (c)   The first layer of stone placed over the fabric must be pushed
onto the fabric and not tailgated. Vehicles are not to drive directly on the
fabric at any time. The first layer of stone is to be placed and compacted to a
minimum six inch (6") thickness which will protect the fabric. The second layer
of stone is to be placed at the thickness necessary to complete the specified
base course thickness. If heavy truck traffic (such as concrete trucks) is to
drive on the stone prior to the final stone base course being completed, a
minimum of ten inches (10") of compacted stone should be established in the
driving paths to protect the fabric.
         (d)   Acceptable products: "Geotex woven geotextile #200ST" as
distributed by Geo-Synthetics, or equal as approved by the village.
      8.   Minimum pavement thickness:
         (a)   Primary, industrial and eighty thousand (80,000) pound truck
routes:
            Geotechnical fabric for ground stabilization
            8" CA-6 subbase granular material
            7" bituminous base course
            21/2" binder
            11/2" surface
         (b)   Secondary and commercial:
            Geotechnical fabric for ground stabilization
            8" CA-6 subbase granular material
            5" bituminous base course
            21/2" binder
            11/2" surface
         (c)   Collector:
            Geotechnical fabric for ground stabilization
            10" CA-6 base course stone
            21/2" binder
            2" surface
         (d)   Minor residential:
            Geotechnical fabric for ground stabilization
            10" CA-6 base course stone
            21/2" binder
            11/2" surface
         (e)   Off street parking (privately maintained): Developer may select
one of the following options in the pavement structure:
 
(1) 10" CA-6 base course stone
   21/2" binder
   11/2" surface
(2) 4" CA-6 base course stone
   6" class PV concrete
 
   (D)   Details:
      Typical pavement sections. (Ord. 07-20, 9-4-2007)
10-8-10: CURBS AND GUTTER:
A concrete curb and gutter section shall be constructed along the outside lines
of all street pavements and parking lots in accordance with the standards and
details of this title.
   (A)   Curb and gutter; residential:
      1.   Combination concrete curb and gutter, type M-3.12 conforming to the
dimensions shown in the standard detail shall be used.
      2.   The back of curb shall be depressed at all sidewalk ADA ramp
locations and at all driveways whose locations are known at the time of curb
installation.
      3.   Combination concrete curb and gutter type B-6.12 conforming to the
dimensions shown in the standard detail shall be used at special locations
including parks, ponds, or as directed by the village engineer.
      4.   Two (2) #4 rebar will be utilized in sections spanning utility
trenches and shall extend five feet (5') beyond the trench. The trench shall be
considered eighteen inches (18") wider than the utility if the utility is five
feet (5') or less in depth as measured from the bottom of the pipe to the
surface of the ground. The trench shall be considered thirty six inches (36")
wider than the utility if the utility is greater than five feet (5') in depth
as measured from the bottom of the pipe to the surface of the ground.
   (B)   Curb and gutter; commercial and industrial:
      1.   Combination concrete curb and gutter type B-6.12 shall be used.
      2.   Depressed curb shall be provided at all sidewalk ADA ramp locations
and at all driveways whose locations are known at the time of curb
installation. However, if the driveway location is not known at the time of
curb and gutter installation, a vertical face barrier curb shall be installed,
and the driveway opening will be provided later by the lot owner.
   (C)   Material specifications:
      1.   Concrete: Portland cement concrete having a minimum compressive
strength of three thousand five hundred (3,500) pounds per square inch in
fourteen (14) days shall be used. Air entrainment shall be in the five percent
(5%) to eight percent (8%) range and slump shall be two inches (2") to four
inches (4"). However, if a slip form paver is used, the slump shall be adjusted
to meet the requirements of the slip forming process.
      2.   Expansion Joint Filler: Bituminous performed expansion joint filler,
three-fourth inch (3/4") thick, and preshaped to the profile of the curb shall
be used.
      3.   Expansion Joint Dowels: Two (2) #5 smooth steel dowels, twenty four
inches (24") long with pinched stop caps on one end shall be used (see
details).
      4.   Curing Compound: Curing compound shall be type II or III, as
specified in section 1022 of the "Standard Specifications For Road And Bridge
Construction".
      5.   Curb Base Course: Curb base course shall be IDOT gradation CA-6 or
CA-10 crushed stone or crushed gravel.
   (D)   Details:
      Barrier concrete curb and gutter, type B-6.12.
      Mountable concrete curb and gutter, type M-3.12. (Ord. 07-20, 9-4-2007)
10-8-11: STREET INSTALLATION, TESTING AND ACCEPTANCE:
   (A)   Notification And Conformance:
      1.   Provide forty eight (48) hour notice to village, village engineer,
and testing firm prior to work or test being performed. If an existing street
is to be partially or totally closed by prior approval, the developer is to
notify the public works department, fire department, police department and
schools forty eight (48) hours prior to road closure. Traffic control/detour
route plans, using IDOT details, shall be submitted with all construction
plans.
      2.   The contractor shall be responsible for providing a competent
individual on site during trenching operations to ensure that all OSHA and
other applicable safety standards are met by the construction means and
methods.
   (B)   Erosion Control:
      1.   All soil erosion control measures are to be in place prior to and
during the installation of roadway and appurtenances and shall be inspected
regularly by the developer at intervals determined by the village engineer. The
minimum intervals shall be every week or after a rain event producing more than
one-half inch (1/2") in a twenty four (24) hour period, whichever is less.
      2.   Traveled roadways shall be kept cleaned of mud/debris.
   (C)   Open Cutting Of Pavement: Open cuts of village streets shall not be
allowed unless the village grants written approval. In some instances, the
village may require boring and jacking under the pavement instead of open
cutting.
   (D)   Proof Roll Equipment: Acceptable proof roll vehicles are:
      1.   Tandem vehicles: Three (3) axles at forty four thousand (44,000)
pounds (gross weight).
      2.   Semi vehicles: Five (5) axles at seventy two thousand (72,000)
pounds (gross weight).
   (E)   Subgrade:
      1.   Definition: The level layer of earth upon which the foundation of a
road is laid.
      2.   The subgrade shall be prepared in accordance with the Illinois
department of transportation "Standard Specifications For Road And Bridge
Construction", latest edition, section 301.
      3.   The subgrade shall be graded and rolled to provide uniform density
and shall comply with the profile and cross sections contained in the drawings.
      4.   All street subgrade shall be proof rolled in the presence of the
village engineer with an acceptable piece of equipment prior to the placement
of any fill materials or base course. A one inch (1") rut or roll maximum is
allowed. Repair subgrade until an acceptable proof roll is obtained. If rain or
damage from excess construction traffic occurs after the subgrade has been
proof rolled and before the base course is placed, another proof roll shall be
required prior to placing the base course.
   (F)   Subbase Course (When Applicable):
      1.   Definition: The layer of aggregate above the subgrade.
      2.   The subbase course shall be prepared in accordance with the Illinois
department of transportation "Standard Specifications For Road And Bridge
Construction", latest edition, section 311.
      3.   Lime stabilization, in accordance with the Illinois department of
transportation "Standard Specifications For Road And Bridge Construction",
latest edition, section 310 of the subgrade shall be allowed when directed by
the village engineer.
      4.   The subbase course shall be proof rolled in the presence of the
village engineer with an acceptable piece of equipment prior to the placement
of any fill materials or base course. A one inch (1") rut or roll maximum is
allowed. Repair subbase course and subgrade until an acceptable proof roll is
obtained. If rain or damage from excess construction traffic occurs after the
subbase course has been proof rolled and before the surface is placed, another
proof roll shall be required prior to placing the base course.
   (G)   Base Course:
      1.   Definition: The layer of aggregate above the subgrade or subbase
course, when applicable.
      2.   The base course shall be prepared in accordance with the Illinois
department of transportation "Standard Specifications For Road And Bridge
Construction", latest edition, section 351.
      3.   The base course shall be proof rolled in the presence of the village
engineer with an acceptable piece of equipment prior to the placement of any
fill materials or base course. A one-half inch (1/2") rut or roll maximum is
allowed. Repair base course and underlying layers until an acceptable proof
roll is obtained. If rain or damage from excess construction traffic occurs
after the base course has been proof rolled and before the surface is placed,
another proof roll shall be required prior to placing the surface course.
   (H)   Bituminous Paving:
      1.   All work shall be in accordance with the Illinois department of
transportation "Standard Specifications For Road And Bridge Construction",
latest edition, section 406.
      2.   The developer is responsible for pavement maintenance, including
repairing potholes, when requested by the village.
      3.   The surface course shall not be applied until the binder course has
weathered through a minimum of one winter season or eighty percent (80%) build
out of the subdivision.
      4.   No open cutting of binder course shall be allowed for utility
installations, including utility service lines.
      5.   Clean pavement and curbs prior to installation of bituminous
surface.
      6.   The contractor shall cut butt joints at existing pavements prior to
paving.
      7.   Remove temporary cold patch mix and replace with hot mix. Any binder
repairs shall be saw cut prior to installation of hot mix.
      8.   Place bituminous material (tack coat) and level binder in binder
irregularities. Any excessive settlement shall be removed and replaced as
determined by the village review engineer.
      9.   Bituminous material (tack coat) will be placed only if the village
accepts the condition of the pavement.
      10.   Bituminous surface course placed on pavement not accepted by the
village will be removed and replaced.
      11.   The village may establish a paving cutoff date each year.
      12.   The developer is responsible for pavement maintenance including
potholes, until maintenance bond is released.
   (I)   Portland Cement Concrete Paving:
      1.   All work shall be in accordance with the Illinois department of
transportation "Standard Specifications For Road And Bridge Construction",
latest edition, section 420.
      2.   The concrete pavements will be finished with a type A final finish
as specified in article 420.09 of the standard specifications.
      3.   Any concrete pavement greater than six inches (6") in thickness will
require dowel bars between joints and curb and gutter for load transfer unless
deemed unnecessary by the village engineer.
      4.   Dowel bar diameters shall be in accordance with the latest version
of IDOT highway standard 420001.
      5.   Joint spacing shall be between eleven feet (11') and fifteen feet
(15') (maximum spacing) depending on the width of the pavement. Joint spacing
may be adjusted to accommodate different road features (drainage castings,
etc.) so long as it adheres to the guidelines of the IDOT highway standards and
the American Concrete Pavement Association's "Intersection Joint Layout".
   (J)   Removal And Replacement Of Damaged Curb And Gutter:
      1.   Any curb that has been installed at the improper line and grade,
that is damaged or badly cracked, or that has been installed with improper
material shall be removed and replaced as a condition of acceptance.
      2.   The minimum length of removal and replacement is ten feet (10').
      3.   Two (2) continuous #4 rebar are required in all replacement
sections.
      4.   Replacement curb requires two (2) dowel bars at each end. Maximum
diameter three-fourths inch (3/4"); twelve inch (12") inserted length.
      5.   Installation shall be in accordance with IDOT requirements, section
606.
      6.   Pavement shall be removed to install a front face form. The area
between the edge of the existing pavement and the face of the new gutter shall
be cleaned of all loose material and then filled with concrete on streets to be
overlaid and shall be filled with CA-6 on streets to be reconstructed, to a
minimum width of six inches (6").
      7.   Any concrete driveway aprons disturbed by curb removal shall be saw
cut at the closest joint and replaced full width. (Ord. 07-20, 9-4-2007)
   (K)   Street Signs And Traffic Control:
      1.   General:
         (a)   The village shall designate the location and type of traffic
control items and street signs to be required in any subdivision or
development. The village shall install, replace, and maintain such signs
according to the pricing schedule provided to the developer upon final approval
of the signage type and location. The pricing schedule shall be determined
administratively by the superintendent of public works and available to the
public upon request. All signs shall be installed within twenty one (21) days
after acceptance by the village of the binder coat of asphalt and prior to the
issuance of building permits, if in the opinion of the village engineer, the
streets are navigable by the general public for the affected phase of
development. The developer shall bear the burden of maintenance and replacement
costs until final acceptance of the development by the village.
         (b)   Signs, striping, and other traffic control items shall be
installed in accordance with the "Manual On Uniform Traffic Control Devices"
(MUTCD), latest edition, the Illinois supplement to the national MUTCD, latest
edition, and the "Standard Specifications For Road And Bridge Construction",
latest edition, unless otherwise modified in this section.
      2.   Street Name Signs:
         (a)   Street name signs shall be located at all street intersections.
         (b)   Street signs shall be mounted on individual metal posts with
materials specified by the village of Manteno.
         (c)   Signs shall be placed parallel to the named street.
         (d)   Sign blades shall be made of extruded aluminum with type A high
intensity sheeting and a minimum sign length of thirty six inches (36").
         (e)   Sign blades shall be nine inches (9") high with six inch (6")
letters and four and one-half inch (4.5") suffix letters.
         (f)   Lettering shall be Highway Gothic, all upper case, white letters
on a green background.
         (g)   Signs shall be two (2) sided.
         (h)   Typical prefix abbreviations are: N = north; S = south; E =
east; W = west.
         (i)   Typical suffix abbreviations are:
Alley = ALLEY    Junction = JCT South = S
Avenue = AVE     Lane = LANE    Southeast = SE
Boulevard = BLVD North = N      Square = SQ
Circle = CIR     Northeast = NE Street = ST
Court = CT       Northwest = NW Terrace = TER
Drive = DR       Parkway = PKWY Thruway = TWY
East = E         Place = PL     Trail = TR
Highway = HWY    Plaza = PLZ    Way = WAY
Hill = HILL      Road = RD      West = W
 
         (j)   Street sign material specification:
            Purchased through:
            Capital StreetScapes
            9402 Business Drive
            Austin, TX 78758
            FL4X14 - Fluted pole
            BASE45 - Slipover base for a 4" pole
            BALL4 - Ball finial for a 4" pole
            ST9x36-S Street sign frame for 9" x 36" sign with welded scroll on
bottom
            9" x 36" single sided street sign with mitered corners. High
intensity reflective. 1 single sided sign attached to each side of the frame.
            All components (except single sided street sign) are powder coated
with cardinal GN03 dark green. (Ord. 15-18, 8-17-2015)
      3.   Traffic Control Signs:
         (a)   Stop Signs Required: At least one stop sign will be required at
every three-way intersection and at least two (2) stop signs will be required
at every four-way intersection, as directed by the village engineer.
         (b)   Other Signs: The village will designate other signs, such as
speed limit and crossing signs, which are required.
         (c)   Location: Signs shall be located in accordance with MUTCD
standards.
         (d)   Stop Bars And Striping:
            (1)   Stop bars are required at all stop signs.
            (2)   The village will designate locations or crosswalk or other
striping that may be required.
            (3)   All striping shall be thermoplastic, and shall conform to
section 780 of the standard specifications. (Ord. 07-20, 9-4-2007)
         Stop Sign:
            30" stop sign R1-1
            Bolt 1 way 5/16" x 21/2" BLT-1W-A-C2.5
            12" x 6" 4-way stop - R1-3
            18" x 6" all way - R1-4
         Stop sign pole material specification:
            FL4X10 - Fluted pole
            BASE45 - Slipover base for a 4" pole
            BALL4 - Ball finial for a 4" pole
            All components are powder coated with cardinal GN03 dark green.
            Purchased through:
            Capital StreetScapes
            9402 Business Drive
            Austin, TX 78758
         Speed Limit:
            30" x 24" speed limit - R2-1
            30" x 24" speed limit - EG-0.80-B/W R2-118/2K1A
            11' U-channel post 2# per ft.-green UCH-11-2#
            Bolt 1 way 5/16" x 21/2" BLT-1W-A-C2.5
         Slow Children:
            18" x 24" slow children at play EG-.080-B/4 W9-1218/2K1B
            11' U-channel post 2# per ft.-grn UCH-11-2#
            Bolt 1 way 5/16" x 21/2" BLT-1W-A-C2.5
         Yield Sign:
            Yield 36" R1-2
            Bolt 1 way 5/16" x 21/2" BLT-1W-A-C2.5
         Yield sign pole material specification:
            FL4X10 - Fluted pole
            BASE45 - Slipover base for a 4" pole
            BALL4 - Ball finial for a 4" pole
            All components are powder coated with cardinal GN03 dark green.
            Purchased through:
            Capital StreetScapes
            9402 Business Drive
            Austin, TX 78758
(Ord. 16-12, 8-15-2016)
         No Trucks:
            No trucks symbol 24" x 24" R5-2a (text sign)
            11' U-channel post 2# per ft.-grn UCH-11-2#
            Bolt 1 way 5/16" x 21/2" BLT-1W-A-C2.5
         No Engine Braking:
            30" no engine braking EG-.080-B/W SP30030/211A
            11' U-channel post 2# per ft.-grn UCH-11-2#
            Bolt 1 way 5/16" x 21/2" BLT-1W-A-C2.5
      4.   Pavement Striping:
         (a)   Stop bars and striping shall be thermoplastic with location,
widths, and colors in accordance with the Illinois department of transportation
district three (of region 2) standard detail.
         (b)   Temporary paint striping shall be required after binder
placement on all collector streets, secondary routes and primary routes.
         (c)   Raised reflective pavement markers will be required for primary
routes, and secondary routes on centerline skip dash, double yellow centerline
and turn lanes. (Ord. 07-20, 9-4-2007)
10-8-12: DRIVEWAYS, SIDEWALKS AND BIKE TRAILS:
   (A)   Driveways:
      1.   The materials and methods of construction shall conform to the
Illinois department of transportation "Standard Specifications For Road And
Bridge Construction", latest edition.
      2.   A paved access driveway from the right of way to the street pavement
shall be provided with location designed not to conflict with safety of public
traffic.
      3.   All proposed parking areas shall be paved.
      4.   Residential driveway or parking area pavements on private property
shall consist of one of the following options:
         (a)   Material shall be base course consisting of IDOT gradation CA-6,
CA-7, or CA-10, eight inches (8") in thickness, and surface course consisting
of bituminous concrete surface course, two and one-half inches (21/2") in
thickness (asphalt). All thicknesses shall be measured with materials in place
and compacted.
         (b)   Material shall be base course consisting of IDOT gradation CA-6,
CA-7, or CA-10, four inches (4") in thickness, and class PV Portland cement,
four inches (4") in thickness, reinforced with fiberglass. All thicknesses
shall be measured with materials in place and compacted.
      5.   Control joints shall be constructed so as to divide the driveway and
driveway apron from the sidewalk. The control joints shall be not less than
one-eighth inch (1/8") nor more than one- fourth inch (1/4") in width, and
shall be edged with an edging tool having a one-fourth inch (1/4") radius. The
minimum depth shall be one and one-fourth inches (11/4").
Any alternate materials in addition to those described above shall be presented
in writing to the village engineer for his written approval prior to inclusion
in the construction drawings and specifications. No bituminous surface
treatment (oil and chip surfaces) will be allowed.
      6.   All curb cuts necessary for driveways accessing on village streets
require a permit and shall be completed as follows:
         (a)   Curbed Entrances: For entrances with a curbed radius, the
complete concrete curb and gutter shall be removed and then replaced with a new
combination concrete curb and gutter (depressed) according to the Illinois
department of transportation "Standard Specifications For Road And Bridge
Construction", latest edition.
         (b)   Aprons: For entrances with aprons, the apron on right of way
shall be made of concrete. The concrete curb and gutter may be either removed
and replaced with new combination concrete curb and gutter (depressed)
according to IDOT specifications, or may be altered by sawing off the back of
the curb using a machine mounted saw specifically manufactured for removing the
backs of curbs.
         (c)   Joint Between Curb And Entrance: At no time shall any portion of
the combination concrete curb and gutter be poured as an integral part of the
driveway. A joint using three-fourths inch (3/4") preformed bituminous
expansion joint filled shall be provided between the back of the curb and the
driveway portion.
         (d)   Situations With No Curb Cut Required: Residential driveways with
aprons may be finished off to match the top of the existing curb without a curb
cut if, and only if, such curb is a modified M3:12 or at a height less than
three inches (3") measured up from the gutter pan flow line.
         (e)   Gutter Pans: All gutter pans or gutters shall be kept clear of
all materials. No concrete, asphalt or any other material will be permitted in
the gutter pan. This prohibitive restriction also applies to pipes or any other
device placed in the gutter pans to provide a better approach to the driveway.
         (f)   Grade: Driveways shall be constructed at a grade ranging between
three percent (3%) to six percent (6%) from the garage to the street unless the
village engineer specifically approves a greater slope.
      7.   All driveways require an apron. Driveway aprons shall be constructed
entirely of Portland cement concrete and will be a minimum of four inches (4")
in thickness. Rebar #4 will be utilized in sections spanning utility trenches
and shall extend five feet (5') beyond the trench on twelve inch (12") centers.
   (B)   Sidewalks And Bike Trails:
      1.   Sidewalks shall be provided on both sides of all streets within all
subdivisions.
      2.   Sidewalks are to be located on the right of way, the nearest edge
being one foot (1') from the property line. The sidewalks are to be five inches
(5") higher than the curb on the side close to the curb and six inches (6")
higher than the curb on the side far from the curb.
      3.   The back of the curb at the point of public sidewalks intersecting
with street curb and gutter shall be depressed and shall not exceed one-half
inch (1/2") elevation over the flow line of the gutter pan.
      4.   The materials and methods of construction shall conform to the
Illinois department of transportation "Standard Specifications For Road And
Bridge Construction", latest edition.
         (a)   Material shall be base course consisting of IDOT gradation CA-6,
CA-7, or CA-10, four inches (4") in thickness, and class SI Portland cement
concrete, four inches (4") in thickness. All thicknesses shall be measured with
materials in place and compacted.
         (b)   Width shall be five feet (5') except where the plan commission
or village engineer deems a wider sidewalk necessary. Any new sidewalks
adjoining existing sidewalks less than five feet (5') in width will transition
to five feet (5') at the driveway, if that point is appropriate, or at a point
to be determined by the director of building and zoning.
         (c)   Control joints shall be constructed at right angles to the
centerline of the sidewalk and shall extend one-fourth inch (1/4") the depth of
the sidewalk. They shall not be less than one-eighth inch (1/8") nor more than
one-fourth inch (1/4") in width, and shall be edged with an edging tool having
a one-fourth inch (1/4") radius.
      5.   Bike trails, when required or approved as part of a development,
shall be ten feet (10') in width and conform to IDOT standards for
construction.
   (C)   Details:
      Driveways.
      Portland cement concrete sidewalk.
      Bike trail (path). (Ord. 07-20, 9-4-2007)
10-8-13: STREET LIGHTING:
All developments shall include the design and construction of a street lighting
system for the illumination of all streets and roadways which lie in or border
the development. The street lighting system shall be in conformance with the
standards, requirements and details of this title.
   (A)   General:
      1.   All developments shall include the design and construction of a
street lighting system for the illumination of all roadways which lie within or
border the development. The street lighting system shall be in conformance with
the standards and requirements established by the village engineer, in
accordance with the provisions of the NEC code, and subject to the approval of
the corporate authorities of the village. It shall be the responsibility of the
developer or subdivider to transfer manufacturer's warranty to village.
      2.   The street lighting system shall be designed and constructed in
accordance with the following standards:
         (a)   "American National Standard Practice For Roadway Lighting"
(ANSI/IES RP8 latest edition) recommended illuminance values.
         (b)   The national electrical code (NEC, NFPA 70, latest edition).
         (c)   "Standard Specification For Road And Bridge Construction" (by
IDOT, latest edition).
         (d)   ComEd standards and requirements for electrical service.
         (e)   Local codes, ordinances, and development standards of the
village.
      3.   Prior to the installation of any streetlights, the following
submittals are required for review and approval by the village:
         (a)   Layout of the proposed street lighting system showing pole
locations, unit duct or conduit routing, pedestal and lighting controller
locations, mast arm orientation, source of power, all utilities both
underground and overhead; and all right of way and easements.
         (b)   Manufacturer's information on poles, luminaires, service
pedestals, lighting controllers, mast arms, unit duct, wire, conduit and
appurtenances.
         (c)   Lighting calculations and design parameters.
         (d)   Voltage drop calculations showing that no branch circuit will
exceed six percent (6%) (the maximum allowable) voltage drop.
      4.   Provide to the village one spare lighting unit for every twenty (20)
units installed. In addition, provide one case of lamps (minimum of 10 lamps)
for each lamp type/wattage installed.
      5.   Each lighting unit shall be mounted on a reinforced concrete
foundation as per the standard detail. (Ord. 07-20, 9-4-2007)
   (B)   Street Lighting Specifications:
      1.   Streetlight Specifications: In addition to adhering to all
specifications as detailed on the streetlight standard, concrete foundation
details and pole base wiring diagram exhibits, all street lighting shall
conform to the following specifications:
         (a)   All wiring shall be in a unit duct or conduit.
         (b)   The luminaires shall be LED, General Electric ERL 1006E
140AGRAYG or approved equal. (Ord. 15-40, 12-21-2015)
         (c)   Streetlights will be controlled singularly with photoelectric
cells.
         (d)   Light standards (poles) finished height shall be twenty seven
feet (27') minimum. Mast arm and pole shall be mill aluminum alloy 6063 T6.
         (e)   Catalog cuts must be submitted and approved by the village
engineer prior to installation of streetlights, if the standard GE M-250A2
powr/door thirty foot (30') mounting height is not used.
         (f)   A statement shall be submitted to the village engineer and
village electrical inspector prior to starting work stating that the
streetlights will be installed in accordance with the specifications set forth
herein and in accordance with ComEd specifications.
      2.   Installation Methods: Street lighting will be installed as follows:
         (a)   All materials and equipment may be installed by the developer
but shall be in accordance with all ComEd specifications and regulations. A
wiring diagram by the developer, including specifications of all equipment to
be installed, shall be submitted to the village engineer, the village
electrical inspector and ComEd for their approval prior to starting work.
         (b)   Street lighting may be installed by ComEd at the developer's
expense.
      3.   Number And Location; Minimum Requirements: The number and precise
location of streetlights as determined by the village engineer, and approved by
the plan commission and village board of trustees, shall be clearly shown on
the infrastructure improvement plans that are to be submitted with the
subdivision plat for approval. As a minimum, streetlights will be required at
all intersections and at the end of all cul-de-sacs. Maximum spacing between
streetlights shall be three hundred fifty feet (350'). In addition, to provide
adequate lighting, commercial and industrial streets of any type and primary
and secondary routes shall determine the spacing of light fixtures by using the
IES RP-8-00 "Roadway Lighting Design Manual" based on illuminance. The pavement
classification and road/pedestrian conflict areas shall be determined by
village engineer.
   (C)   Installation Requirements For Residential Areas: Street lighting in
residential areas shall consist of a thirty foot (30') mounting height single
lighting unit. These units shall be installed a minimum of three feet (3')
behind back of curb. (Ord. 07-20, 9-4-2007)
   (D)   Installation Requirements For Industrial Areas: The thirty foot (30')
single units shall consist of a twenty seven foot (27') pole with a ten foot
(10') arm and a single LED luminaire mounted at thirty feet (30'). The
luminaire shall be the General Electric ERL 1008E 140AGRAYG or approved equal.
The pole shall consist of a round aluminum tapered pole with a ten foot (10')
arm, as manufactured by GE or approved equal. These units shall be installed at
all intersections and along all industrial area streets and roadways, a minimum
of six foot (6') behind the back of the curb. (Ord. 15-40, 12-21-2015)
   (E)   Wiring:
      1.   All wiring installed for the street lighting system from the service
pedestal to a lighting unit and from lighting unit to lighting unit, shall be
provided with a ground wire and contained in unit duct manufactured from high
density smooth wall polyethylene electrical plastic duct or a PVC schedule 40
conduit. Direct burial cable or wire for the street lighting system is
prohibited.
      2.   Where unit duct is routed under sidewalks, streets, driveways, or
other paved areas, the unit duct shall be installed in rigid steel conduit of a
large enough size (minimum 2 inch diameter) to allow for an easy installation
of the unit duct. If sidewalks, streets, driveways, or other paved areas are
existing, the conduit shall be pushed under these surfaces by a village
approved means prior to unit duct installation.
      3.   All wiring installed for the street lighting system shall be heat
and moisture resistant, XLP-type USE, copper wire, minimum of no. 8 AWG and
shall have an insulation rating of six hundred (600) volts.
      4.   All runs shall be continuous without splices in the unit duct or
wire, from the service pedestal to a lighting unit and from lighting unit to
lighting unit.
      5.   All wiring shall be subject to an insulation test to ground after
installation. The minimum acceptable resistance to ground shall be one hundred
(100) meg-ohms. Any section of wiring failing to pass the insulation test for
any reason shall be replaced. All wiring shall be tested in the presence of the
village engineer.
      6.   All unit ducts and conduits shall be installed not less than thirty
inches (30") below finish grade.
      7.   Electrical service pedestals and weatherproof disconnect switches
shall be provided for lighting units connected directly to the utility company,
and the pedestal shall be located in village right of way or village utility
easement.
   (F)   Grounding:
      1.   Provision: Grounding of the street lighting system shall be provided
as shown in the standard details and as required by the national electrical
code.
      2.   Testing: All ground rods shall be subject to a resistance to earth
test performed by either using the three (3) point method of measurement or
other means approved by the engineer. All ground rods shall be tested
individually in the presence of the village engineer. The maximum DC resistance
allowed shall be ten (10) ohms. If any ground rods fail the test, a second
ground rod shall be driven ten feet (10') away from the first. Both ground rods
shall be connected together, and the test performed again. If the resistance is
still too high, install additional ground rods in like manner as needed.
   (G)   Details:
      Residential, commercial, and industrial thirty foot (30') single lighting
unit.
      Foundation.
      Alternate residential, commercial and industrial sixteen foot (16')
single lighting unit as provided and approved by the village engineer. (Ord.
07-20, 9-4-2007)
10-8-14: PARKWAY AND OUTLOT RESTORATION:
   (A)   All outlots and parkways, between the sidewalk and curb, shall be
graded so as to have a minimum cross drainage slope of two percent (2%) to the
curb line.
   (B)   Unsuitable soil, boulders, and other debris, including broken or
excess concrete shall be removed from the parkway so as to provide an
acceptable subgrade. Stumps shall be removed to a minimum of twelve inches
(12") below the proposed finished grade.
   (C)   After the outlot or parkway subgrade has been prepared, acceptable
topsoil material shall be placed to a minimum depth of six inches (6") and
graded to proposed finish surface. (Ord. 07-20, 9-4-2007)
10-8-15: SITE GRADING AND DRAINAGE:
   (A)   General Requirements:
      1.   The excavation of, or any combination thereof, any lot or parcel
within any subdivision shall be in accordance with an approved grading plan
submitted as part of engineering plans for said subdivision.
      2.   All lots shall be graded to drain as part of subdivision
construction. In addition, the backyards of lots within fifteen feet (15') of
the back property lines and also fifteen feet (15') either side of easements
are to be graded to meet the neighborhood drainage plan at the time of
subdivision construction, prior to utility (electric, phone, cable, gas, etc.)
installation.
      3.   Before any area that is subject to flooding or is in a designated
floodplain area can be subdivided, permits shall be obtained from the army
corps of engineers, the Illinois department of natural resources, department of
water resources, and the federal emergency management agency (FEMA). All lots
shall be removed from the 100-year floodplain as designated by FEMA prior to
preliminary plat approval.
   (B)   Contents Of The Grading Plan: The grading plan shall include the
following:
      1.   Bench mark locations and other control elevations based on USGS
datum as required by village engineer.
      2.   Existing and finished ground control lines at a minimum of one foot
(1') contour intervals.
      3.   Site and any affected adjoining properties drainage showing existing
and proposed channels, swales, lakes, ponds, and structures with control
elevations, slopes and cross sections.
      4.   Top of foundation elevations and any opening elevations below top of
the foundation for any existing or proposed buildings.
      5.   Finished ground surface elevations at foundation corners, lot
corners, top of curbs at property lines extended, drainage inlet structures,
and at other ground control points.
      6.   The parcel drainage shall be designed to flow away from the top of
the foundation. Storm water being directed to the side yard of the parcel shall
be directed into a formed drainage swale, having a minimum slope of one percent
(1%) and a maximum slope of seven percent (7%). In the event that conditions
dictate that some parts of the lot be higher than the structure foundation, the
grading plan must show specific drainage configurations for the parcel
specifying that all drainage is to be directed to flow away from the foundation
in an acceptable manner without diverting the flow to a neighboring property.
      7.   Back lot line swales shall be graded to a positive outlet or inlet
structure at a minimum flow line slope of one percent (1%) and shall have side
slopes of six to one (6:1) or less.
      8.   Construction and work such as walkways, driveways, landscaping or
any structure shall be installed so that the construction of same will not
interfere with drainage. All sidewalks, driveways, patios and other flat work
shall be at an elevation relative to the foundation wall so that water will
drain away from the structure on all sides and off the lot in a manner which
will provide reasonable freedom from erosion and permanently pocketed surface
water.
      9.   The flow from off site tributary areas that are tributary to an
intermittent stream or overflow route that must pass through the parcel must be
identified on the grading plan and must be designed in such a way to adequately
convey the flow of all surface water for a 100-year storm frequency without
damage to adjoining structures.
      10.   All overflow routes for the 100-year storm and for accumulated
storm water runoff from several lots or from off site catchment areas must be
clearly designated on the grading plan with the total width of the flow route
contained within an easement for drainage purposes.
   (C)   Lot Grading Surveys: Prior to issuance of a certificate of building or
occupancy for any structure, the applicable survey shall be submitted to and
approved by the director of building and zoning. The surveys shall be in
accordance with section
8-1-4 of this code. (Ord. 07-20, 9-4-2007)
10-8-16: PUBLIC UTILITIES:
   (A)   After the public utility easement subgrade has been prepared,
acceptable topsoil material shall be placed to a minimum depth of six inches
(6") and brought to final grade prior to installation of the public utilities.
   (B)   All utility lines for telephone, electric service and cable television
shall be placed underground entirely throughout a subdivided area. Said
conduits or cables shall be placed within easements or dedicated public ways at
the rear of the lots, in a manner which will not conflict with other
underground services. Further, all transformer boxes shall be located at the
rear of the lots so as not to be unsightly or hazardous to the public. The
utility lines shall be parallel to and not less than eighteen inches (18") from
the rear property lines. Per ComEd's requirements, all utility lines shall be
installed in approved conduits due to the village's rear-lot installation
requirement. Corner property markers shall not be disturbed by the installation
of utility lines. (Ord. 07-20, 9-4-2007; amd. Ord. 19-31, 1-21-2020)
10-8-17: STORM SEWERS AND SUMP PUMP DRAINS:
   (A)   General:
      1.   An adequate system of storm water drainage shall be constructed and
installed, consisting of pipes, storm water detention facilities, tiles,
swales, manholes, inlets and other necessary facilities that will adequately
drain the subdivision and protect roadway pavements and buildings from
flooding. The storm water drainage system shall be in compliance with the
village's storm water management ordinance, the standards, requirements and
details of this title and all other applicable ordinances enacted by the
village and subject to the approval by the village engineer.
      2.   The storm sewer system shall be designed and constructed in
accordance with the latest editions of the "Standard Specifications For Water
And Sewer Main Construction In Illinois"; the Illinois department of
transportation's "Standard Specifications For Road And Bridge Construction";
and the village of Manteno storm water management ordinance.
      3.   Whenever any stream or important surface drainage course is located
in any area which is being subdivided, the subdivider shall reserve an adequate
drainage right of way as determined by the village, Illinois environmental
protection agency, U.S. corps of engineers, and Illinois department of natural
resources along each side of the stream for the purpose of widening, deepening,
sloping, improving, or protecting the stream.
      4.   The storm sewer system shall be designed in accordance with the
storm water management ordinance using a 10-year storm frequency or other
methods approved by the village engineer. Culvert design and capabilities shall
be determined according to the Illinois department of highways standard design
methods using a 25-year storm frequency.
      5.   Computations for the storm sewer system for on site and off site
drainage shall be presented with the preliminary plat for approval.
      6.   The drainage system shall include underground piping for sump pump
connections. Said piping shall extend from either the front or rear of each
building lot to the storm sewer system and include manholes and/or cleanouts
for maintenance purposes. The sump pump drainage system shall be subject to the
approval of the village engineer.
      7.   Any field tiles encountered during construction shall be either
integrated into the storm sewer system, rerouted, removed or plugged in a
manner deemed appropriate by the village engineer.
      8.   Erosion control shall be in accordance with the state of Illinois
standards. Minimum requirements include silt fence around the downstream
perimeter of the developed property, monofilament geotextile fabric in/over all
storm grates until all vegetation is in place, and ditch checks where
appropriate.
   (B)   Basic Design Standards:
      1.   Complete System Requirements:
         (a)   A complete storm and detention system shall be designed to serve
the entire development.
         (b)   The storm sewers, streams, or channels shall be designed to
accommodate all areas which naturally flow to the area of development and also
any additional areas which plan to contribute to the drainage area as
identified by the design engineer and approved by the village engineer. All
storm sewer runoff from adjacent areas shall be received and conveyed through
the subdivision.
         (c)   The storm sewer system shall be separate and independent of the
sanitary sewer system.
      2.   Sizing Requirements:
         (a)   Minimum storm sewer size shall be twelve inch (12") diameter.
         (b)   All storm tiles with open grates to accept surface runoff are
considered to be storm sewers and require at least the minimum diameter.
      3.   Cover Requirements:
         (a)   Sewers shall be sufficiently deep to prevent freezing.
         (b)   Where high ground water conditions are anticipated, buoyancy of
sewers shall be considered and adequate provisions made for protection.
      4.   Design Flows:
         (a)   Storm water design and detention shall be in accordance with the
village of Manteno storm water management ordinance.
         (b)   A minimum velocity of two feet (2') per second shall be
maintained in pipe flowing full, in accordance with the guidelines contained in
the Illinois department of transportation's "Drainage Manual".
         (c)   Drainage calculations shall be submitted with the development
plans.
      5.   Vertical And Horizontal Alignment: Sewers shall be laid straight in
both horizontal and vertical planes between manholes.
      6.   Storm Sewer Size Changes: Storm sewers of different diameter shall
join only at manholes.
   (C)   Material Specifications:
      1.   Storm sewer pipe and fittings:
         (a)   Reinforced concrete pipe (RCP):
            (1)   Comply with AASHTO M170.
            (2)   Use class IV unless otherwise designated on drawings.
         (b)   Elliptical concrete pipe (ECP):
            (1)   Comply with AASHTO M207.
            (2)   Use class HE-III horizontal elliptical unless otherwise
designated on drawings.
         (c)   Concrete branch fittings:
            (1)   RCP wye or tee fitting.
            (2)   Flexible watertight tee service connector.
         (d)   Concrete joints: Use one of the following types:
            (1)   Rubber ring gasket complying with ASTM C443.
            (2)   Preformed bituminous plastic gasket consisting of a
homogeneous blend of refined hydrocarbon resins and plasticizing compound
reinforced with inert mineral filler similar to RAM-NEK manufactured by K.T.
Snyder Company, or type CS-208 manufactured by Concrete Sealants, Inc., or
village approved equal.
            (3)   Bituminous mastic joints of the cold applied type, consisting
of oakum and a homogeneous blend of bitumen, inert filler and suitable solvent
of such consistency that it can be applied to the joints with a trowel when the
air temperature is between twenty degrees Fahrenheit (20°F) and one hundred
degrees Fahrenheit (100°F).
         (e)   Polyethylene corrugated sewer pipe:
            (1)   Use high density, polyethylene pipe whose manufacture shall
be from resins complying with the requirements of ASTM D3350, cell
classification 335434.
            (2)   Comply with the following: For pipe sizes twelve inch (12")
through sixty inch (60"): AASHTO M252, type S.
            (3)   Joints: Use integral bell gasketed type with elastomeric O-
ring gaskets to form a watertight seal complying with ASTM D3212 and F477.
            (4)   Provide smooth interior surface for pipe and fittings.
            (5)   Branch fittings:
               A.   Prefabricated fittings made of same material as mainline
pipe.
               B.   Thermo-molded PVC branch fittings.
            (6)   Acceptable products:
               A.   N-12 pipe manufactured by Advanced Drainage Systems, Inc.
               B.   Spirolite pipe manufactured by Spiral Engineered Systems or
village approved equal.
            (7)   This type of pipe is allowed under pavements provided two
foot (2') of cover, measured from the top of pipe to pavement surface, is
provided. Pipe installed under any roadway must be done in the presence of the
village engineer or village field inspector.
   (D)   Storm Water Inlets:
      1.   Surface drainage shall be provided so that surface water is not
carried across any street intersection or parking lot drives. Surface runoff
shall not extend a distance more than four hundred feet (400') along the
surface of the ground and shall not build up a flow more than two (2) cubic
feet per second in a 10-year storm before being interrupted by a drainage
inlet.
      2.   Every residential lot shall have a storm sewer inlet in the backyard
within five feet (5') of a property line. Sump services are not to cross side
lot lines and shall be connected to the sewer pipe or a structure.
      3.   Inlets shall discharge into storm sewers, which shall not discharge
into side lot or rear lot drainage ditches, unless otherwise approved by the
village engineer.
      4.   Inlets (or other drainage structures) shall be provided at all low
points.
      5.   Storm water inlets shall only be type A or type B.
      6.   At least one adjusting ring shall be used on each inlet barrel to
provide a base for the frame and grate. No more than two (2) adjusting rings
with twelve inch (12") maximum height adjustment will be allowed.
      7.   All storm inlets shall have concrete fillets poured in the bottom of
the structure as directed by the village.
   (E)   Storm Manholes:
      1.   Locations: Manholes shall be provided at the following locations:
         (a)   Termination of all sewers which do not terminate at an inlet, or
flared end section.
         (b)   Changes in direction, horizontal, or vertical alignment.
         (c)   Changes in shape or pipe size.
         (d)   Junctions with other storm sewers.
      2.   Maximum Spacing: The maximum access spacing shall be four hundred
feet (400').
      3.   Special Manholes Or Junction Chambers: Where flows, pipe size, or
other conditions dictate, special manholes or junction chambers shall be
designed and constructed, as approved by the village engineer.
      4.   Minimum Diameters: Minimum manhole diameters shall be:
 
Sewer Pipe Size     Manhole Diameter
18 inch or less     48 inches
21 to 36 inch       60 inches
Larger than 36 inch As directed by the village engineer with 48 inch offset
                    riser
 
      5.   Adjusting Rings: At least one adjusting ring shall be used on each
inlet barrel to provide a base for the frame and grate. No more than two (2)
adjusting rings with twelve inch (12") maximum height adjustment will be
allowed.
      6.   Concrete Fillets: All storm manholes shall have concrete fillets
poured in the bottom of the structure as directed by the village.
      7.   Storm Sewer Manhole Specifications:
         (a)   Precast:
            (1)   Provide precast reinforced concrete manhole sections,
bottoms, and flat top slabs complying with IDOT specifications.
            (2)   Provide eccentric cone section.
            (3)   Design flat slab top and cone sections for HS-20 loading.
         (b)   Joints For Precast Sections: Provide tongue and groove joints
with either flexible watertight rubber gaskets or preformed bituminous plastic
gaskets consisting of a homogeneous blend of refined hydrocarbon resins and
plasticizing compound reinforced with inert mineral filler.
         (c)   Steps:
            (1)   Provide steps with a minimum width of twelve inches (12") and
a minimum projection of five inches (5").
            (2)   Use steps consisting of copolymer polypropylene plastic with
a continuous one-half inch (1/2") steel reinforcement.
         (d)   Manhole Frames And Covers:
            (1)   Provide cast iron frames and covers stamped with the word
"STORM".
            (2)   Acceptable products: East Jordan 1050.
         (e)   Storm Manhole And Inlet Frames And Covers:
            (1)   Manholes: Provide open lid cast iron frames and covers with a
type M1 radial flat grate.
            (2)   Acceptable products: East Jordan 1050.
         (f)   Inlets: Provide open lid cast iron frames and covers.
            (1)   Mountable curb and gutter - acceptable products: East Jordan
7525.
            (2)   Barrier curb and gutter - acceptable products: East Jordan
7210. (Ord. 07-20, 9-4-2007)
   (F)   Construction And Inspection Standards:
      1.   Notification: Prior to beginning the storm sewer installation, the
contractor shall give the village forty eight (48) hours' notice of the
intended time of starting work.
      2.   Conformance:
         (a)   The installation of storm sewers and appurtenances, including
services, shall conform to the requirements of the Illinois department of
transportation and the Illinois pollution control board.
         (b)   The contractor shall be responsible for providing a competent
individual on site during trenching operations to ensure that all OSHA and
other applicable safety standards are met by the construction means and
methods.
      3.   Excavation And Foundation:
         (a)   The trench shall be excavated so that the flow line of the
finished sewer shall be at the depth and grade shown on the approved plans. The
trench shall be at least twelve inches (12") wider than the external diameter
of the pipe. The width of the trench shall not exceed the external diameter of
the pipe by more than eighteen inches (18") at the top of the pipe.
         (b)   If the excavation is deeper than necessary, the foundation shall
be brought to proper grade by the addition of well compacted bedding material.
Where a firm foundation is not encountered at the grade established, due to
soft, spongy, or other unsuitable soil (unless other special construction
methods are called for on the plans or in the special provisions), all such
unsuitable soil under the pipe and for the width of the trench shall be removed
and replaced with well compacted bedding material.
         (c)   The pipe shall be laid so that it will be uniformly supported
and the entire length of the pipe barrel will have full bearing. No blocking of
any kind shall be used to adjust the pipe to grade except when used with
embedment in concrete.
      4.   Pipe Bedding And Backfilling:
         (a)   Four inches (4") of CA-7 material shall be used as bedding for
the storm sewer pipe, increased to eight inches (8") if rock is encountered.
         (b)   Backfill CA-7 material to the horizontal centerline of concrete
pipe and to six inches (6") above N-12 pipe in areas over two feet (2') away
from existing or proposed pavements, driveways, or sidewalks.
         (c)   Any pipe installed under or within two feet (2') of an existing
or proposed pavement, driveway, or sidewalk shall be backfilled with CA-
7 material at a one to one (1:1) slope from the edge of pavement, driveway, or
sidewalk to the trench.
      5.   Pipe Laying:
         (a)   Pipe laying and joining shall be done in accordance with the
pipe manufacturer's recommendations.
         (b)   Pipe shall be laid straight both horizontally and vertically
between manholes.
         (c)   Pipe shall not be dropped from delivery vehicles. All pipe shall
be lowered into the trench with a suitable apparatus; in no case shall the pipe
be dropped or thrown.
      6.   Locating Wire Requirements:
         (a)   All storm pipe shall require insulated metallic locating wire
(10-gauge copper minimum) capable of detection by a cable locator and shall be
buried directly against pipe.
         (b)   Locating wire shall terminate at the top of each structure or
cleanout and be capable of extending six inches (6") above final grade. (Ord.
09-29, 2-1-2010)
   (G)   Sump Pump And Footing Tile Connections:
      1.   Discharge Of Water: No water from footing tiles or basement sumps
shall be pumped onto the ground surface. Such water shall be discharged
directly into the storm sewer system.
      2.   Discharge Pipe Material: Pipe material for discharge pipe from the
house and the secondary drainage system shall be PVC with a minimum SDR 35 ASTM
3034.
      3.   Discharge Line And Piping: The sump pump discharge line should come
out of the house above the ground, and turn downward using an elbow. It should
then extend just into a gravity receiving pipe that is sticking out of the
ground a few inches. The gravity pipe should be a four inch (4") diameter PVC.
Discharge piping from the house and the secondary drainage system shall be laid
on a uniform grade of one percent (1%) and a minimum depth of cover of three
feet (3').
      4.   Tap Into Storm Sewer Main: The tap into the storm sewer main should
be made based on the type of receiving storm sewer pipe as follows:
         (a)   N-12 Storm Sewer (Heavy Black Plastic Pipe With A Smooth
Interior): An Inserta-Tee by Advanced Drainage Systems shall be used for
connection of the four inch (4") PVC gravity sump pump line to the N-12 storm
pipe.
         (b)   Concrete Storm Sewer: A hole shall be sawed into the existing
concrete storm sewer or storm structure. Three (3) or four (4) galvanized metal
screws, a minimum of two inches (2") long, are to be installed in the end of
the four inch (4") PVC sump pump discharge pipe at a distance from the end
equal to the thickness of the concrete to create a stop barrier. The screws
should be equally spaced around the PVC pipe and screwed in no more than one-
fourth inch (1/4"). The four inch (4") PVC pipe is to be inserted into the
concrete until the screws rest against the outside of the concrete causing the
end of the PVC pipe to be flush with the interior of the concrete pipe or
structure. The PVC pipe should then be concreted and/or grouted in place with
care taken to prevent the cement materials from entering the pipe or structure.
         (c)   Inspections Required: Trenches and connections are not to be
backfilled until an inspection is made by the appropriate village inspector.
      5.   Connection Not Allowed: Two (2) or more homes are not allowed to
connect to a common service.
      6.   Secondary Drainage Systems: Secondary drainage systems shall be
installed within the street right of way or in front, side, or back yard
easements.
      7.   Storm Manhole: A storm manhole shall be provided at all junctions.
      8.   Dead Ends: Dead ends of secondary systems shall be provided with a
two foot (2') diameter inlet.
      9.   Factory Made Fittings: All connections between house discharge sump
pump discharge and the secondary drainage system shall be made with factory
made fittings. No cut in connections will be allowed.
   (H)   Downspouts: Downspouts for residential usage shall discharge to the
ground surface. They shall not discharge directly to storm sewers or other
underground drains. The discharge location shall be a minimum of five feet (5')
from any property line, five feet (5') from the structure foundation and shall
not be directed toward any neighboring or adjacent building. All efforts shall
be made to direct the runoff water to flow over the property in question as
long as possible, rather than diverting the flow to a neighboring property.
   (I)   Detention Ponds: The village has a storm water management ordinance
(chapter 10 of this title) to diminish threats to public health, safety and
welfare caused by runoff of excessive storm water from new development and
redevelopment.
      1.   Detention Pond Release Rate: Detention shall be provided for all
developments. The post-development runoff shall be limited to 0.15 cfs per
acre. Bulletin 75, or the latest released version of the Illinois State Water
Survey rainfall data, shall be used for storm calculations.
      2.   End Sections: End sections shall be installed at all storm sewer
outfalls into a detention pond. The end section shall be precast concrete. Pipe
twelve inches (12") and larger shall have an integral bell and spigot jointing
system with an O-ring, polyisoprene rubber gasket meeting ASTM F-477. The
gasket shall be factory installed on the spigot end. End sections fifteen
inches (15") or larger in size shall have an IDOT protective grate.
      3.   Concrete Swales: A concrete paved swale or paved ditch is required
in detention ponds where the low flows travel across the pond.
      4.   Turf Improvements: Turf improvements shall include installation of a
minimum of twelve inches (12") of topsoil, fertilizer, and seeding. Final
acceptance of the improvements will be withheld until the turf is established.
Minimum slope of pond bottoms is one percent (1%).
      5.   Landscape Guidelines: Wet bottom and dry bottom detention basins are
two (2) ways to fulfill the requirements of this title. To promote
environmental and ecological benefits of these basins, the village has
established these landscaping guidelines. These guidelines are divided into two
(2) categories: wet bottom ponds and dry bottom basins.
         (a)   Wet Bottom Basins (Fishery):
            (1)   Pond Size: These guidelines are to be used for ponds to
support a fishery. Ponds that support fisheries must be at least one acre in
size and at least twenty five percent (25%) of the pond ten feet (10') to
twelve feet (12') deep, measured from the normal water level. These ponds must
also have storm water best management practices upstream of the pond to reduce
and minimize siltation, high nutrient loads, and other water quality concerns.
            (2)   Wetland Mitigation Projects: Wet bottom basins that are
specifically designed for wetland mitigation or wetland conservation are not
covered in these guidelines. The design for wetland mitigation projects should
follow the U.S. army corps of engineers wetland mitigation guidance documents.
            (3)   Pond Design: The pond shall be designed with respect to its
position in the overall landscape. The following are guidelines that can be
used, but site specific conditions, goals and criteria shall be developed
during the design. The pond design shall be reviewed by the village in
conjunction with the overall site planning.
            (4)   Pond Shape: Several engineering attributes need to be
incorporated into a wet bottom pond design. For landscaping, there are two (2)
important engineering attributes: pond slope and topsoil thickness.
               A.   The pond slope shall be five horizontal to one vertical
(5h:1v) or flatter at the normal pool elevation and no steeper than three
horizontal to one vertical (3h:1v) for other slopes of the pond. Also required
is a level safety ledge at least six feet (6') in width at 2.5 to 3.0 feet
below the normal water depth.
               B.   A minimum of twelve inches (12") of topsoil is required for
areas of the pond that will be vegetated.
            (5)   Vegetation:
               A.   The use of native plants in and around the pond are
required. Only plants native to northeastern Illinois may be used. Genetically
modified plants are not allowed. A list of suitable native plants is presented
in "Native Plant Guide For Streams And Stormwater Facilities In Northeastern
Illinois" by the USDA natural resources conservation service. The developer may
submit additional native plants to the village for approval.
               B.   These guidelines describe four (4) vegetation zones that
need to be included in the pond design: submergent vegetation zone; emergent
vegetation zone; saturated soil zone; and upland slope buffer. A detailed plan,
addressing all four (4) zones, will need to be submitted to the village for
review and approval.
            (6)   Submergent Vegetation Zone: This aquatic plant community is
generally submersed below the water surface or has floating leaves. This plant
community provides important habitat for fish and wildlife, but too much cover
of this plant community can choke a pond and decrease fish habitat. The village
requires random plantings of submergent plants. Thirty percent (30%) of the
safety ledge shall be planted with submergent plants. Areas of gravel on the
safety ledge will help the fish to spawn.
            (7)   Emergent Vegetation Zone: Emergent vegetation grows in
periodic or permanently flooded areas and the plant's leaves and stems extend
above the water's surface. For purposes of this guideline, emergent vegetation
is found in the zone from the normal water's edge to a water depth of six
inches (6"). Survival rate is best when installing live plant parts rather than
seeds, therefore, the village requires the planting of live plant parts for
this zone. Similar plants are recommended to be planted near each other in
small clusters, spacing of one foot (1') to one and one-half feet (11/2') on
center. A minimum of four thousand five hundred (4,500) plugs per acre is
required. Also, a goose grid to keep foraging geese from destroying these
plants is required for the emergent vegetation zone. When choosing the plant
list, the developer shall consider the plant's tolerance of siltation,
salinity, and nutrient load and light preference expected to be found at the
site. The "Native Plant Guide For Streams And Stormwater Facilities In
Northeastern Illinois" provides a good description of the plant's preferences.
            (8)   Saturated Soil Vegetation Zone: Plants that can grow under
saturated soil conditions are included in this zone. This zone, along with the
emergent vegetation zone, is important to stabilizing the shoreline, a common
soil erosion problem area. For purposes of this guideline, saturated soil
vegetation zone extends from the normal water's edge to approximately two feet
(2') above the normal water level or the 2-year flood water level, whichever is
greater. This zone can be seeded, but additional random planting of live plants
is required. A minimum of ten (10) pounds of pure live seed per acre shall be
seeded. The seed mix shall contain a variety of grasses, sedges, rushes and
forbs. A minimum of five (5) grasses, sedges, and rushes and eight (8) forbs
are required. A nurse crop of annual plants shall also be used to help
stabilize the soils and provide conditions suitable for the germination and
growth of perennial plants.
            (9)   Upland Slope Buffer: Plants that can grow in the upland slope
buffer zone occur on well drained slopes or soils and are rarely inundated by
water. Any inundation is also short lived. This zone is on the upland side of
the saturated soil vegetation zone. This zone can be seeded, and a minimum of
ten (10) pounds of pure live seed per acre is required. The seed mix shall
contain a variety of grasses and forbs. A minimum of four (4) grasses and ten
(10) forbs are required. A nurse crop of annual plants shall also be used to
help stabilize the soils and provide conditions suitable for the germination
and growth of perennial plants.
            (10)   Fish Structure: In addition to pond shape and vegetation,
additional habitat features are required to increase fish habitat. To help with
fish spawning, random placement of pea gravel on the safety bench is required.
Each pea gravel spawning area should be approximately twenty five (25) square
feet in size and four inches (4") thick.
      Random placement of rock piles and/or bundles of wood branches shall be
placed at pond depths of eight feet (8') to twelve feet (12'). The Illinois
department of natural resources has guidelines for assembling these types of
fish structures.
      Fishing access along the shoreline is required. The access area should
have a hard bottom, such as ledger stone/flagstone and access areas should be
placed at a minimum of once every two hundred fifty feet (250') of shoreline.
Paths shall be provided to the access areas, and shall be five feet (5') wide
PCC sidewalk.
         (b)   Wet Bottom Basins (Nonfishery):
            (1)   Water tolerant native vegetation or grass shall be used to
landscape the shorelines of wet detention facilities. The selected plants and
planting methods shall conform to the soils, hydrology, and water quality
conditions present in such facilities, with plants being tolerant of highly
variable hydrologic conditions and degraded water quality (e.g., high turbidity
and salinity content). Plant selection should conform to the guidance in the
"Native Plant Guide For Stream And Stormwater Facilities In Northeastern
Illinois" (NRCS et al., 1997), which is hereby adopted by reference.
      Native vegetation is recommended, but not required, for side slopes of
all detention facilities.
         (c)   Dry Bottom Detention Basins:
            (1)   There are two (2) basic land uses for dry bottom basins:
active management for multipurpose activities or passive use for aesthetics and
wildlife. A dry bottom basin that will accommodate athletic fields and
playgrounds shall have an underdrain system to keep the fields dry. This area
is suitable for turf grasses that can be mowed regularly. A mixture of at least
three (3) turf grasses is required. Common turf grasses include Kentucky
bluegrass, perennial rye grass, creeping red fescue, tall fescue, redtop, and
timothy. The first four (4) species are best for higher traffic areas. Traffic
tolerant cultivars are required.
            (2)   Dry bottom basins, intended to be used for aesthetics and
wildlife shall have native plantings. Deep rooted plants are required to
encourage infiltration of the water into the ground. A mixture of wet mesic and
mesic plants shall be used within the dry bottom basin. This zone can be
seeded, and a minimum of ten (10) pounds of pure live seed per acre is
required. The seed mix shall contain a variety of grasses, sedges, rushes and
forbs. A minimum of five (5) grasses, sedges, and rushes and ten (10) forbs are
required. A nurse crop of annual plants shall also be used to help stabilize
the soils and provide conditions suitable for the germination and growth of
perennial plants.
   (J)   Miscellaneous Standards:
      1.   General:
         (a)   All the required correction of defects of the storm sewer shall
be performed before curb and gutter or other permanent type surface improvement
work begins.
         (b)   Any piping defects including cracks, improperly sealed joints,
or variations from approved grade, slope, or alignment shall be repaired at the
contractor's expense by means approved by the village engineer.
         (c)   Any pipes or structures containing sediment shall be cleaned
prior to acceptance.
   (K)   Details:
      Storm sewer installation.
      Storm inlet type A (2 foot diameter).
      Storm inlet type B (3 foot diameter).
      Manhole type A.
      Flat top for storm manhole type A.
      Storm manhole type A (6 foot diameter).
      Flat top for storm manhole type A (6 foot diameter).
      Sump discharge service line. (Ord. 07-20, 9-4-2007; amd. Ord. 20-24, 2-1-
2021)
10-8-18: EROSION AND SEDIMENT CONTROL PLAN:
A soil and erosion plan shall be provided in accordance with the provisions in
this chapter.
   (A)   General:
      1.   All residential, commercial, or industrial subdivision of
development including single lots shall include provisions for the installation
and regular maintenance of soil erosion and sedimentation control devices.
      2.   The erosion control system shall be designed and constructed in
accordance with the latest edition of the following: "Illinois Urban Manual";
the IDOT "Standard Specifications"; the Illinois environmental protection
agency "Standards And Specifications For Soil Erosion And Sediment Control".
   (B)   Basic Design Standards:
      1.   On site sediment control measures, as specified by the following
criteria, shall be constructed and functional prior to initiating clearing,
grading, stripping, excavating or fill activities on the site.
         (a)   For disturbed areas draining less than one acre, filter barriers
(including filter fences, ditch checks, or equivalent control measures) shall
be constructed to control all off site runoff as specified in reference
handbooks. Vegetated filter strips, with a minimum width of twenty five feet
(25'), may be used as an alternative only where runoff in sheet flow is
expected.
         (b)   For disturbed areas draining more than one acre, a sediment trap
or equivalent control measure shall be constructed at the downslope point of
the disturbed area.
         (c)   Sediment basins and sediment traps designs shall provide for
both detention storage and sediment storage. The detention storage shall be
composed of equal volumes of "wet" detention storage and "dry" detention
storage and each shall be sized for the two (2) year, twenty four (24) hour
runoff from the site under maximum runoff conditions during construction. The
release rate of the basin shall be that rate required to achieve minimum
detention times of at least ten (10) hours. The elevation of the outlet
structure shall be placed such that it only drains the dry detention storage.
         (d)   The sediment storage shall be sized to store the estimated
sediment load generated from the site over the duration of the construction
period with a minimum storage equivalent to the volume of sediment generated in
one year. For construction periods exceeding one year, the one year sediment
load and a sediment removal schedule may be substituted.
         (e)   The developer and contractors shall use a water wagon or other
acceptable means on the project site to control dust, at a minimum of once each
day during dry conditions or more frequently as directed by the village
engineer.
         (f)   All streets used by the developer, contractors, or suppliers in
or adjacent to the development shall be kept free of debris, dirt, dust, and
mud. Streets shall be left in a clean condition at the end of each day's work.
Developers and contractors who fail to keep streets clean shall be responsible
for street cleaning expenses incurred by the village.
      2.   Storm water conveyance channels, including ditches, swales, and
diversions, and the outlets of all channels and pipes shall be designed and
constructed to withstand the expected flow velocity from the 10-year frequency
storm without erosion. All constructed or modified channels shall be stabilized
within forty eight (48) hours, consistent with the following standards:
         (a)   For grades up to four percent (4%), seeding in combination with
mulch, erosion blanket, or an equivalent control measure shall be applied. Sod
or erosion blanket or mat shall be applied to the bottom of the channel.
         (b)   For grades of four percent (4%) to eight percent (8%), sod or an
equivalent control measure shall be applied in the channel.
         (c)   For grades greater than eight percent (8%), rock, riprap, or an
equivalent control measure shall be applied, or the grade shall be effectively
reduced using drop structures.
         (d)   All drainage ditches and overland flood routes shall be seeded
and lined with silt fence prior to acceptance by the village.
      3.   Disturbed areas shall be stabilized with temporary or permanent
measures within three (3) calendar days following the end of active
disturbance, or redisturbance, consistent with the following criteria:
         (a)   Appropriate temporary or permanent stabilization measures shall
include seeding, mulching, sodding, and/or nonvegetative measures.
         (b)   Areas having slopes greater than twelve percent (12%) shall be
stabilized with sod, mat or blanket in combination with seeding, or equivalent.
      4.   Land disturbance activities in stream channels shall be avoided,
where possible. If disturbance activities are unavoidable, the following
requirements shall be met:
         (a)   Construction vehicles shall be kept out of the stream channel to
the maximum extent practicable. Where construction crossings are necessary,
temporary crossings shall be constructed on nonerosive material, such as riprap
or gravel.
         (b)   The time and area of disturbance of stream channels shall be
kept to a minimum. The stream channel, including bed and banks, shall be
restabilized within forty eight (48) hours after channel disturbance is
completed, interrupted, or stopped.
         (c)   Whenever channel relocation is necessary, the new channel shall
be constructed in the dry and fully stabilized before flow is diverted.
      5.   Storm sewer inlets and culverts shall be protected by ditch checks,
sediment traps or filter barriers meeting accepted design standards and
specifications. Ditch checks and silt fences shall be inspected weekly and
after rainfall events in excess of one- half inch (1/2") to determine required
repairs and/or replacement. As a minimum, ditch checks are to be replaced every
three (3) months or as required by the village engineer. If tributary drainage
areas are greater than one acre, sediment basins shall be constructed in
addition to using ditch checks and silt fences. Installation of silt fence or
filter fabric under the lid of a structure is not considered adequate
protection and is not allowed.
      6.   Soil storage piles containing more than ten (10) cubic yards of
material shall not be located with a downslope drainage length of less than
twenty five feet (25') to a roadway, easement, or drainage channel. Filter
barriers, including ditch checks, filter fence, or equivalent, shall be
installed immediately on the downslope side of the piles.
      7.   If dewatering devices are used, discharge locations shall be
protected from erosion. All pumped discharges shall be routed through
appropriately designed sediment traps or basins or equivalent.
      8.   All temporary and permanent erosion and sediment control practices
must be maintained and repaired as needed to assure effective performance of
their intended function.
      9.   All temporary erosion and sediment control measurers shall be
disposed of within thirty (30) days after final site stabilization is achieved
with permanent soil stabilization measures. Trapped sediment and other
disturbed soils resulting from the disposition of temporary measures should be
permanently stabilized to prevent further erosion and sedimentation.
      10.   The condition of the construction site for the winter shutdown
period shall address proper sediment and erosion control early in the fall
growing season so that slopes and other bare earth areas may be stabilized with
temporary and/or permanent vegetative cover. All open areas that are to remain
idle throughout the winter shall receive temporary erosion control measure
including temporary seeding, mulching and/or erosion control blanketing prior
to the end of the fall growing season. The areas to be worked beyond the end of
the growing season must incorporate soil stabilization measures that do not
rely on vegetative cover such as erosion control blankets and heavy mulching.
      11.   All waste generated as a result of site development activity should
be properly disposed of and should be prevented from being carried off the site
by either wind or water.
   (C)   Material Specifications:
      1.   Silt Fence:
         (a)   Material: Geotechnical fabric of woven or nonwoven filaments of
polypropylene, polyester, or polyethylene.
            (1)   Nonwoven Fabric: Needle punched, heat bonded, resin bonded,
or a combination thereof.
            (2)   Filaments: Dimensionally stable, resistant to delamination,
free from chemical treatments or coatings that reduce porosity and
permeability, and resistant to ultraviolet radiation.
            (3)   Properties:
               A.   Width: 3.5 feet minimum.
               B.   Weight: 4.0 ounces per square yard minimum ASTM D-3776.
               C.   Grab tensile strength: Two hundred (200) pounds minimum
ASTM D-4632.
               D.   Grab elongation at failure: Twelve percent (12%) minimum
ASTM D-4632.
               E.   Burst strength: Two hundred fifty (250) psi minimum ASTM D-
751.
               F.   Equivalent opening size (EOS) U.S. standard sieve number:
nonwoven - 30 minimum, woven - 50 minimum.
            (4)   Acceptable Products:
               A.   Mirafi 100X by Mirafi, Inc., Charlotte, North Carolina.
               B.   Supac 5WS by Phillips Fibers Corp., Greenville, South
Carolina.
               C.   Or village approved equal.
         (b)   Support Posts:
            (1)   Type:
               A.   Treated wood: Two inch by four inch (2" x 4") or 3.0 square
inch cross section.
               B.   Steel: Standard "T" or "U" sections weighing not less than
1.00 pound per linear foot.
            (2)   Length: Four and one-half feet (41/2') minimum.
            (3)   Interval: Five feet (5') (typical).
            (4)   Use existing fence posts where available, if approved by
engineer.
         (c)   Fasteners: Use metal staples, nails, or wire to fasten fabric to
posts.
      2.   Ditch Check Barrier:
         (a)   Construct according to the natural resources conservation
services standard drawing IL-605CA for drainage areas under two (2) acres.
         (b)   Construct according to the natural resources conservation
services standard drawing IL-605R for drainage areas between two (2) and ten
(10) acres.
         (c)   Filter fabric shall be installed under the ditch checks. The
filter fabric shall meet the requirements of section 287 of the IDOT standard
specifications, latest edition.
      3.   Temporary Grass: Seed: annual rye grass, spring oats, or wheat.
      4.   Temporary Riprap: Comply with IDOT section 1005.01, gradation 3 or 4
as required by the village engineer, quality designation C.
      5.   Excelsior Blanket:
         (a)   Machine produced mat of wood excelsior from wood properly cured
to produce adequately curled and barbed fibers. Fiber length: Eighty percent
(80%) minimum at six inches (6") or longer.
         (b)   Properties:
            (1)   Width: Twenty four inches (24") minimum.
            (2)   Weight: 0.9 pounds per square yard minimum.
            (3)   Length of roll: One hundred fifty feet (150') minimum.
         (c)   Cover the top side of the blanket with a ninety (90) day
biodegradable, extruded plastic mesh netting.
            (1)   Minimum opening: Five-eighths inch by five-eighths inch (5/8"
x 5/8").
            (2)   Maximum opening: Two inches by one inch (2" x 1").
         (d)   Acceptable products: American Excelsior Company, or village
approved equal.
      6.   Knitted Straw Mat: Conform to IDOT section 1081.10(b).
      7.   Riprap:
         (a)   Bedding material: Conform to IDOT section 1005.01, gradation 1.
         (b)   Riprap: Conform to IDOT section 1005.01, gradation 4, quality
designation A.
         (c)   Filter fabric: Conform to IDOT section 1080.03.
   (D)   Installation, Inspection And Maintenance:
      1.   Maintenance And Control Measures: All soil erosion and sediment
control measures necessary to meet the requirements of this title shall be
maintained periodically by the applicant or subsequent landowner during the
period of land disturbance and development of the site in a satisfactory manner
to ensure adequate performance. The developer will identify and provide to the
village the name of the person(s) or entity which will have legal
responsibility for maintenance of erosion control structures and measures after
development is completed.
      2.   Inspection: A village representative shall make inspections as
hereinafter required and shall either approve that portion of the work
completed or shall notify the permittee wherein the work fails to comply with
the site development or erosion and sedimentation control plan as approved.
Plans for grading, stripping, excavating, and filling work bearing the stamp of
approval of the village field inspector or his representative shall be
maintained at the site during progress of the work. In order to obtain
inspections and to ensure compliance with the approved erosion and sediment
control plan, the grading or building permit, and this title, the permittee
shall notify the village field inspector within two (2) working days of the
completion of the construction stages specified below:
         (a)   Upon completion of installation of sediment and runoff control
measures (including perimeter controls and diversions), prior to proceeding
with any other earth disturbance or grading;
         (b)   After stripping and clearing;
         (c)   After rough grading;
         (d)   After final grading;
         (e)   After seeding and landscaping deadlines; and
         (f)   After final stabilization and landscaping, prior to removal of
sediment controls.
      3.   Phased Work: If stripping, clearing, grading and/or landscaping are
to be done in phases or areas, the permittee shall give notice and request
inspection at the completion of each of the above work stages in each phase or
area. If an inspection is not made and notification of the results given within
five (5) working days after notice is received by the village from the
permittee, the permittee may continue work at his/her own risk, without
presuming acceptance by the village. Notification of the results of the
inspection shall be given in writing at the site.
      4.   Inspection At Project Completion: At the completion of any project,
storm sewers, gutters, etc., will be inspected by the village to determine any
cleaning or flushing of trapped sediment which may be required due to erosion.
The responsibility for that work lies with the site developer.
      5.   Special Precautions:
         (a)   If at any stage of the grading of any development site, the
village engineer or his designee determines by inspection that the nature of
the site is such that further work authorized by an existing permit is likely
to imperil any property, public way, stream, lake, wetland, or drainage
structure, the village engineer or the village field inspector may require, as
a condition of allowing the work to be done, that such reasonable special
precautions to be taken as considered advisable to avoid the likelihood of such
peril. "Special precautions" may include, but shall not be limited to: a more
level exposed slope, construction of additional drainage facilities, berming,
terracing, compaction, or cribbing, installation of plant materials for erosion
control, and recommendations of a registered soils engineer and/or engineering
geologist which may be made requirements for further work.
         (b)   Where it appears that storm damage may result because the
grading on any development site is not complete, work may be stopped and the
permittee required to install temporary structures or take such other measures
as may be required to protect adjoining property or the public safety. On large
developments or where unusual site conditions prevail, the village may specify
the time of starting grading and time of completion or may require that the
operations be conducted in specific stages so as to ensure completion of
protective measures or devices prior to the advent of seasonal rains.
      6.   Amendment Of Plans: Major amendments of the site development or
erosion and sedimentation control plans shall be submitted to the planning
department and shall be processed and approved or disapproved in the same
manner as the original plans. Field modifications of a minor nature may be
authorized by the village field inspector by written authorization to the
permittee.
   (E)   Enforcement:
      1.   Stop Work Order; Revocation Of Permit:
         (a)   In the event any person holding a site development permit
pursuant to this title violates the terms of the permit, or carries on site
development in such a manner as to materially adversely affect the health,
welfare, or safety of persons residing or working in the neighborhood of the
development site or so as to be materially detrimental to the public welfare or
injurious to property or improvements in the neighborhood, the village may
suspend or revoke the site development permit.
         (b)   Suspension of a permit shall be by a written stop work order
issued by the village field inspector and delivered to the permittee or his
agent or the person performing the work. The stop work order shall be effective
immediately, shall state the specific violations cited, and shall state the
conditions under which work may be resumed. A stop work order shall remain in
effect until the next available scheduled meeting of the village board, unless
the permittee immediately takes all action necessary to come into compliance
with this title.
         (c)   No site development permit shall be permanently suspended or
revoked until a hearing is held by the village board. Written notice of such
hearing shall be served on the permittee, either personally or by registered
mail, and shall state:
            (1)   The grounds for complaint or reasons for suspension or
revocation, in clear and concise language; and
            (2)   The time when and place where such hearing will be held.
         (d)   Such notice shall be served on the permittee at least five (5)
days prior to the date set for hearing. At such hearing, the permittee shall be
given an opportunity to be heard and may call witnesses and present evidence on
his behalf. At the conclusion of the hearing the village board shall determine
whether the permit shall be suspended or revoked.
      2.   Violations And Penalties: No person shall construct, enlarge, alter,
repair, or maintain any grading, excavation or fill, or cause the same to be
done, contrary to or in violation of any terms of this title. Any person
violating any of the provisions of this title shall be deemed guilty of an
ordinance violation, and each day during which any violation of any of the
provisions of this title is committed, continued, or permitted shall constitute
a separate offense. Upon conviction of any such violation, such person,
partnership, or corporation shall be punished by a fine of not more than seven
hundred fifty dollars ($750.00) for each offense. In addition to any other
penalty authorized by this section, any person, partnership, or corporation
convicted of violating any of the provisions of this title shall be required to
restore the site to the condition existing prior to commission of the
violation, or to bear the expense of such restoration.
   (F)   Details:
      Stabilized construction entrance.
      Silt fence.
      Ditch check.
      Flared end section erosion protection.
      Rock check dam coarse aggregate.
      Rock check dam - riprap.
      Inlet protection straw bale barrier plan.
      Erosion blanket plan.
      Pipe outlet to channel. (Ord. 07-20, 9-4-2007)
10-8-19: FLOODPLAIN REGULATIONS:
All foundation elevations, proposed grading, storm water management facilities
and structures shall be designed and constructed in conformance with the
village of Manteno's development in floodplain areas ordinance. (Ord. 07-20, 9-
4-2007)
10-8-20: SANITARY SEWER SYSTEM:
A sanitary sewer system shall be provided in accordance with the provisions,
requirements and details of this title.
   (A)   General:
      1.   Required: All residential, commercial, or industrial subdivision or
development including single lots shall be served by a sanitary sewer system
connected to the village sanitary sewer system. Each subdivision or development
shall include provisions for the construction of sanitary sewer facilities
complete with manholes and other appurtenances required in accordance with this
section.
      2.   Design And Construction: The sanitary sewer system shall be designed
and constructed in accordance with the latest edition of the "Standard
Specifications For Water And Sewer Main Construction In Illinois"; the Illinois
environmental protection agency's "Illinois Recommended Standards For Sewage
Works" as included in the latest edition of title 35 of the Illinois
administrative code, subtitle C, chapter II, part 370; the latest edition of
the "Recommended Standards For Wastewater Facilities"; and the plumbing code of
the village of Manteno, unless otherwise modified in the section.
      3.   Lift Stations: Whenever a development proposes to use a lift station
to serve part or all of the lots in the development, the lift station shall be
designed to the satisfaction of the village and offered to it for dedication.
The village may refuse to accept the dedication where it finds that the
development will probably be served without the use of the lift station at some
time during the planning period. Any lift station shall be housed in a building
which is compatible in design with the nearby uses and which is large enough to
accommodate any required equipment. Each lift station shall include a flow
meter approved by the village engineer. Every lift station shall include an
emergency backup power supply using natural gas, and an extra pump. Each
station shall be connected to the village SCADA (supervisory control and data
acquisition) system in such a manner that the village is electronically
notified if the pumps are not functioning.
   (B)   Basic Design Standards:
      1.   Complete System Requirements: A complete sanitary sewer system shall
be designed to serve the entire development. The sanitary sewers shall be of
adequate size to collect and transport the wastewater from the development to
the village's wastewater treatment plant. The design shall be consistent with
the village's master plan. The design engineer shall submit calculations
showing that the sewers have adequate capacity.
      2.   Location: All sanitary sewers shall be extended to each property
line and shall be constructed within public right of way or within an approved
easement dedicated for sanitary sewer.
      3.   Sizing Requirements:
         (a)   Minimum sanitary sewer size shall be eight inch (8") diameter.
         (b)   Minimum building sanitary service sewer size shall be six inch
(6") diameter from the main to the property line.
      4.   Cover Requirements:
         (a)   Sewers shall be sufficiently deep to prevent freezing.
         (b)   A minimum of four feet (4') of cover shall be provided.
         (c)   Where high ground water conditions are anticipated, buoyancy of
sewers shall be considered and adequate provisions made for protection.
      5.   Service Connections:
         (a)   All attached and detached single-family dwelling units shall be
served directly by a separate sanitary service connected to the village's
sanitary sewer system and not be part of a common service.
         (b)   All service laterals shall have a cleanout within eight feet
(8') of the building served.
         (c)   Overhead sewers are required for all buildings. Gravity basement
service will not be allowed.
         (d)   Each sanitary sewer stub extended to a minimum of one foot (1')
inside of the lot line, plugged, and marked with a four inch by four inch (4" x
4") post no less than three feet (3') above grade painted green in color.
      6.   Design Flows:
         (a)   Design flows shall be based upon full development of the
ultimate service area using generally accepted engineering principles and
resident occupancy criteria as well as commonly used quantities of sewage flows
as found in the "Illinois Recommended Standards For Sewerage Works".
         (b)   Sewers shall be designed on the basis of not less than one
hundred (100) gallons per capita per day.
         (c)   Design peak flows shall be determined using the ratio of peak to
average daily flow as determined in the "Illinois Recommended Standards For
Sewerage Works".
      7.   Sewer Design Hydraulics:
         (a)   All sewers shall be designed to provide design flow capacity,
using Manning's formula with an "n" value of 0.013.
            (1)   Eight inch (8") and ten inch (10") sewers are to be designed
to flow at fifty percent (50%) of capacity at design flow.
            (2)   Twelve inch (12"), fifteen inch (15"), and eighteen inch
(18") sewers are to be designed to flow at sixty seven percent (67%) of
capacity at design flow.
            (3)   Sewers greater than eighteen inch (18") in size shall be
designed to flow at eighty percent (80%) of capacity at design flow.
         (b)   All sewers shall be designed and constructed to give mean
velocities, when flowing full, of not less than two feet (2') per second.
         (c)   Where velocities greater than ten feet (10') per second are
attained, special provisions shall be made to protect against erosion and
shock.
      8.   Vertical And Horizontal Alignment: Sewers shall be laid straight in
both horizontal and vertical planes between manholes.
      9.   Sewer Size Changes: Sanitary sewers of different diameter shall join
only at manholes.
      10.   Sanitary Manholes:
         (a)   Manholes shall be provided at the following locations:
            (1)   Termination of existing and future lines.
            (2)   Changes in direction, horizontal, or vertical alignment.
            (3)   Changes in shape or pipe size.
            (4)   Junctions with other sanitary sewers.
            (5)   For inspection and sampling where required by the village or
village engineer.
         (b)   The maximum access spacing shall be four hundred feet (400'),
unless otherwise approved by the village engineer.
         (c)   A drop manhole shall be provided for any manhole with a pipe
having a difference in invert elevation of more than twenty four inches (24")
above the invert of the sewer leaving the manhole.
         (d)   Where flows, pipe size, or other conditions dictate, special
manholes or junction chambers shall be designed and constructed, as approved by
the village engineer.
         (e)   Minimum manhole diameters shall be:
 
Sewer Pipe Size Manhole Diameter
8 to 21 inch    48 inches
24 to 30 inch   60 inches
 
   (C)   Material Specifications:
      1.   Sanitary Sewer Pipe:
         (a)   PVC plastic sewer pipe (4 inch through 15 inch):
            (1)   Comply with ASTM D3034 for polyvinyl chloride (PVC) sewer
pipe and fittings of minimum wall thickness SDR 35. The minimum wall thickness
shall be increased to SDR 26 for sewers installed with a bury depth greater
than twelve feet (12'). The bury depth shall be measured from invert to finish
grade.
            (2)   Joints shall be elastomeric gasket type complying with ASTM
F477 and bell and spigot type gravity sewer complying with ASTM D3212.
         (b)   PVC large diameter ultra-rib (18 inch through 21 inch):
            (1)   Comply with ASTM F794 for PVC gravity sewer pipe complying
with a minimum cell classification of 12454B or 12454C as per ASTM D1784.
Provide smooth interior surface for pipe and fittings.
            (2)   Joints shall be elastomeric gasket type complying with ASTM
F477 and bell and spigot type gravity sewer complying with ASTM D3212.
         (c)   PVC large diameter ultra-corr (24 inch through 36 inch):
            (1)   Comply with ASTM F794 and ASTM F949. Provide smooth interior
surface for pipe and fittings.
            (2)   Joints shall be elastomeric gasket type complying with ASTM
F477 and bell and spigot type gravity sewer complying with ASTM D3212.
         (d)   PVC plastic sewer pipe (alternative for 18 inch through 36
inch):
            (1)   Comply with ASTM D3034 for polyvinyl chloride (PVC) sewer
pipe and fittings of minimum wall thickness SDR 26.
            (2)   Joints shall be elastomeric gasket type complying with ASTM
F477 and bell and spigot type gravity sewer complying with ASTM D3212.
      2.   Branch Fittings: Fittings shall tee-wye and conform to standards of
ASTM D3034 gasketed SDR 26 heavy wall except caps and plugs, which shall be SDR
35.
      3.   Risers And Service Pipe And Fittings: Fittings shall conform to
standards of ASTM D3034 gasketed SDR 26.
      4.   Sanitary Manholes:
         (a)   Precast:
            (1)   Provide precast reinforced concrete manhole sections,
bottoms, and flat top slabs complying with ASTM C478 unless otherwise indicated
on drawings.
            (2)   Provide eccentric cone section unless otherwise indicated on
the drawings.
            (3)   Provide precast reinforced concrete monolithic base for new
and existing sewer lines.
            (4)   Design flat slab top for HS-2044 loading.
            (5)   Provide reducer flat top or cone to reduce manhole barrel to
forty eight inch (48") diameter on manholes with larger than forty eight inch
(48") diameter monolithic bases.
            (6)   All manholes shall include:
               A.   External frame seal.
               B.   Manhole exterior joint protection.
            (7)   Adjusting rings: Rubber risers, one minimum, two (2) maximum,
with maximum adjustment of twelve inches (12").
         (b)   Joints For Precast Sections:
            (1)   Provide tongue and groove joints. Each joint requires two (2)
layers of polybutal rope.
            (2)   Mortar interior of joints with a nonshrink grout.
         (c)   Steps:
            (1)   Provide steps with a minimum width of sixteen inches (16")
and a minimum projection of five inches (5").
            (2)   Use steps consisting of copolymer polypropylene plastic with
a continuous one-half inch (1/2") steel reinforcement.
         (d)   Frames And Covers:
            (1)   Provide cast iron frames and covers with heavy duty indented
top with solid self-sealing lids and machined bearing surfaces, stamped with
the word "SANITARY".
            (2)   Acceptable products: East Jordan 1050 HD.
         (e)   Flexible Pipe Connectors:
            (1)   Provide flexible rubber gasket collar for connecting pipe to
the manhole.
               A. Use resilient gasket, conforming to ASTM C-923, by A-LOK
Products, Inc.
            (2)   A nonshrink grout shall be used around all pipes on the
inside of sanitary sewer manholes.
         (f)   Manhole Exterior Joint Protection:
            (1)   Utilize a woven polypropylene fabric with rubberized mastic
coating and steel strapping, conforming to ASTM C-478.
               A.   Minimum width nine inches (9").
               B.   Acceptable manufacturer: MacWrap.
         (g)   Internal Frame Seal:
            (1)   Provide rubber gasket consisting of flexible synthetic rubber
sleeve and stainless steel expansion bands.
            (2)   Acceptable products: Cretex Specialty Products.
         (h)   Manhole Drop Connection:
            (1)   Eight inch (8") to twelve inch (12") diameter drop: PVC SDR
35.
               A.   Encase entire drop pipe from base of manhole to six inches
(6") above top of incoming sewer with four thousand (4,000) psi concrete at a
minimum thickness of six inches (6").
            (2)   Over twelve inch (12") diameter drop: Ductile iron class 50.
               A.   Encase drop elbow at base of manhole only in concrete.
               B.   Encase to two feet (2') above top of elbow.
               C.   Utilize ductile iron restrained joint pipe and fittings for
drop elbow, pipe, and ductile iron tee at incoming sewer.
               D.   Support drop pipe to manhole wall with stainless steel
brackets and strapping where drops are over ten feet (10') long.
            (3)   PVC drops over twelve inch (12") diameter with total concrete
encasement may be utilized if approved by the village engineer.
      5.   Pipe Bedding And Backfill: Provide well graded, washed, mixture of
gravel or crushed stone aggregate free of clay, loam, dirt, calcareous, slag or
other foreign matter and conforming to the IDOT "standard specification"
gradation no. CA-7. (Ord. 07-20, 9-4-2007)
   (D)   Construction And Inspection Standards:
      1.   Notification:
         (a)   Prior to beginning the sanitary sewer installation, the
contractor shall give the village forty eight (48) hours' notice of the
intended time of starting work.
         (b)   Prior to beginning all sewer taps onto existing mains, sewer
repairs, or service line installation from the stub to the building, the
contractor shall give the village twenty four (24) hours' notice of the
intended time of starting work.
      2.   Conformance:
         (a)   The installation of sanitary sewers and appurtenances, including
services, shall conform to the requirements of the Illinois environmental
protection agency and the Illinois pollution control board.
         (b)   The contractor shall be responsible for providing a competent
individual on site during trenching operations to ensure that all OSHA and
other applicable safety standards are met by the construction means and
methods.
      3.   Excavation And Foundation:
         (a)   The trench shall be excavated so that the flow line of the
finished sewer shall be at the depth and grade shown on the approved plans. The
trench shall be at least twelve inches (12") wider than the external diameter
of the pipe. The width of the trench shall not exceed the external diameter of
the pipe by more than eighteen inches (18") at the top of the pipe.
         (b)   If the excavation is deeper than necessary, the foundation shall
be brought to proper grade by the addition of well compacted bedding material.
Where a firm foundation is not encountered at the grade established, due to
soft, spongy, or other unsuitable soil (unless other special construction
methods are called for on the plans or in the special provisions), all such
unsuitable soil under the pipe and for the width of the trench shall be removed
and replaced with well compacted bedding material, CA-7.
         (c)   The pipe shall be laid so that it will be uniformly supported
and the entire length of the pipe barrel will have full bearing. No blocking of
any kind shall be used to adjust the pipe to grade except when used with
embedment concrete.
      4.   Pipe Bedding And Backfilling:
         (a)   Four inches (4") of CA-7 material shall be used as bedding for
the sanitary sewer pipe.
         (b)   Twelve inches (12") of CA-7 material shall be used to cover the
sanitary sewer in areas over two feet (2') away from existing or proposed
pavements, driveways, or sidewalks.
         (c)   Any pipe installed under or within two feet (2') of an existing
or proposed pavement, driveway, or sidewalk shall be backfilled with CA-
7 material at a one to one (1:1) slope from the edge of pavement, driveway, or
sidewalk to the trench.
      5.   Pipe Laying:
         (a)   Pipe laying and joining shall be done in accordance with ASTM
D2321 "recommended practice for underground installation of flexible
thermoplastic sewer pipe" and the pipe manufacturer's recommendations.
         (b)   Pipe shall not be dropped from delivery vehicles. All pipe shall
be lowered into the trench with a suitable apparatus; in no case shall the pipe
be dropped or thrown.
      6.   Service Connections:
         (a)   Connections to the sewer main shall be done by means of a wye
fitting installed in the main.
         (b)   When the sewer mains are deeper than twelve feet (12'), risers
shall be installed at connections such that service pipe shall be not more than
twelve feet (12') deep.
         (c)   Unused wye fittings shall have socket ends sealed by watertight
rubber or plastic stoppers suitably fastened or braced to prevent dislodging by
back pressure from the main line.
         (d)   Connections to existing sewer mains shall be made by installing
a new wye fitting or by use of a circular saw cut by proper tools ("sewer tap"
machine or similar) and installation of a wye saddle in accordance with
manufacturer's recommendations. All such connections shall be done in the
presence of the village field inspector.
         (e)   All sanitary service laterals shall be plugged or capped at the
time of installation.
         (f)   Bedding and cover shall be CA-7 aggregate and shall consist of
four inches (4") below the pipe and twelve inches (12") over the pipe,
respectively.
      7.   Locating Wire Requirements:
         (a)   All sanitary pipe shall require insulated metallic locating wire
(10-gauge copper minimum) capable of detection by a cable locator and shall be
buried directly against pipe.
         (b)   Locating wire shall terminate at the top of each structure or
cleanout and be capable of extending six inches (6") above final grade. (Ord.
09-28, 2-1-2010)
   (E)   Testing And Televising Standards:
      1.   General:
         (a)   The maximum allowable infiltration allowed under these technical
standards shall be two hundred (200) gallons per inch of diameter of the sewer
per mile per twenty four (24) hour day at any time for any section of the
system. The joints shall be visibly tight and visible leakage in the joints, or
leakage in excess of that specified above, shall be repaired at the
contractor's expense by means approved by the village engineer.
         (b)   New sanitary sewers shall be plugged and not allowed to
discharge into existing sewers until the sewers have been tested and the
results accepted by the village.
         (c)   All mainline sanitary sewer testing shall be completed no sooner
than thirty (30) days after backfilling, per IEPA requirements.
      2.   Notification And Operation:
         (a)   The village field inspector and village engineer shall be
notified of the time of the test a minimum of forty eight (48) hours prior to
each test.
         (b)   All tests shall be performed in the presence of a representative
of the village of Manteno.
      3.   Sewer Televising:
         (a)   Upon completion of construction and prior to acceptance of the
sewer system, and again prior to the expiration of the maintenance guarantee,
an internal inspection shall be made through the use of televising equipment.
If required by the village engineer, the sanitary sewer shall be jetted prior
to the televising. The television inspection shall be done by the village
according to the price provided to the developer upon request.
         (b)   All deficiencies noted during the inspection shall be repaired
by the contractor at his expense by means approved by the village engineer.
      4.   Leakage Tests:
         (a)   Low pressure air test:
            (1)   Prior to testing for leakage, flush and clean the sewers by
passing a snug fitting inflated rubber ball through the sewer by upstream water
pressure.
            (2)   Seal pipe openings with airtight plugs and braces.
            (3)   Whenever the sewer to be tested is submerged under
groundwater, insert a pipe probe by boring or jetting into the backfill
material adjacent to the center of the sewer to determine the groundwater
hydrostatic pressure by forcing air to flow slowly through the probe pipe.
            (4)   Add air to the plugged sewer sections under test until
internal air pressure reaches 4.0 psig greater than any groundwater hydrostatic
pressure.
            (5)   Allow at least two (2) minutes for air temperature to
stabilize and adding air to maintain the initial test pressure.
            (6)   Shut off the air supply after stabilizing the air temperature
and record the time in seconds using an approved stopwatch for the internal
sewer pressure to drop from 3.5 psig to 2.5 psig greater than any groundwater
hydrostatic pressure.
            (7)   Air testing techniques shall be in accordance with the latest
ASTM standard practice for testing sewer lines by low pressure air test method
for the appropriate pipe material, except that the minimum required time for
the one pound per square inch pressure drop described in subsection (E)4(a)(6)
of this section shall not be less than that shown in the table below:
MINIMUM ALLOWABLE TIME (MIN:SEC) FOR PRESSURE DROP FROM 31/2 TO 21/2 PSIG WHEN
TESTING ON PIPE DIAMETER ONLY
Length Of Sewer Pipe In Feet Pipe Diameter, Inches
                             4 6 8 10 12 15 18 21 24
Length Of Sewer Pipe In Feet Pipe Diameter, Inches
                             4    6    8    10   12   15    18    21    24
25                           0:04 0:10 0:18 0:28 0:40 1:02  1:29  2:01  2:38
50                           0:09 0:20 0:35 0:55 1:19 2:04  2:58  4:03  5:17
75                           0:13 0:30 0:53 1:23 1:59 3:06  4:27  6:04  7:55
100                          0:18 0:40 1:10 1:50 2:38 4:08  5:56  8:05  10:34
 
125                          0:22 0:50 1:28 2:18 3:18 5:09  7:26  9:55  11:20
150                          0:26 0:59 1:46 2:45 3:58 6:11  8:30  10:02 11:35
175                          0:31 1:09 2:03 3:13 4:37 7:05  8:30  10:09 11:50
200                          0:35 1:19 2:21 3:40 5:17 7:17  8:30  10:17 12:06
 
225                          0:40 1:29 2:38 4:08 5:40 7:29  8:30  10:25 13:36
250                          0:44 1:39 2:56 4:35 5:43 7:41  8:31  11:35 15:07
275                          0:48 1:49 3:14 4:43 5:46 7:53  9:21  12:44 16:38
300                          0:53 1:59 3:31 5:00 5:50 8:05  10:12 13:53 18:09
 
350                          1:02 2:19 3:47 5:15 5:57 8:16  11:54 16:12 21:10
400                          1:10 2:38 4:18 5:35 6:03 9:27  13:36 18:31 24:12
 
450                          1:19 2:50 4:35 5:50 6:48 10:38 15:19 20:50 27:13
500                          1:28 3:30 5:00 6:14 7:34 11:49 17:01 23:09 30:14
 
            (8)   The required times will be adjusted by the village engineer
for main line sewers larger than twenty four inches (24") and for lateral pipes
connected and tested with the main line sewer.
            (9)   If the air test fails to meet these requirements, locate and
repair, or remove and replace the faulty sections of sewer in a manner approved
by the village engineer, as necessary to meet the allowable limits upon
retesting.
            (10)   Acrylamid gel sealant is not allowed to correct leaks.
            (11)   Test every section of sanitary sewer pipe as witnessed by
the village field inspector and the village engineer.
      5.   Deflection Test For Flexible Thermoplastic Pipe:
         (a)   Test the deflection in every section of sanitary sewer as
witnessed by the village and the village engineer.
         (b)   Perform the test no sooner than thirty (30) days after
backfilling has been completed.
         (c)   Perform the test by pulling a mandrel or rigid ball having a
diameter equal to ninety five percent (95%) of the inside diameter of the pipe
through the pipe from manhole to manhole without using mechanical pulling
devices.
         (d)   Allowable deflection limits: Five percent (5%) of the base
inside diameter of the PVC pipe.
         (e)   Wherever the deflection limitation is exceeded, uncover the
pipe, carefully replace compacted embedment and backfill material, and retest
for deflection.
      6.   Sanitary Manhole Vacuum Testing:
         (a)   Test each sanitary manhole for leakage no sooner than thirty
(30) days after installation.
         (b)   Plug all lift holes with a nonshrink grout.
         (c)   Seal all inlet and outlet pipes with airtight plugs, taking care
to securely brace plugs to prevent the plugs from being drawn into the manhole.
         (d)   Place the vacuum test equipment at the inside top of the cone
section and inflate the seal to forty (40) psi.
         (e)   Draw a vacuum of ten inches (10") of mercury and shut the vacuum
pump off.
         (f)   Close valves and measure the time for the vacuum to drop to nine
inches (9") of mercury.
         (g)   Allowable limits: The manhole shall pass if the time for the
vacuum reading to drop from ten inches (10") to nine inches (9") exceeds sixty
(60) seconds for a forty eight inch (48") diameter manhole, seventy five (75)
seconds for a sixty inch (60") diameter manhole, and ninety (90) seconds for a
seventy two inch (72") diameter manhole, all of eight foot (8') depth. The
times shall be increased by the village engineer for deeper structures, but
will not be decreased for shallower structures.
         (h)   Repair all manholes failing the initial test with a nonshrink
grout.
         (i)   If a manhole fails the initial test, all leaks shall be sealed
and the manhole retested until a satisfactory test is obtained.
         (j)   The contractor shall provide equipment, materials and labor
necessary to conduct vacuum testing.
   (F)   Details:
      Sanitary sewer installation.
      Sanitary manhole.
      Sewer service.
      Internal manhole chimney seal with extension.
      Water and sewer separation details. (Ord. 08-16, 9-2-2008)
   (G)   Abandoned Sanitary Lines:
      1.   An old service line may be used in connection with a new building
only when it is demonstrated by the owner or representative to be of sufficient
capacity, integrity, and construction to meet the standards established by the
director. If not able to meet requirements it shall be replaced at the cost of
the owner.
      2.   Sewer service lines which supplied sewer service to structures that
are being abandoned or demolished shall be disconnected from the sanitary sewer
main at the main by the owner. All cost incurred for this work, including
excavation and restoration, shall be the responsibility of the owner or
applicant. (Ord. 09-28, 2-1-2010)
10-8-21: LANDSCAPING AND TREES:
A landscape plan, prepared by a qualified landscape architect, shall be
submitted with all applications for site plan review in accordance with this
title.
   (A)   General Landscape Requirements:
      1.   Purpose: The purpose of these landscape requirements are to provide
orderly, safe, and healthful development of the area within the village and to
promote the health, safety, and general welfare of the community. These
requirements are intended to be a benefit to the owners and users of the
property, as an asset to the neighborhoods and pride to the village.
      2.   Objective: The objective of these requirements is to establish
requirements for the installation and maintenance of landscape elements. The
justification for such regulations is as follows:
         (a)   To encourage the preservation of existing native trees and
vegetation;
         (b)   To protect and conserve the value of property;
         (c)   To provide visual buffering and enhance the beautification of
the village;
         (d)   To assist in providing adequate light and air and in preventing
overcrowding of land;
         (e)   To reduce the impact of development on the community's storm
drainage system;
         (f)   To reduce the level of carbon dioxide and return pure oxygen to
the air. (Ord. 07-20, 9-4-2007)
   (B)   Planting Size And Material:
      1.   Planting: Other than plantings approved for new subdivisions, or the
planting of replacement trees for the removal of existing diseased ash trees by
the village public works department, it shall be unlawful to plant any tree
within a public street or parkway. All planting shall be governed by the
following:
         (a)   It shall be unlawful to plant any trees or shrubs that would
obstruct, become a general nuisance or in any way hamper views of traffic
thereof.
         (b)   Poplar, cottonwood, Russian olive, weeping willow, silver maple,
box elder, fruit bearing trees and other trees not recommended for planting by
the Morton Arboretum shall not be permitted in commercial or industrial areas.
         (c)   In newly developed areas where the developer is planting the
trees, one softwood or conifer tree and one hardwood tree shall be allowed per
lot or alternate lots, whichever meets the distance apart requirements,
preventing sections of the village having all softwood or all conifer trees
therein. (Ord. 15-14, 7-6-2015)
      2.   Minimum Size Of Plants And Materials For Required Landscape Plans:
All planting shall meet these minimum standards:
         (a)   Deciduous Trees: Two and one-half inch (21/2") caliper, measured
four and one-half feet (41/2') above the ground. Trees shall be a species
having a minimum mature spread of fifteen feet (15') to twenty feet (20').
         (b)   Ornamental And Flowering Trees: Two inch (2") caliper, measured
four and one-half feet (41/2') above the ground.
         (c)   Evergreen Trees: Six feet (6') in height, as measured by
American Nursery.
         (d)   Flowering And Evergreen Shrubs And Hedges: Five (5) gallon size.
         (e)   Vines And Ground Covers: One gallon size.
         (f)   Redwood Bark Chips Or Wood Chip Mulch: Two inches (2") in size
at least three inches (3") in depth in areas protected from wind erosion.
         (g)   Synthetic Lawns And Plants: Shall not be used in lieu of plant
requirements in this section.
         (h)   Ground Cover: Shall be a minimum of two (2) years old when
planted and be spaced so that a complete coverage can be obtained after one
growing season.
         (i)   Area: Shall be planted with species indigenous to the area,
disease resistant and one that will require low maintenance in cutting and
watering. It should be an immediate cover and sod is recommended in areas in
which it will grow.
      3.   Plant And Material Requirements:
         (a)   Plant materials shall be selected for type, size, and quality on
the basis of suitability to climate, setting, and compatibility with other
development plantings, character and functions.
         (b)   Plant materials should be free of disease and harmful insects.
Plants selected which are prone to disease and insect problems or which may
jeopardize the health of adjoining plantings will not be acceptable.
         (c)   Proper drainage will be required for all major plantings to
ensure the establishment of a good root system and a healthy growth. (Ord. 07-
20, 9-4-2007)
      4.   Completion Of Landscape:
         (a)   When a site plan is required for a development or project, the
final landscape plan shall be submitted at the same time to the building
department for approval. A date of completion of all planting and related work
shall be included on the plan. Landscaping shall be installed and completed
prior to the issuance of a certificate of occupancy, weather permitting. (Ord.
15-14, 7-6-2015)
         (b)   Landscaping delayed due to weather shall require an irrevocable
letter of credit and agreement as follows:
            (1)   Irrevocable Letter Of Credit: In periods of adverse weather
conditions, an irrevocable letter of credit will be accepted for the completion
of necessary landscaping, said letter of credit to be equal to one hundred
twenty five percent (125%) times the cost of the landscaping. A cost estimate
for landscaping not installed at the time shall be presented to the director of
building and zoning for approval. Letters of credit will not be released until
all planting and finish materials shown on the approved landscaped plan are
installed and accepted.
            (2)   Agreements: The developer or owner shall also agree in
writing that he, or his successors or assigns, shall provide the required
planting within one year as specified above, as a condition for obtaining a
temporary certificate of occupancy for the principal use so long as the
principal use shall continue. The developer/owner shall also agree that the
principal use shall be discontinued if the required planting not be provided as
specified in the approved plan. Violations of these provisions shall constitute
an unauthorized, illegal occupancy of the principal use.
   (C)   Procedure: Except as otherwise provided below, the landscaping
requirements of this chapter shall apply to all land, public and private,
located in the village. Unless provided otherwise by this chapter, none of the
uses authorized by this section shall be permitted until such landscaping
requirements are installed.
      1.   Procedures And General Requirements: When an application is made for
site plan approval for a development or project, such application shall be
accompanied by a landscape plan. The landscape plan shall contain the
information listed below, plus any additional information requested by the
director of building and zoning or village board.
      2.   Landscape Plan Requirements: The landscape plan shall be separate
from the site plan and include the following:
         (a)   Existing and proposed landscaping, including:
            (1)   Landscaping and screening that is required by this code;
            (2)   Location and dimensions of structures, planting areas,
parkways, parking areas and transitional protective yards;
            (3)   Exact location and spacing of all plants such as trees,
shrubs, ground covers, vines, flowers, sod, and other materials used in the
design. Fences and earth mounds or berms must be indicated as to location,
width and height.
            (4)   Plant list must show the following:
               A.   Quantity of plants for each species.
               B.   Botanical plant name.
               C.   Common plant name.
               D.   Climatic zones in which the plant can grow (per USDA plant
hardiness zone map).
               E.   Sizes or height of plants at time of planting.
               F.    Whether plants are to be container grown or will be balled
and burlapped.
               G.   Spacing of shrubs used in hedges and ground covers must be
indicated on the list or on the landscape drawing.
               H.   List of quantities and types of all other materials used;
i.e., three hundred (300) square feet of redwood bark, two inches (2") in
depth.
               I.   Any other relevant or required information.
            (5)   Soil stabilization and plant protection.
         (b)   All existing land uses adjoining or adjacent to the site and an
indication of the density of development of adjoining tracts containing
residential dwellings.
         (c)   Landscaping in landscaped areas shall not obstruct the view of
motorists using any street, private driveway, parking aisles or approach to any
street intersection so as to constitute a traffic hazard of a condition
dangerous to the public safety upon any such street, driveway, parking aisle,
or street intersection, or violates the guidelines set forth by this chapter.
         (d)   Whenever any planting areas required by this chapter are
adjacent to parking or vehicular circulation areas, the planting areas shall be
protected from vehicular intrusion or damage from vehicular lubricants or
fuels.
         (e)   All landscape planting areas shall be stabilized from soil
erosion immediately upon planting and shall be maintained for the duration of
the project. (Ord. 07-20, 9-4-2007)
      3.   New Homes; Ground Cover:
         (a)   The property owner, builder or developer of a single-family lot
is required to grade and sod the parkway and front yard setback, as well as
seed the back yards and side yards. Sodding and seeding shall be completed no
later than twelve (12) months after certificate of occupancy is issued.
      4.   Parkway Landscape Requirements:
         (a)   It is the intent of this subsection to establish a uniform
planting area between the public street right of way and any use of land. This
area will be reserved for the planting of live vegetation, except trees, to
provide a community of vegetation throughout the village, to reduce the amount
of impervious surface and reduce stormwater runoff, to filter air, and
otherwise improve the microclimate for all the citizens and to reserve a
remnant of Manteno's natural vegetation cover.
         (b)   No more than fifty percent (50%) of the required parkway shall
be covered with an impervious surface which may be used, without limitation,
for walkways or driveways. (Ord. 15-14, 7-6-2015)
      5.   Screening:
         (a)   All residential development must be screened from trash
dumpsters, trash pads, and service areas.
         (b)   Screening is required where residential dwelling units are
proposed within one hundred feet (100') of interstate right of way. One
evergreen is required for every four feet (4') of land abutting the highway.
Staggered rows are preferable. (Ord. 07-20, 9-4-2007)
   (D)   Commercial, Industrial And Multi-Family Requirements:
      1.   Intent And Purpose:
         (a)   It is the intent of this section to modify and reduce the
deleterious visual, environmental and aesthetic effects of existing and
proposed parking lots, parking areas and vehicle storage areas.
         (b)   The landscape requirements herein have been developed to: filter
and reduce the glare of headlight and reflected sunlight from parked
automobiles onto the public street right of way and adjoining property; to
visually modify the appearance of parking areas and vehicle storage areas, to
encourage the construction of such necessary areas in a manner that more
closely follows the existing natural contours of the land; to distribute
planting areas around and within the parking area in such a manner that
approximately twenty percent (20%) of all surface area receive the benefit of
shade; to modify the rate of stormwater runoff and increase the capability of
groundwater recharge in urbanizing area; to provide shade, filtering and air
and other beneficial environmental effects to the microclimate of the parking
area and its environs, to prevent the overcrowding of land and to break the
visual blight created by large expanses of barren asphalt.
         (c)   A combination of deciduous, coniferous and ornamental trees,
shrubs, hedges, flowers, sod, ground cover and other natural materials shall
cover all areas of the site (including detention ponds), not used for
structures, drives, sidewalks or parking on all commercial, industrial or
multi-family property. This landscaping shall include: parking lot landscaping,
foundation planting and open space landscaping.
      2.   Parking Lots Greater Than Five Spaces:
         (a)   In any aisle in excess of thirty (30) parking stalls, an
interior landscaped island shall be provided.
         (b)   Landscaped islands shall be provided at each end of all rows of
parking stalls in parking lots in excess of forty (40) parking stalls. All
landscape islands shall be protected by a six inch (6") curb.
         (c)   Landscaped medians shall be placed periodically to prevent
vehicular movement across parking aisles.
         (d)   One tree per eight thousand (8,000) square feet of paved surface
is required of which seventy five percent (75%) must be deciduous, overstory
trees.
         (e)   The following requirements apply to all parking lot islands or
medians:
            (1)   Each island shall contain at least one deciduous shade tree.
            (2)   Each island shall not contain any shrub over eighteen inches
(18") in height.
            (3)   Islands and medians shall be a minimum of eight feet (8') in
width.
            (4)   The remainder shall be planted with approved ground cover in
the appropriate density to achieve complete cover within two (2) years. Mulch
may be substituted for other ground cover if it is applied to one hundred
percent (100%) of the landscaping area at a thickness of at least two inches
(2").
            (5)   Any remaining parking lot trees or shrubs not planted in
medians or end caps shall be placed along the perimeter of the parking surface.
(Ord. 15-14, 7-6-2015)
      3.   Streetscape: Minimum spacing for street trees shall be every forty
feet (40') along the right of way adjacent to the parcel, as located by the
director of building and zoning.
      4.   Property Adjacent To Residential Or Institutional Uses:
         (a)   All off street parking, loading facilities and driveways shall
be effectively screened from adjacent residential, public or institutional uses
by a fence, wall, berm or densely planted landscape buffer. Said screen shall
be opaque year round and a minimum six feet (6') tall at time of planting.
Plantings may be along a terraced and/or undulating berm with the total height
requirement at six feet (6') above established grade.
         (b)   Where dissimilar uses exist adjacent to one another, the
required open space landscaping shall be concentrated on the common line.
         (c)   When choosing tree species to plant in a landscape buffer, it is
important to choose the proper combination of forms in order to effectively
screen a view. This fact will be taken into consideration by the village in the
site plan review process.
      5.   Foundation Planting: A foundation planting area, a minimum six feet
(6') in width, including ornamental and/or coniferous trees, shrubs and flowers
shall be provided between the building face and any public or private street.
      6.   Quantity And Mix Of Open Space Landscaping: Open space landscaping
will be required in addition to foundation, parking lot and street tree
landscaping. These plantings will be placed in the open space remaining after
the other requirements have been met:
         (a)   One tree per fifty feet (50') of lot perimeter is required.
         (b)   One shrub per forty feet (40') of lot perimeter is required.
         (c)   At least thirty percent (30%) of the required open space trees
shall be coniferous and no more than thirty percent (30%) may be ornamental.
      7.   Visual Clearance: No fence, wall, dense landscaping, sign, vehicle,
or other visual obstruction above a height of thirty inches (30") from the
established street grade shall be permitted within fifteen feet (15') of either
side of an entrance or exit of off street parking and loading facilities,
measured at the property line. Nor may such obstruction be permitted within the
triangular area formed by a straight line drawn between points on the property
lines at a distance of thirty feet (30') in each direction from the
intersection of any street or alley right of way.
      8.   Utility Clearance: Access to utilities (manhole covers, fire
hydrants, electrical transformer, etc.) must be maintained.
   (E)   Permitted Landscaping Species: All trees and shrubs required as a
result of the stipulations within this title shall be specifically approved by
the village. A variety of tree genera shall be used to avoid monoculture
problems. The following are permitted by the village:
      1.   Recommended Street Trees:
         (a)   "Redmond" American linden.
         (b)   "Autumn blaze" red maple.
         (c)   "Marmo" red maple.
         (d)   Black maple.
         (e)   Thornless honey locust ("skyline").
         (f)   Kentucky coffee tree.
         (g)   Common hackberry.
         (h)   "Accolade" accolade elm.
         (i)   Japanese tree lilac.
         (j)   Chinkapin oak.
         (k)   Lacebark elm.
      2.   Recommended Shrubs:
         (a)   Five-leaved aralia.
         (b)   Bottlebrush buckeye.
         (c)   Red chokeberry.
         (d)   Flowering quince.
         (e)   Cotoneaster species.
         (f)   Deutzia species.
         (g)   Forsythia species.
         (h)   Juniper species.
         (i)   Kerria.
         (j)   Rhododendron and azaleas.
         (k)   Viburnum species.
      3.   Not Permitted: In no case shall the following genera of trees be
permitted as parking lot or street trees:
American elm            (Ulmus)
Ash (seed bearing)      (Fraxinus)
Birch                   (Betula)
Black locust            (Triacanthos)
Box elder               (Acer negundo)
Catalpa                 (Allanthus)
Crabapples              (Malus)
Mountain ash            (Sorbus)
Mulberry                (Mrus alba)
Paul's scarlet hawthorn (Crataegus)
Poplar                  (Populus)
Russian olive           (Elaegnus)
Siberian elm            (Ulmus)
Soft maple              (Acer dasycarpum)
Willow                  (Salix)
 
      4.   Planting Sizes:
         (a)   Deciduous: Two and one-half inch (21/2") trunk diameter,
measured 4.5 feet aboveground.
         (b)   Ornamental: Two inch (2") trunk diameter, measured 4.5 feet
aboveground.
         (c)   Coniferous: Six feet (6') tall, with a minimum five foot (5')
spread.
         (d)   Shrubs: 0.5 gallons.
   (F)   Tree And Shrub Installation: The trees and shrubs that are planted
shall be the species and size specified on the approved plans unless
substitutions have been approved by the director of building and zoning prior
to planting. Undesirable substitutions that have been planted without prior
approval by the director of building and zoning shall be removed and replaced
by acceptable and village approved species.
      1.   Material:
         (a)   Trees and shrubs shall be nursery grown unless otherwise
approved and be species appropriate to this climatic zone and the immediate
planting environment. These should be healthy and vigorous plants, free from
defects, decay disfiguring roots, sun scales, injuries, abrasions of the bark,
plant diseases, insect pest eggs, bores and all forms of objectionable
infestations as determined by the director of building and zoning. Plants shall
be in accordance with the current Morton Arboretum standards and conform in
general to representative species.
         (b)   Balled and burlapped trees and shrubs shall be dug with firm and
natural balls of earth of adequate size as specified by the American
Association of Nurserymen, "American Standard For Nursery Stock", with balls
securely wrapped.
         (c)   All street trees shall be balled and burlapped with a minimum
diameter ball of thirty two inches (32").
      2.   Planting:
         (a)   Sites must be cleared of all construction debris and
contaminants prior to any planting.
         (b)   All trees and shrubs shall be planted in such a manner as to
ensure their survival. This shall include the planting of intact balls,
planting at proper depth, properly backfilling and watering, and construction
of a planting saucer.
      3.   Guying And Staking: All trees shall be properly guyed or staked to
keep them in a vertical position.
      4.   Wrapping: The trunks of all trees except for low branching conifers
shall be properly wrapped with waterproofed tree wrapping paper.
      5.   Mulching:
         (a)   All trees and shrubs shall be properly mulched after planting,
to a minimum depth of three inches (3"), with any appropriate mulch such as
pine bark, pine needles, wood chips, or shredded bark.
         (b)   Mulch shall cover the entire plant saucer.
      6.   Authorization To Plant: It shall be unlawful to plant any tree or
shrub in any street right of way or other public space without first having
secured permission from the director of building and zoning.
   (G)   Private Landscape Maintenance:
      1.   All trees shall be maintained in a healthy state (alive, disease and
insect free) by the property owner.
      2.   All foliage, branches and suckers of trees shall be pruned to a
height of eight feet (8') to ten feet (10') from street level or ground level,
whichever is greater.
      3.   All diseases or dead trees shall be removed by the owner at his
expense when tree is so designated by the director of building and zoning or
his duly authorized agents.
      4.   If any of the above is not maintained as indicated, the director of
building and zoning, upon proper notification, shall remove, trim or spray or
cause to be removed, trimmed or sprayed to correct said infringements of the
above, at the owner's expense.
      5.   The village provides a seasonal brush pick up route for trimming and
pruning of residential trees. Branches may be no longer than five feet (5') in
length. Any branch or trunk larger than five inches (5") in diameter may not
exceed three feet (3') in length. Crews will not pick up root balls or any
brush that contains stones, metal, roots, vines, willow whips, twigs or thorns.
Other lawn waste, including grass clippings, brush trimmings and plant removal,
shall be disposed of in recycling bags.
   (H)   Public Landscape Maintenance:
      1.   Authorization Required For Removal: It shall be unlawful to remove
or cut down any tree or shrub in any public place without having secured
written authorization. Requests for such authorization shall be made to the
village clerk and approved by the director of building and zoning before
issuance.
      2.   Damage Or Injury Unlawful: It shall be unlawful to damage or injure
any tree or shrub planted or growing in any public place.
      3.   Attaching Signs Unlawful: It shall be unlawful to attach any sign,
advertisement or notice to any trees or shrub in any public place.
      4.   Removal Of Stumps: All stumps of street trees and park trees shall
be removed below the surface of the ground so that the top of the stump shall
not project above the surface of the ground.
      5.   Excavations: In making excavations in streets or other public places
proper care shall be taken to avoid injury to the roots of any tree or shrub,
whenever possible.
      6.   Interference With Director Of Building And Zoning: It shall be
unlawful for any person to prevent, delay or interfere with the director of
building and zoning, or any of his agents, while engaging in and about
planting, cultivating, mulching, pruning, spraying or removing any street tree,
park tree or trees on private grounds, as authorized in this title.
      7.   Arborist's License: It shall be unlawful for any person or firm to
engage in the business or occupation of pruning, treating or removing street or
park trees within the village without first applying for and obtaining a
license; provided, however, that no license shall be required of any village
employee doing such work. Such business license shall require evidence of
current liability insurance for bodily injury and property damage indemnifying
the village or any person injured or damaged resulting from the pursuit of such
endeavors as herein described. (Ord. 07-20, 9-4-2007)
CHAPTER 9
DEVELOPMENT IN FLOODPLAIN AREAS
SECTION:
10-9-1: Purpose
10-9-2: Definitions
10-9-3: Base Flood Elevation
10-9-4: Duties Of The Responsible Official
10-9-5: Development Permit
10-9-6: Preventing Increased Flood Heights And Resulting Damages
10-9-7: Protecting Buildings
10-9-8: Subdivision Requirements
10-9-9: Public Health And Other Standards
10-9-10: Carrying Capacity And Notification
10-9-11: Variances
10-9-12: Disclaimer Of Liability
10-9-13: Penalty
10-9-14: Abrogation And Greater Restrictions
10-9-15: Severability
10-9-16: Effective Date
10-9-1: PURPOSE:
This chapter is enacted pursuant to the police powers granted to this Village
Board by the Illinois Municipal Code 1  in order to accomplish the following
purposes:
   (A)   To prevent unwise developments from increasing flood or drainage
hazards to others;
   (B)   Protect new buildings and major improvements to buildings from flood
damage;
   (C)   To promote and protect the public health, safety, and general welfare
of the citizens from the hazards of flooding;
   (D)   To lessen the burden on the taxpayer for flood control, repairs to
public facilities and utilities, and flood rescue and relief operations;
   (E)   Maintain property values and a stable tax base by minimizing the
potential for creating blight areas;
   (F)   Make Federally subsidized flood insurance available; and
   (G)   To preserve the natural characteristics and functions of watercourses
and floodplains in order to moderate flood and stormwater impacts, improve
water quality, reduce soil erosion, protect aquatic and riparian habitat,
provide recreational opportunities, provide aesthetic benefits and enhance
community and economic development. (Ord. 18-21, 1-22-2019)
 
Notes
1 1. 65 ILCS 5/1-2-1, 5/11-12-12, 5/11-30-2, 5/11-30-8 and 5/11-31-2.
10-9-2: DEFINITIONS:
For the purposes of this chapter, the following definitions are adopted:
BASE FLOOD: The flood having a one percent (1%) probability of being equaled or
exceeded in any given year. The base flood is also known as the 100-year flood.
The base flood elevation at any location is as defined in section
10-9-3 of this chapter.
BASE FLOOD ELEVATION (BFE): The elevation in relation to mean sea level of the
crest of the base flood.
BASEMENT: That portion of a building having its floor sub-grade (below ground
level) on all sides.
BUILDING: A walled and roofed structure, including gas or liquid storage tank
that is principally above ground including manufactured homes, prefabricated
buildings and gas or liquid storage tanks. The term also includes recreational
vehicles and travel trailers installed on a site for more than one hundred
eighty (180) days per year.
COMPENSATORY STORAGE: An artificially excavated, hydraulically equivalent
volume of storage within the SFHA used to balance the loss of natural flood
storage capacity when artificial fill or structures are placed within the
floodplain.
CRITICAL FACILITY: Any facility which is critical to the health and welfare of
the population and, if flooded, would create an added dimension to the
disaster. Damage to these critical facilities can impact the delivery of vital
services, can cause greater damage to other sectors of the community, or can
put special populations at risk.
Examples of critical facilities where flood protection should be required
include: emergency services facilities (such as fire and police stations),
schools, hospitals, retirement homes and senior care facilities, major roads
and bridges, critical utility sites (telephone switching stations or electrical
transformers), and hazardous material storage facilities (chemicals,
petrochemicals, hazardous or toxic substances).
DEVELOPMENT: Any man-made change to real estate including, but not necessarily
limited to:
   (A)   Demolition, construction, reconstruction, repair, placement of a
building, or any structural alteration to a building;
   (B)   Substantial improvement of an existing building;
   (C)   Installation of a manufactured home on a site, preparing a site for a
manufactured home, or installing a travel trailer on a site for more than one
hundred eighty (180) days per year;
   (D)   Installation of utilities, construction of roads, bridges, culverts or
similar projects;
   (E)   Construction or erection of levees, dams, walls or fences;
   (F)   Drilling, mining, filling, dredging, grading, excavating, paving, or
other alterations of the ground surface;
   (G)   Storage of materials including the placement of gas and liquid storage
tanks, and channel modifications or any other activity that might change the
direction, height, or velocity of flood or surface waters.
"Development" does not include routine maintenance of existing buildings and
facilities, resurfacing roads, or gardening, plowing, and similar practices
that do not involve filling, grading, or construction of levees.
EXISTING MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION: A manufactured home park or
subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on
which the manufactured homes are to be affixed or buildings to be constructed
(including, at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of
streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is
completed before the effective date of the floodplain management regulations
adopted by a community.
EXPANSION TO AN EXISTING MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION: The preparation
of additional sites by the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on
which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including the installation of
utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the
pouring of concrete pads).
FEMA: Federal Emergency Management Agency.
FLOOD: A general and temporary condition of partial or complete inundation of
normally dry land areas from the overflow, the unusual and rapid accumulation,
or the runoff of surface waters from any source.
FLOOD FRINGE: That portion of the floodplain outside of the regulatory
floodway.
FLOOD INSURANCE RATE MAP: A map prepared by the Federal Emergency Management
Agency that depicts the floodplain or special flood hazard area (SFHA) within a
community. This map includes insurance rate zones and may or may not depict
floodways and show base flood elevations.
FLOOD INSURANCE STUDY: An examination, evaluation and determination of flood
hazards and, if appropriate, corresponding water surface elevations.
FLOOD PROTECTION ELEVATION (FPE): The elevation of the base flood plus one foot
(1') of freeboard at any given location in the floodplain.
FLOODPLAIN AND SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD AREA (SFHA): These two (2) terms are
synonymous. Those lands within the jurisdiction of the Village of Manteno, the
extraterritorial jurisdiction of the Village of Manteno, or that may be annexed
into the Village of Manteno, that are subject to inundation by the base flood.
The floodplains of the Village of Manteno are generally identified as such on
panel number 45 of the Countywide Flood Insurance Rate Map of Kankakee County
prepared by the Federal Emergency Management Agency and dated February 15, 2019
and on panel numbers 65, 70, 185, 202, and 205 of the Countywide Flood
Insurance Rate Map of Kankakee County prepared by the Federal Emergency
Management Agency and dated January 20, 2010. Floodplain also includes those
areas of known flooding as identified by the community.
The floodplains of those parts of unincorporated Kankakee County that are
within the extraterritorial jurisdiction of the Village of Manteno or that may
be annexed into the Village of Manteno are generally identified as such on the
Flood Insurance Rate Map prepared for Kankakee County by the Federal Emergency
Management Agency and dated January 20, 2010 and February 15, 2019.
FLOODPROOFING: Any combination of structural or nonstructural additions,
changes, or adjustments to structures which reduce or eliminate flood damage to
real estate, property and their contents.
FLOODPROOFING CERTIFICATE: A form published by the Federal Emergency Management
Agency that is used to certify that a building has been designed and
constructed to be structurally dry floodproofed to the flood protection
elevation.
FLOODWAY: That portion of the floodplain required to store and convey the base
flood. The floodway for the floodplains of Forked Creek, South Branch Forked
Creek, Rock Creek and South Branch Rock Creek shall be as delineated on the
Countywide Flood Insurance Rate Map of Kankakee County prepared by FEMA and
dated January 20, 2010 and February 15, 2019. The floodways for each of the
remaining floodplains of the Village of Manteno shall be according to the best
data available from the Federal, State, or other sources.
FREEBOARD: An increment of elevation added to the base flood elevation to
provide a factor of safety for uncertainties in calculations, future watershed
development, unknown localized conditions, wave actions and unpredictable
effects such as those caused by ice or debris jams.
HISTORIC STRUCTURE: Any structure that is:
   (A)   Listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places or
preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as meeting the
requirements for individual listing on the National Register.
   (B)   Certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior
as contributing to the Historic District or a district preliminarily determined
by the Secretary to qualify as a registered Historic District.
   (C)   Individually listed on the State Inventory of Historic Places by the
Illinois Historic Preservation Agency.
   (D)   Individually listed on a local Inventory of Historic Places that has
been certified by the Illinois Historic Preservation Agency.
IDNR/OWR: Illinois Department of Natural Resources/Office of Water Resources.
IDNR/OWR JURISDICTIONAL STREAM: Illinois Department of Natural Resources Office
of Water Resources has jurisdiction over any stream serving a tributary area of
six hundred forty (640) acres or more in an urban area, or in the floodway of
any stream serving a tributary area of six thousand four hundred (6,400) acres
or more in a rural area. Construction on these streams requires a permit from
the department (Ill. Admin. Code title 17, part 3700.30). The department may
grant approval for specific types of activities by issuance of a Statewide
permit which meets the standards defined in section
10-9-6 of this chapter.
LOWEST FLOOR: The lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area (including
basement). An unfinished or flood resistant enclosure, usable solely for
parking of vehicles, building access or storage in an area other than a
basement area is not considered a building's lowest floor. Provided that such
enclosure is not built to render the structure in violation of the applicable
non- elevation design requirements of section
10-9-7 of this chapter.
MANUFACTURED HOME: A structure transportable in one or more sections that is
built on a permanent chassis and is designed to be used with or without a
permanent foundation when connected to required utilities.
MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION: A parcel (or contiguous parcels) of land
divided into two (2) or more lots for rent or sale.
NFIP: National Flood Insurance Program.
NEW CONSTRUCTION: Structures for which the start of construction commenced or
after the effective date of floodplain management regulations adopted by a
community and includes any subsequent improvements of such structures.
NEW MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION: A manufactured home park or
subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on
which the manufactured homes are to be affixed or buildings to be constructed
(including, at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of
streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is
completed on or after the effective date of the floodplain management
regulations adopted by a community.
RECREATIONAL VEHICLE OR TRAVEL TRAILER: A vehicle which is:
   (A)   Built on a single chassis;
   (B)   Four hundred (400) square feet or less in size;
   (C)   Designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a light duty
truck and designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling but as
temporary living quarters for recreational, camping, travel or seasonal use.
REPETITIVE LOSS: Flood related damages sustained by a structure on two (2)
separate occasions during a ten-year period for which the cost of repairs at
the time of each such flood event on the average equals or exceeds twenty five
percent (25%) of the market value of the structure before the damage occurred.
SFHA: See definition of floodplain.
START OF CONSTRUCTION: Includes substantial improvement and means the date the
building permit was issued, provided the actual start of construction, repair,
reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition placement or other improvement, was
within one hundred eighty (180) days of the permit date. The actual start means
either the first placement of permanent construction of a structure on a site,
such as the pouring of slab or footings, the installation of piles, the
construction of columns or any work beyond the stage of excavation or placement
of a manufactured home on a foundation. For a substantial improvement, actual
start of construction means the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor or
other structural part of a building whether that alteration affects the
external dimensions of the building.
STRUCTURE: See definition of "building".
SUBSTANTIAL DAMAGE: Damage of any origin sustained by a structure whereby the
cumulative percentage of damage during a ten (10) year period equals or exceeds
fifty percent (50%) of the market value of the structure before the damage
occurred regardless of actual repair work performed. Volunteer labor and
materials must be included in this determination. The term includes "repetitive
loss buildings" (see definition of repetitive loss).
SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVEMENT: Any reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition or
improvement of a structure taking place during a ten (10) year period in which
the cumulative percentage of improvements:
   (A)   Equals or exceeds fifty percent (50%) of the market value of the
structure before the improvement or repair is started, or
   (B)   Increases the floor area by more than twenty percent (20%).
"Substantial improvement" is considered to occur when the first alteration of
any wall, ceiling, floor or other structural part of the building commences,
whether that alteration affects the external dimensions of the structure. This
term includes structures which have incurred repetitive loss or substantial
damage, regardless of the actual repair work done.
The term does not include:
   (A)   Any project for improvement of a structure to comply with existing
State or local Health, Sanitary, or Safety Code specifications which are solely
necessary to assure safe living conditions, or
   (B)   Any alteration of a structure listed on the National Register of
Historic Places or the Illinois Register of Historic Places.
VIOLATION: The failure of a structure or other development to be fully
compliant with the community's floodplain management regulations. A structure
or other development without the required Federal, State, and/or local permits
and elevation certification is presumed to be in violation until such time as
the documentation is provided. (Ord. 18-21, 1-22-2019)
10-9-3: BASE FLOOD ELEVATION:
This chapter's protection standard is the base flood. The best available base
flood data are listed below. Whenever a party disagrees with the best available
data, the party shall finance the detailed engineering study needed to replace
the existing data with better data and submit it to the FEMA and IDNR/OWR for
approval prior to any development of the site.
   (A)   The base flood elevation for the floodplains of Rock Creek and South
Branch of Rock Creek shall be as delineated on the 100-year flood profiles in
the Countywide Flood Insurance Study of Kankakee County prepared by the Federal
Emergency Management Agency and dated January 20, 2010 and February 15, 2019.
   (B)   The base flood elevation for each floodplain delineated as an "AH
Zone" or "AO Zone" shall be that elevation (or depth) delineated on the
Countywide Flood Insurance Rate Map of Kankakee County.
   (C)   The base flood elevation for each of the remaining floodplains
delineated as an "A Zone" on the Countywide Flood Insurance Rate Map of
Kankakee County shall be according to the best data available from Federal,
State or other sources. Should no other data exist, an engineering study must
be financed by the applicant to determine base flood elevations.
   (D)   The base flood elevation for the floodplains of those parts of
unincorporated Kankakee County that are within the extraterritorial
jurisdiction of the Village of Manteno, or that may be annexed into the Village
of Manteno, shall be as delineated on the 100-year flood profiles in the Flood
Insurance Study of Kankakee County prepared by the Federal Emergency Management
Agency and dated January 20, 2010 and February 15, 2019. (Ord. 18-21, 1-22-
2019)
10-9-4: DUTIES OF THE RESPONSIBLE OFFICIAL:
The Director of Building and Zoning shall be responsible for the general
administration of this chapter and ensure that all development activities
within the floodplains under the jurisdiction of the Village of Manteno meet
the requirements of this chapter. Specifically, the Director of Building and
Zoning shall:
   (A)   Process development permits in accordance with section
10-9-5 of this chapter;
   (B)   Ensure that all development in a floodway (or a floodplain with no
delineated floodway) meets the damage prevention requirements of section
10-9-6 of this chapter;
   (C)   Ensure that the building protection requirements for all buildings
subject to section
10-9-7 of this chapter are met and maintain a record of the "as-built"
elevation of the lowest floor (including basement) or floodproof certificate;
   (D)   Assure that all subdivisions and annexations meet the requirements of
section
10-9-8 of this chapter;
   (E)   Ensure that water supply and waste disposal systems meet the public
health standards of section
10-9-9 of this chapter;
   (F)   If a variance is requested, ensure that the requirements of section
10-9-11 of this chapter are met and maintain documentation of any variances
granted;
   (G)   Inspect all development projects and take any and all penalty actions
outlined in section
10-9-13 of this chapter as a necessary to ensure compliance with this chapter;
   (H)   Assure that applicants are aware of and obtain any and all other
required local, State, and Federal permits;
   (I)   Notify IDNR/OWR and any neighboring communities prior to any
alteration or relocation of a watercourse;
   (J)   Provide information and assistance to citizens upon request about
permit procedures and floodplain construction techniques;
   (K)   Cooperate with State and Federal floodplain management agencies to
coordinate base flood data and to improve the administration of this chapter;
   (L)   Maintain for public inspection base flood data, floodplain maps,
copies of State and Federal permits, and documentation of compliance for
development activities subject to this chapter;
   (M)   Perform site inspections to ensure compliance with this chapter and
make substantial damage determinations for structures within the floodplain;
and
   (N)   Maintain the accuracy of floodplain maps including notifying IDNR/OWR
and/or submitting information to FEMA within six (6) months whenever a
modification of the floodplain may change the base flood elevation or result in
a change to the floodplain map. (Ord. 18-21, 1-22-2019)
10-9-5: DEVELOPMENT PERMIT:
No person, firm, corporation, or governmental body not exempted by law shall
commence any development in the floodplain without first obtaining a
development permit from the Director of Building and Zoning. The Director of
Building and Zoning shall not issue a development permit if the proposed
development does not meet the requirements of this chapter.
   (A)   The application for development permit shall be accompanied by:
      1.   Drawings of the site, drawn to scale showing property line
dimensions;
      2.   Existing grade elevations and all changes in grade resulting from
excavation or filling;
      3.   The location and dimensions of all buildings and additions to
buildings;
      4.   The elevation of the lowest floor (including basement) of all
proposed buildings subject to the requirements of section
10-9-7 of this chapter; and
      5.   Cost of project or improvements as estimated by a licensed engineer
or architect. A signed estimate by a contractor may also meet this requirement.
   (B)   Upon receipt of an application for a development permit, the Director
of Building and Zoning shall compare the elevation of the site to the base
flood elevation. Any development located on land that is shown by survey
elevation to be below the current base flood elevation is subject to the
provisions of this chapter. In addition, any development located on land shown
to be below the base flood elevation and hydraulically connected to a flood
source, but not identified as floodplain on the current Flood Insurance Rate
Map, is subject to the provisions of this chapter. Any development located on
land that can be shown by survey data to be higher than the current base flood
elevation and which has not been filled after the date of the site's first
Flood Insurance Rate Map is not in the floodplain and therefore not subject to
the provisions of this chapter.
The Director of Building and Zoning shall maintain documentation of the
existing ground elevation at the development site and certification that this
ground elevation existed prior to the date of the site's first Flood Insurance
Rate Map identification.
The Director of Building and Zoning shall be responsible for obtaining from the
applicant copies of all other Federal, State, and local permits, approvals or
permit-not-required letters that may be required for this type of activity. The
Director of Building and Zoning shall not issue a permit unless all other
Federal, State, and local permits have been obtained. (Ord. 18-21, 1-22-2019)
10-9-6: PREVENTING INCREASED FLOOD HEIGHTS AND RESULTING DAMAGES:
Within any floodway identified on the Countywide Flood Insurance Rate Map, and
within all other floodplains where a floodway has not been delineated, the
following standards shall apply:
   (A)   Except as provided in subsection (B) of this section, no development
shall be allowed which, acting in combination with existing and anticipated
development will cause any increase in flood heights or velocities or threat to
public health and safety. The following specific development activities shall
be considered as meeting this requirement:
      1.   Bridge and culvert crossings of streams in rural areas meeting the
conditions of the Illinois Department of Natural Resources, Office of Water
Resources Statewide permit number 2;
      2.   Barge fleeting facilities meeting the conditions of IDNR/OWR
Statewide permit number 3;
      3.   Aerial utility crossings meeting the conditions of IDNR/OWR
Statewide permit number 4;
      4.   Minor boat docks meeting the conditions of IDNR/OWR Statewide permit
number 5;
      5.   Minor, non-obstructive activities such as underground utility lines,
light poles, sign posts, driveways, athletic fields, patios, playground
equipment, minor storage buildings not exceeding seventy (70) square feet and
raising buildings on the same footprint which does not involve fill and any
other activity meeting the conditions of IDNR/OWR Statewide permit number 6;
      6.   Outfall structures and drainage ditch outlets meeting the conditions
of IDNR/OWR Statewide permit number 7;
      7.   Underground pipeline and utility crossings meeting the conditions of
IDNR/OWR Statewide permit number 8;
      8.   Bank stabilization projects meeting the conditions of IDNR/OWR
Statewide permit number 9;
      9.   Accessory structures and additions to existing residential buildings
meeting the conditions of IDNR/OWR Statewide permit number 10;
      10.   Minor maintenance dredging activities meeting the conditions of
IDNR/OWR Statewide permit number 11;
      11.   Bridge and culvert replacement structures and bridge widening
meeting the conditions of IDNR/OWR Statewide permit number 12;
      12.   Temporary construction activities meeting the conditions of IDNR/
OWR Statewide permit number 13;
      13.   Any development determined by IDNR/OWR to be located entirely
within a flood fringe area shall be exempt from State floodway permit
requirements.
   (B)   Other development activities not listed in subsection (A) of this
section may be permitted only if:
      1.   Permit has been issued for the work by IDNR/OWR (or written
documentation is provided that an IDNR/OWR permit is not required), or
      2.   Sufficient data has been provided to FEMA when necessary, and
approval obtained from FEMA for a revision of the regulatory map and base flood
elevation. (Ord. 18-21, 1-22-2019)
10-9-7: PROTECTING BUILDINGS:
   (A)   In addition to the State permit and damage prevention requirements of
section
10-9-6 of this chapter, all buildings located in the floodplain shall be
protected from flood damage below the flood protection elevation. This building
protection requirement applies to the following situations:
      1.   Construction or placement of a new building or alteration or
addition to an existing building valued at more than one thousand dollars
($1,000.00) or seventy (70) square feet.
      2.   Substantial improvements or structural alterations made to an
existing building that increase the floor area by more than twenty percent
(20%) or equal or exceed the market value by fifty percent (50%). Alteration
shall be figured cumulatively during a 10-year period. If substantially
improved, the existing structure and the addition must meet the flood
protection standards of this section.
      3.   Repairs made to a substantially damaged building. These repairs
shall be figured cumulatively during a 10-year period. If substantially damaged
the entire structure must meet the flood protection standards of this section
within twenty four (24) months of the date the damage occurred.
      4.   Installing a manufactured home on a new site or a new manufactured
home on an existing site. (The building protection requirements do not apply to
returning a manufactured home to the same site it lawfully occupied before it
was removed to avoid flood damage.)
      5.   Installing a travel trailer or recreational vehicle on a site for
more than one hundred eighty (180) days per year.
      6.   Repetitive loss to an existing building as defined in section
10-9-2 of this chapter.
   (B)   Residential or non-residential buildings can meet the building
protection requirements by one of the following methods:
      1.   The building may be constructed on permanent land fill in accordance
with the following:
         (a)   The lowest floor (including basement) shall be at or above the
flood protection elevation.
         (b)   The fill shall be placed in layers no greater than six inches
(6") before compaction and should extend at least ten feet (10') beyond the
foundation before sloping below the flood protection elevation.
         (c)   The fill shall be protected against erosion and scour during
flooding by vegetative cover, riprap, or other structural measure.
         (d)   The fill shall be composed of rock or soil and not incorporated
debris or refuse material.
         (e)   Shall not adversely affect the flow of surface drainage from or
onto neighboring properties and when necessary stormwater management techniques
such as swales or basins shall be incorporated.
      2.   The building may be elevated on solid walls in accordance with the
following:
         (a)   The building or improvements shall be elevated on stilts, piles,
walls, crawlspace, or other foundation that is permanently open to flood
waters.
         (b)   All components located below the flood protection elevation
shall be constructed of materials resistant to flood damage.
         (c)   The lowest floor and all electrical, heating, ventilating,
plumbing, and air conditioning equipment and utility meters shall be located at
or above the flood protection elevation.
         (d)   If walls are used, all enclosed areas below the flood protection
elevation shall address hydrostatic pressures by allowing the automatic entry
and exit of flood waters. Designs must either be certified by a licensed
professional engineer or by having a minimum of one permanent opening on each
wall no more than one foot (1') above grade with a minimum of two (2) openings.
The openings shall provide a total net area of not less than one square inch
for every one square foot of enclosed area subject to flooding below the base
flood elevation.
         (e)   The foundation and supporting members shall be anchored,
designed, and certified to minimize exposure to hydrodynamic forces such as
current, waves, ice, and floating debris.
            (1)   Water and sewer pipes, electrical and telephone lines,
submersible pumps, and other service facilities may be located below the flood
protection elevation provided they are waterproofed,
            (2)   The area below the flood protection elevation shall be used
solely for parking or building access and not later modified or occupied as
habitable space, or
            (3)   In lieu of the above criteria, the design methods to comply
with these requirements may be certified by a licensed professional engineer or
architect.
      3.   The building may be constructed with a crawlspace located below the
flood protection elevation provided that the following conditions are met:
         (a)   The building must be designed and adequately anchored to resist
flotation, collapse, and lateral movement of the structure resulting from
hydrodynamic and hydrostatic loads, including the effects of buoyancy.
         (b)   Any enclosed area below the flood protection elevation shall
have openings that equalize hydrostatic pressures by allowing for the automatic
entry and exit of flood waters. A minimum of one opening on each wall having a
total net area of not less than one square inch per one square foot of enclosed
area. The openings shall be no more than one foot (1') above grade.
         (c)   The interior grade of the crawlspace below the flood protection
elevation must not be more than two feet (2') below the lowest adjacent
exterior grade.
         (d)   The interior height of the crawlspace measured from the interior
grade of the crawlspace to the top of the foundations wall must not exceed four
feet (4') at any point.
         (e)   An adequate drainage system must be installed to remove flood
waters from the interior area of the crawlspace within a reasonable period of
time after a flood event.
         (f)   Portions of the building below the flood protection elevation
must be constructed with materials resistant to flood damage.
         (g)   Utility systems within the crawlspace must be elevated above the
flood protection elevation.
   (C)   Non-residential buildings may be structurally dry floodproofed (in
lieu of elevation) provided a licensed professional engineer or architect
certifies that:
      1.   Below the flood protection elevation, the structure and attendant
utility facilities are watertight and capable of resisting the effects of the
base flood.
      2.   The building design accounts for flood velocities, duration, rate of
rise, hydrostatic and hydrodynamic forces, the effects of buoyancy, and the
impact from debris and ice.
      3.   Floodproofing measures will be incorporated into the building design
and operable without human intervention and without an outside source of
electricity.
      4.   Levees, berms, floodwalls and similar works are not considered
floodproofing for the purpose of this subsection.
   (D)   Manufactured homes or travel trailers to be permanently installed on
site shall be:
      1.   Elevated to or above the flood protection elevation in accordance
with subsection (B) of this section, and
      2.   Anchored to resist flotation, collapse, or lateral movement by being
tied down in accordance with the rules and regulations for the Illinois Mobile
Home Tie-Down Act issued pursuant to 77 Ill. Adm. Code section 870.
   (E)   Travel trailers and recreational vehicles on site for more than one
hundred eighty (180) days per year shall meet the elevation requirements of
subsection (D) of this section unless the following conditions are met:
      1.   The vehicle must be either self-propelled or towable by a light duty
truck.
      2.   The hitch must always remain on the vehicle.
      3.   The vehicle must not be attached to external structures such as
decks and porches.
      4.   The vehicle must be designed solely for recreation, camping, travel,
or seasonal use rather than as a permanent dwelling.
      5.   The vehicle's largest horizontal projections must be no larger than
four hundred (400) square feet.
      6.   The vehicle's wheels must remain on axles and inflated.
      7.   Air conditioning units must be attached to the frame to be safe for
movement of the floodplain.
      8.   Propane tanks as well as electrical and sewage connections must be
quick-disconnect.
      9.   The vehicle must be licensed and titled as a recreational vehicle or
park model.
      10.   Must either:
         (a)   Entirely be supported by jacks, or
         (b)   Have a hitch jack permanently mounted, have the tires touching
the ground and be supported by block in a manner that will allow the block to
be easily removed by use of the hitch jack.
   (F)   Garages, sheds or other minor accessory structures constructed
ancillary to an existing residential use may be permitted provided the
following conditions are met:
      1.   The garage or shed must be non-habitable.
      2.   The garage or shed must be used only for the storage of vehicles and
tools and cannot be modified later into another use.
      3.   The garage or shed must be located outside of the floodway or have
the appropriate State and/or Federal permits.
      4.   The garage or shed must be on a single-family lot and be accessory
to an existing principal structure on the same lot.
      5.   Below the base flood elevation, the garage or shed must be built of
materials not susceptible to flood damage.
      6.   All utilities, plumbing, heating, air conditioning and electrical
must be elevated above the flood protection elevation.
      7.   The garage or shed must have at least one permanent opening on each
wall not more than one foot (1') above grade with one square inch of opening
for every one square foot of floor area.
      8.   The garage or shed must be less than fifteen thousand dollars
($15,000.00) in market value or replacement cost whichever is greater or less
than five hundred seventy six (576) square feet (24' x 24').
      9.   The structure shall be anchored to resist floatation and
overturning.
      10.   All flammable or toxic materials (gasoline, paint, insecticides,
fertilizers, etc.) shall be stored above the flood protection elevation.
      11.   The lowest floor elevation should be documented, and the owner
advised of the flood insurance implications. (Ord. 18-21, 1-22-2019)
10-9-8: SUBDIVISION REQUIREMENTS:
The Village Board shall consider hazards, to the extent that they are known, in
all official actions related to land management use and development.
   (A)   New subdivisions, manufactured home parks, annexation agreements,
planned unit developments, and additions to manufactured home parks and
subdivisions shall meet the damage prevention and building protections
standards of sections
10-9-6 and
10-9-7 of this chapter. Any proposal for such development shall include the
following data:
      1.   The base flood elevation and the boundary of the floodplain, where
the base flood elevation is not available from an existing study, the applicant
shall be responsible for calculating the base flood elevation;
      2.   The boundary of the floodway when applicable; and
      3.   A signed statement by a licensed professional engineer that the
proposed plat or plan accounts for changes in the drainage of surface waters in
accordance with the Plat Act 1 .
Streets, blocks, lots, parks and other public grounds shall be located and laid
out in such a manner as to preserve and utilize natural streams and channels.
Wherever possible the floodplains shall be included within parks or other
public grounds. (Ord. 18-21, 1-22-2019)
 
Notes
1 1. 765 ILCS 205/2.
10-9-9: PUBLIC HEALTH AND OTHER STANDARDS:
   (A)   Public Health Standards: Public health standards must be met for all
floodplain development. In addition to the requirements of sections
10-9-6 and
10-9-7 of this chapter the following standards apply:
      1.   No development in the floodplain shall include locating or storing
chemicals, explosives, buoyant materials, flammable liquids, pollutants, or
other hazardous or toxic materials below the flood protection elevation unless
such materials are stored in a floodproofed and anchored storage tank and
certified by a professional engineer or floodproofed building constructed
according to the requirements of section
10-9-7 of this chapter.
      2.   Public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas and electric
shall be located and constructed to minimize or eliminate flood damage.
      3.   Public sanitary sewer systems and water supply systems shall be
located and constructed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of flood waters
into the systems and discharges from the systems into flood waters.
      4.   New and replacement on-site sanitary sewer lines or waste disposal
systems shall be located and constructed to avoid impairment to them or
contamination from them during flooding. Manholes or other above ground
openings located below the flood protection elevation shall be watertight.
      5.   Construction of new or substantially improved critical facilities
shall be located outside the limits of the floodplain. Construction of new
critical facilities shall be permissible within the floodplain if no feasible
alternative site is available. Critical facilities constructed within the SFHA
shall have the lowest floor (including basement) elevated or structurally dry
floodproofed to the 500-year flood frequency elevation or three feet (3') above
the level of the 100-year flood frequency elevation whichever is greater.
Floodproofing and sealing measures must be taken to ensure that toxic
substances will not be displaced by or released into flood waters. Access
routes elevated to or above the level of the base flood elevation shall be
provided to all critical facilities.
   (B)   Other Activities: All other activities defined as development shall be
designed so as not to alter flood flows or increase potential flood damages.
   (C)   Compensatory Storage In Floodplains:
      1.   Whenever a portion of the floodplain is authorized for use, the
volume of space which will be occupied by the authorized fill or structure
below the base flood or 100-year frequency flood elevation shall be compensated
for and balanced by a hydraulically equivalent volume of excavation taken from
below the base flood or 100-year frequency flood elevation.
      2.   The excavation volume shall be at least equal to the volume of
storage lost due to the fill or structure (1:1).
      3.   In the case of streams and watercourses, such excavation shall be
made opposite or adjacent to the areas so filled or occupied.
      4.   All floodplain storage lost below the existing 10-year flood
elevation shall be replaced below the proposed 10-year flood elevation. All
floodplain storage lost above the existing 10-year flood elevation shall be
replaced above the proposed 10-year flood elevation.
      5.   All such excavations shall be constructed to drain freely and openly
to the watercourse.
   (D)   Compensatory Storage In Floodway:
      1.   Compensatory storage shall be provided for any designated floodway
storage lost due to the proposed work from the volume of fill or structures
placed and the impact of any related flood control projects.
      2.   Compensatory storage for fill or structures shall be equal to the
volume of floodplain storage lost (1:1).
      3.   Artificially created storage lost due to a reduction in head loss
behind a bridge shall not be required to be replaced.
      4.   The compensatory designated floodway storage shall be placed between
the proposed normal water elevation and the proposed 100-year flood elevation.
All designated floodway storage lost below the existing 10-year flood elevation
shall be replaced below the proposed 10-year flood elevation. All designated
floodway storage lost above the existing 10-year flood elevation shall be
replaced above the proposed 10-year flood elevation.
      5.   All such excavations shall be constructed to drain freely and openly
to the watercourse.
      6.   If the compensatory storage will not be placed at the location of
the proposed construction, the applicant's engineer shall demonstrate through a
determination of flood discharges and water surface elevations that the
compensatory storage is hydraulically equivalent.
      7.   There shall be no reduction in floodway surface area as a result of
a floodway modification unless such modification is necessary to reduce
flooding at existing structures.
   (E)   Dams: Any work involving the construction, modification, or removal of
a dam as defined under definitions per 17 IL Adm. Code part 3702 (Rules for
Construction of Dams) shall obtain an IDNR/OWR permit prior to the start of
construction of a dam. (Ord. 18-21, 1-22-2019)
10-9-10: CARRYING CAPACITY AND NOTIFICATION:
For all projects involving channel modification, fill, or stream maintenance
(including levees), the flood carrying capacity of the watercourse shall be
maintained.
In addition, the Village of Manteno shall notify adjacent communities in
writing thirty (30) days prior to the issuance of a permit for the alteration
or relocation of the watercourse. (Ord. 18-21, 1-22-2019)
10-9-11: VARIANCES:
Whenever the standards of this chapter place undue hardship on a specific
development proposal, the applicant may apply to the Planning Commission for a
variance. The Planning Commission shall review the applicant's request for a
variance and shall submit its recommendation to the Village Board. The Village
Board may attach such conditions to granting of a variance as it deems
necessary to further the intent of this chapter.
   (A)   Variance Requirements: No variance shall be granted unless the
applicant demonstrates that all the following conditions are met:
      1.   The development activity cannot be located outside the floodplain.
      2.   An exceptional hardship would result if the variance were not
granted.
      3.   The relief requested is the minimum necessary.
      4.   There will be no additional threat to public health, safety or
creation of a nuisance.
      5.   There will be no additional public expense for flood protection,
rescue or relief operations, policing, or repairs to roads, utilities, or other
public facilities.
      6.   The applicant's circumstances are unique and do not establish a
pattern inconsistent with the intent of the NFIP.
      7.   All other State and Federal permits have been obtained.
   (B)   Notification: The Village Board shall notify an applicant in writing
that a variance from the requirements of the building protections standards of
section
10-9-7 of this chapter that would lessen the degree of protection to a building
will:
      1.   Result in increased premium rates for flood insurance up to twenty
five dollars ($25.00) per one hundred dollars ($100.00) of insurance coverage;
      2.   Increase the risk to life and property; and
      3.   Require that the applicant proceed with knowledge of these risks and
that the applicant acknowledge in writing the assumption of the risk and
liability.
   (C)   Historic Structures:
      1.   Variances to the building protection requirements of section
10-9-7 of this chapter which are requested in connection with reconstruction,
repair, or alteration of a historic site or historic structure as defined in
"historic structures", may be granted using criteria more permissive than the
requirements of sections
10-9-6 and
10-9-7 of this chapter subject to the conditions that:
         (a)   The repair or rehabilitation is the minimum necessary to
preserve the historic character and design of the structure.
         (b)   The repair or rehabilitation will not result in the structure
being removed as a certified historic structure.
   (D)   Agriculture: Any variance granted for an agricultural structure shall
be decided individually based on a case by case analysis of the building's
unique circumstances. Variances granted shall meet the following conditions as
well as those criteria and conditions set forth in this chapter. In order to
minimize flood damages during the 100-year flood and the threat to public
health and safety, the following conditions shall be included for any variance
issued for agricultural structures that are constructed at-grade and wet-
floodproofed.
      1.   All agricultural structures considered for a variance from the
floodplain management regulations of this chapter shall demonstrate that the
varied structure is located in wide, expansive floodplain areas and no other
alternate location outside of the special flood hazard area exists for the
agricultural structure. Residential structures or animal confinement
facilities, such as farm houses, cannot be considered agricultural structures.
      2.   Use of the varied structures must be limited to agricultural
purposes in Zone A only as identified on the community's Flood Insurance Rate
Map (FIRM).
      3.   For any new or substantially damaged agricultural structures, the
exterior and interior building components and elements (i.e., foundation, wall
framing, exterior and interior finishes, flooring, etc.) below the base flood
elevation, must be built with flood-resistant materials in accordance with
section
10-9-7 of this chapter.
      4.   The agricultural structures must be adequately anchored to prevent
flotation, collapse, or lateral movement of the structures in accordance with
section
10-9-7 of this chapter. All the building's structural components must be
capable of resisting specific flood-related forces including hydrostatic,
buoyancy, and hydrodynamic and debris impact forces.
      5.   Any mechanical, electrical, or other utility equipment must be
located above the base flood elevation or floodproofed so that they are
contained within a watertight, floodproofed enclosure that is capable of
resisting damage during flood conditions in accordance with section
10-9-7 of this chapter.
      6.   The NFIP requires that enclosure or foundation walls, subject to the
100-year flood, contain openings that will permit the automatic entry and exit
of flood waters in accordance with subsection
10-9-7(B) this chapter.
      7.   The agricultural structures must comply with the floodplain
management floodway provisions of section
10-9-6 of this chapter. No variances may be issued for agricultural structures
within any designated floodway.
      8.   Wet-floodproofing construction techniques must be reviewed and
approved by the Floodplain Administrator and a registered professional engineer
or architect prior to the issuance of any floodplain development permit for
construction. (Ord. 18-21, 1-22-2019)
10-9-12: DISCLAIMER OF LIABILITY:
The degree of protection required by this chapter is considered reasonable for
regulatory purposes and is based on available information derived from
engineering and scientific methods of study. Larger floods may occur, or flood
heights may be increased by man-made or natural causes. This chapter does not
imply that development either inside or outside of the floodplain will be free
from flooding or damage. This chapter does not create liability on the part of
the Village of Manteno or any officer or employee thereof for any flood damage
that results from proper reliance on this chapter or any administrative
decision made lawfully thereunder. (Ord. 18-21, 1-22-2019)
10-9-13: PENALTY:
Failure to obtain a permit for development in the floodplain or failure to
comply with the conditions of a permit or a variance shall be deemed to be a
violation of this chapter. Upon due investigation, the Director of Building and
Zoning may determine that a violation of the minimum standards of this chapter
exists. The Director of Building and Zoning shall notify the owner in writing
of such violation.
   (A)   If such owner fails after ten (10) days' notice to correct the
violation:
      1.   The Village of Manteno shall make application to the Circuit Court
for an injunction requiring conformance with this chapter or make such other
order as the court deems necessary to secure compliance with this chapter.
      2.   Any person who violates this chapter shall upon conviction thereof
be fined not less than fifty dollars ($50.00) or more than seven hundred fifty
dollars ($750.00) for each offense.
      3.   A separate offense shall be deemed committed upon each day during or
on which a violation occurs or continues.
      4.   The Village of Manteno shall record a notice of violation on the
title of the property.
   (B)   The Director of Building and Zoning shall inform the owner that any
such violation is considered a willful act to increase flood damages and
therefore may cause coverage by a Standard Flood Insurance Policy to be
suspended.
   The Director of Building and Zoning is authorized to issue an order
requiring the suspension of the subject development. The stop-work order shall
be in writing, indicate the reason for the issuance, and shall order the
action, if necessary, to resolve the circumstances requiring the stop-work
order. The stop-work order constitutes a suspension of the permit. No site
development permit shall be permanently suspended or revoked until a hearing is
held by the Village Board. Written notice of such hearing shall be served on
the permittee and shall state:
      1.   The grounds for the complaint, reasons for suspension or revocation,
and
      2.   The time and place of the hearing.
At such hearing the permittee shall be given an opportunity to present evidence
on their behalf. At the conclusion of the hearing, the Village Board shall
determine whether the permit shall be suspended or revoked.
   (C)   Nothing herein shall prevent the Village of Manteno from taking such
other lawful action to prevent or remedy any violations. All costs connected
therewith shall accrue to the person or persons responsible. (Ord. 18-21, 1-22-
2019)
10-9-14: ABROGATION AND GREATER RESTRICTIONS:
This chapter repeals and replaces other ordinances adopted by the Village of
Manteno to fulfill the requirements of the National Flood Insurance Program
including all other floodplain related ordinances. However, this chapter does
not repeal the original resolution or ordinance adopted to achieve eligibility
in the program. Nor does this chapter repeal, abrogate, or impair any existing
easements, covenants, or deed restrictions. Where this chapter and other
ordinance easements, covenants or deed restrictions conflict or overlap,
whichever imposes the more stringent restrictions shall prevail. (Ord. 18-21,
1-22-2019)
10-9-15: SEVERABILITY:
The provisions and sections of this chapter shall be deemed separable and the
invalidity of any portion of this chapter shall not affect the validity of the
remainder. (Ord. 18-21, 1-22-2019)
10-9-16: EFFECTIVE DATE:
This chapter shall be in full force and effect from and after its passage,
approval, and publication as required by law. (Ord. 18-21, 1-22-2019)
CHAPTER 10
STORM WATER MANAGEMENT
SECTION:
10-10-1: Intent Of Storm Water Management Concepts And Standards
10-10-2: Definitions
10-10-3: Storm Water Runoff Management
10-10-4: General Principles And Permit Requirements
10-10-4-1: Permit Required
10-10-4-2: Application For Permit
10-10-4-3: Building Permit
10-10-4-4: Appeals
10-10-4-5: Responsibility
10-10-4-6: Retention Of Plans
10-10-4-7: Inspections
10-10-4-8: Record Drawings
10-10-5: Neighborhood Drainage Planning/Subdivision Plats
10-10-6: Operation Standards And Requirements
10-10-7: Fees And Bonds
10-10-8: Appeals And Variations
10-10-9: Revocation Of Permit
10-10-10: Violations And Penalties
10-10-1: INTENT OF STORM WATER MANAGEMENT CONCEPTS AND STANDARDS:
   (A)   The village has, in the past, experienced damage to public and private
lands and improvements from excess storm water runoff and flooding.
Development, which has increased the amount and rate of runoff, has aggravated
the situation as well as have developments which have allowed excessive
quantities of soil to erode clogging and limiting the usefulness of
drainageways.
   (B)   The intent of this chapter shall not be to preclude development but to
ensure that development enhances rather than detracts from or ignores the
natural topography, resources and amenities of the area. The intent of this
chapter is to set forth the parameters within which development may take place
by specifying storm water management concepts and standards for drainage system
construction; requiring erosion and sedimentation control; regulating the
alteration of land and topography; regulating the removal of vegetation;
assuring the continued, efficient operation of the drainage system; and
protection of the natural stream system from alteration of its natural
function. (Ord. 07-20, 9-4-2007)
10-10-2: DEFINITIONS:
The following definitions shall be applicable to this chapter:
BUILDING PERMIT: A permit issued by the village for the construction, erection
or alteration of a structure or building.
CERTIFY OR CERTIFICATION: The specific inspections and tests where required
have been performed, and that such tests comply with the applicable
requirements of this chapter.
CHANNEL: A depression formed in the topography of the earth's surface to carry
storm water runoff through a specific area.
COMPENSATORY STORAGE: Shall be considered hydraulically equivalent when it
maintains the existing storage capacity between the normal water level and 10-
year high water level and between the 10-year high water level and the 100-year
high water level.
CONDUIT: Any channel, pipe, sewer or culvert used for the conveyance or
movement of water, whether open or closed.
CONTROL STRUCTURE: A structure designed to control the rate of flow that passes
through the structure, given a specific upstream and downstream water surface
elevation. (See also definition of Storm Water Runoff Release Rate.)
CUBIC YARDS: The amount of material in excavation and/or fill measured by the
method of average end areas.
DAM: As defined by the Illinois department of natural resources.
DETENTION BASIN: A facility constructed or modified to provide for the
temporary storage of storm water runoff and the controlled release of this
runoff at a prescribed rate during and after a flood or storm.
DEVELOPER: Any person or persons engaged in development.
DEVELOPMENT: Any manmade change to improved or unimproved real estate,
including, but not limited to, construction of or substantial improvements to
buildings or other structures, the placement of mobile homes, mining, dredging,
filling, grading, paving, excavation or drilling operations.
DRY BOTTOM STORM DETENTION BASIN: A facility that is designed to drain after
temporary storage of storm water flows, shall be normally dry, and contains
water only when excess storm water runoff occurs.
ENGINEER: A registered professional engineer of Illinois.
EROSION: The general process whereby soil or earth is moved by rainfall,
flowing water, wind or wave action.
EVENT: A short duration hydrologic occurrence, such as a period of rainfall or
elevated stream flow, that is brief in duration allowing certain hydrologic
components, such as evaporation and arrival times of rainfall, to be neglected.
A storm event is normally limited to ten (10) days or less.
EXCAVATION: Any act by which organic matter, earth, sand, gravel, rock or any
other similar material is cut into, dug, quarried, uncovered, removed,
displaced, relocated or bulldozed and shall include the conditions resulting
therefrom.
EXCESS STORM WATER RUNOFF: That portion of storm water runoff which exceeds the
transportation capacity of storm sewers or natural drainage channels serving a
specific watershed.
EXISTING GRADE: The vertical location of the existing ground surface prior to
excavation or filling.
FILL: Any act by which earth, sand, gravel, rock or any other material is
deposited, placed, replaced, pushed, dumped, pulled, transported or moved by
man to a new location and shall include the conditions resulting therefrom.
FREEBOARD: The minimum difference in elevation (1 foot) between the crest (high
water elevation) of the overflow structure and the top of bank of the storm
water detention basin.
GRADING: Excavation or fill or any combination thereof and shall include the
conditions resulting from any excavation or fill.
GROUND WATER RECHARGE: Replenishment of existing natural underground water
supplies.
HYDRAULICALLY EQUIVALENT: Compensatory storage maintains the existing storage
capacity between the normal water level and the 10-year high water level and
between the 10-year high water level and the 100-year high water level.
HYDROGRAPH: A graph or tabulation showing for a given location on a stream or
conduit, the flow rate with respect to time.
INFILTRATION: The passage or movement of water into the soil.
LAND SURVEYOR: A registered surveyor of the state of Illinois.
LOW FLOW: The transport of flow of a minor or common volume of storm water as
opposed to a high or peak volume of storm water which would utilize overflow
facilities.
MITIGATION: When prescribed controls are not sufficient and additional measures
are required to offset the development, including those measures necessary to
minimize the negative effects which storm water drainage and development
activities might have on the public health, safety and welfare. Examples of
mitigation include, but are not limited to: compensatory storage, soil erosion
and sediment control, channel restoration and wetland creation, enhancement,
and restoration.
NATURAL: Conditions existing prior to development resulting from physical,
chemical, and biological processes without intervention by man.
NATURAL DRAINAGE: Channels formed by the existing surface topography of the
earth prior to changes made by unnatural causes.
100-YEAR EVENT: A rainfall, runoff, or flood event having a one percent (1%)
probability of being equaled or exceeded in any given year.
OVERFLOW STRUCTURE: A structure designed to convey large flood flows safely
past the earth embankments of storm water detention basins. An overflow
structure shall be provided for all storm water detention basins.
PARCEL: All contiguous land under one ownership.
PERMITTEE: Any person to whom a site development permit is issued.
PERSON: Any person, firm or corporation, public or private, the state of
Illinois and its agencies or political subdivisions, and the United States of
America, its agencies and instrumentalities, and any agent, servant, officer or
employee of any of the foregoing.
POSITIVE GRAVITY OUTLET: A term used to describe the drainage of an area by
means of natural gravity so that it lowers the free water surface to a point
below the existing grade or invert of storm drains within the area.
RECOGNIZED AGENCY: An agency or governmental unit that has statistically and
consistently examined local climatic and geologic conditions and maintained
records as they apply to storm water runoff.
Recognized agencies include, but are not limited to: Technical release no. 55,
urban hydrology for small watersheds, engineering division, soil conservation
service, United States department of agriculture, latest edition, shall be the
methodological standard to be applied hereunder. Alternate generally acceptable
methods may be approved on a case by case basis.
SAFE STORM DRAINAGE CAPACITY: The quantity of storm water runoff that can be
transported within a channel, passage, conduit, tube, duct, or combination
thereof in such a manner that the elevation of the water does not rise
sufficiently above the level of the adjacent ground surface so as to cause
damage to structures of facilities located thereon.
SEDIMENT: Soil, sand, minerals, or other debris that has been disturbed or
eroded and transported by water, wind, gravity, or tracked by equipment tires.
SEDIMENTATION: The process that deposits soils, debris, and other materials
either on other ground surfaces or in bodies of water or storm water drainage
systems.
SITE: A lot or parcel of land, or a contiguous combination thereof, where
grading work is performed as a single unified operation.
SITE DEVELOPMENT: Altering terrain and/or vegetation and constructing driveways
and parking lots.
SITE DEVELOPMENT PERMIT: A written document from the village authorizing
improvement exhibited in the site development plan and subject to the
conditions and restrictions contained therein.
SITE DEVELOPMENT PLAN: Plan documents showing any proposed manmade changes to
improved or unimproved real estate, including, but not limited to, construction
of or substantial improvements to buildings or other structures, the placement
of mobile homes, mining, dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavation or
drilling operations.
STORM SEWER: A closed conduit for conveying collected storm water.
STORM WATER MANAGEMENT SYSTEM (Also Known As STORM WATER INFRASTRUCTURE): The
designed features within the village or that directly impact the village which
collect, convey, channel, hold, inhibit or divert the movement of storm water.
This includes the design, development, improvement, installation, inspection,
operation, maintenance and oversight of all structural and natural storm water
control systems of all types including, but not limited to: open drainage
channels, retention basins, wet bottom storm water detention areas, dry bottom
storm water detention areas, storm sewers, field tiles, conduits, pipelines,
pumping and ventilation stations, bioretention systems, and other planted storm
water management buffers, structures, and real and personal property used for
support of the system. Also to ensure compliance with all applicable federal,
state, and local laws, statutes, ordinances, regulations and policies.
STORM WATER RUNOFF: Water that results from precipitation which is not absorbed
by the soil or plant material.
STORM WATER RUNOFF RELEASE RATE: The rate at which storm water runoff is
released from dominant to servient land.
STORM WATER STORAGE AREA: Areas designated to store excess storm water runoff.
STREAM: Any river, creek, brook, branch, flowage, ravine, or natural or manmade
drainageways that has a definite bed and banks or shoreline, in or into which
surface or ground water flows, either perennially or intermittently.
TRIBUTARY WATERSHED: All of the area that contributes storm water runoff to a
given point.
VACANT: Land on which there are no structures or only structures which are
secondary to the use of maintenance of the land itself.
VEGETATION REMOVAL: Cutting vegetation to the ground or stumps, complete
extraction, or killing by spraying.
VILLAGE: Village of Manteno, Illinois.
WET BOTTOM STORM WATER DETENTION BASINS: A facility that is designed to be
maintained as free water surface or pond and accumulates water only when excess
storm water runoff occurs.
The following abbreviations when used in this chapter shall have the designated
meanings:
BFE   Base flood elevation
BMP   Best management practices
CFR   Code of federal regulations
CWA   Clean water act
EPA   U.S. environmental protection agency
FEMA  Federal emergency management agency
FIRM  Flood insurance rate map
IDNR  Illinois department of natural resources
IDPH  Illinois department of public health
IEPA  Illinois environmental protection agency
ISWS  Illinois state water survey
NPDES National pollutant discharge elimination system
NRCS  Natural resources conservation service (was SCS)
SCS   Soil conservation service (now NRCS)
SWCD  Soil and water conservation district
SWP3  Storm water pollution prevention plan
USACE U.S. army corps of engineers
 
(Ord. 07-20, 9-4-2007)
10-10-3: STORM WATER RUNOFF MANAGEMENT:
   (A)   The controlled release and storage of excess storm water runoff shall
be required in combination for all commercial, industrial, institutional,
governmental, utility, or other developments and for residential developments
that contain an area in excess of two (2) acres.
   (B)   The controlled release and storage of excess storm water runoff from
all developments described above, shall not exceed the existing safe storm
drainage capacity of the natural downstream outlet channel or storm sewer
system, or that amount of existing runoff from the parcel of land in a
vegetative condition, whichever is less. The final release rate shall not
exceed the existing rate for all recurrence storm events up to and including
the 100-year storm event. The rate at which storm water runoff is delivered to
an existing village owned designated storm water storage area may be
unrestricted, but subject to prior village approval and agreement with the
village to purchase the required storage.
      1.   Release rates for new developments or redevelopments or
redevelopments shall be designed to control the peak rate of discharge from the
total property under development for the 100-year critical duration storm
event. The allowable release rate for the 100-year critical duration storm
event is:
 
Event Frequency Maximum Release Rate (cfs/Acre)
100-year        0.15 (minus the area directly released from the site)
 
   If it is determined by the village that the safe downstream capacity of the
natural downstream (receiving) outlet channel or storm sewer storm drainage
system may not safely convey the allowable release rate(s), the release rate(s)
shall be lowered such that the receiving system can safely handle the detention
pond discharge. The applicant may be required to provide documentation that
downstream capacity is adequate and erosion prevention measures will be
installed.
      2.   ISWS Bulletin 75, or the latest released version of the Illinois
State Water Survey rainfall data distributions, shall be used for all design
rainfall events.
   (C)   A storm sewer conveyance system shall be designed with adequate
capacity to convey through the development the storm water runoff from all
tributary upstream areas. Design of the system shall also take into
consideration control of storm water velocity (minimum storm sewer design
velocity = 2 fps) to prevent erosion or other damage to the facility, which
will restrict its primary use. Construction of a low flow system of storm
sewers to carry the minor storm runoff and reshaping of the channel with a
minimum of five (5) horizontal to one vertical side slopes (5:1) and bottom of
a width adequate to facilitate maintenance and carry the flood runoff without
eroding velocities may be required in the plans for land development.
      1.   A channel system shall be designed with adequate capacity to convey
through the development the storm water runoff from all tributary upstream
areas. This channel shall be designed to carry the peak rate of runoff from a
100-year critical duration storm as published by the recognized agency,
assuming all storm sewers are blocked and that the upstream areas are fully
developed and have been saturated with antecedent rainfall (AMC = 4).
         (a)   No habitable structures shall be constructed within this
channel; however, streets and parking or playground areas and utility easements
shall be considered compatible uses.
         (b)   In the event that conveyance of the channel is reduced by
restrictions for reshaping, construction, or any other activity the village may
cause to have any restrictions removed at the expense of the party or parties
causing said restriction.
         (c)   Design of this channel system shall also take into consideration
control of storm water velocity to prevent erosion or other damage to the
facility which will restrict its primary use. Depths of flow shall be kept to a
minimum and retention of channel configurations shall be totally under village
control. In the event that the area within this channel is reshaped or
restricted for use as a floodway, the village may cause to have any
restrictions removed at the expense of the party or parties causing said
restriction. Should the development contain an existing natural waterway, this
land configuration shall be preserved as part of the channel system.
         (d)   The lowest opening of all habitable structures shall have one
foot (1') of freeboard during the 100-year critical duration flood event.
      2.   Construction of a low flow system of storm sewers to carry the peak
rate of discharge from a 10-year storm of critical duration as published by the
recognized agency may be required in the plans for land development. All storm
sewer systems shall be designed using the Manning's "n" value of 0.013 and have
a minimum design velocity of two (2) fps.
      3.   Should the development contain a natural waterway, depressional
area, lake, pond, or wetland, this land configuration should be preserved. If
the configuration must be altered, the lost value must be mitigated.
         (a)   If channel modification occurs, the physical characteristics of
the modified channel shall meet the existing channel in length, cross section,
slope, sinuosity, and carrying capacity of the original channel. Hydraulically
equivalent compensatory storage is required for fill or structures and shall be
at least equal to the volume of floodplain lost. Channel modification must not
result in adverse flooding impact to adjacent property owners.
         (b)   All disturbed areas associated with a channel modification shall
be seeded or otherwise stabilized immediately upon completion of site grading
construction.
         (c)   If the upstream drainage area exceeds one square mile, the
Illinois department of transportation division of water resources must be
notified and all relevant permits received before modification of the waterway
begins.
         (d)   Compensatory storage is required for fill or structures placed
in depressional areas, lakes, and ponds and shall be at least equal to the
volume of open water and flood storage lost.
         (e)   Filling of wetland areas will be avoided. If a wetland area is
to be filled, compensatory storage at least equal to the volume of flood
storage lost must be provided. Mitigation of the functional value of the
wetland may be required. A permit must be received from the U.S. army corps of
engineers before filling of any wetland area.
         (f)   The extent of any wetland must be delineated according to the
current federal wetland determination methodology.
      4.   The applicant shall submit a subsurface drainage inventory. The
inventory shall locate existing farm and storm drainage tiles by appropriate
methods performed by a qualified individual. All existing drain tile lines
damaged during the investigation shall be repaired in a method approved on site
by the village engineer.
         (a)   The applicant shall provide a topographical map of the
development site. The name, address, and phone number of the person or firm
conducting tile location investigation shall be included on this map. The
inventory shall include:
            (1)   Proof of notification to adjacent landowners.
            (2)   Aerial photographs.
            (3)   Proof of notification with any active drainage districts.
            (4)   Consultation with NRCS/SWCD.
            (5)   Other items as required by the village.
         (b)   Information collected during the drainage investigation shall be
used to design and develop a storm water management system that is appropriate
for the development and connecting of tile lines on adjoining properties.
         (c)   Existing easements for any agricultural drainage systems located
underneath areas that will be developed shall be preserved. If no such easement
exists, an easement shall be dedicated to access, maintain, operate and repair
or replace the system.
         (d)   All agricultural drainage systems that serve upstream areas
outside of the development and that are located underneath areas that will be
developed shall be replaced with nonperforated storm sewer pipes or otherwise
protected to prevent root blockage. The existing drainage district system may
remain in place with the approval of the drainage district and the village.
         (e)   Agricultural drainage systems that, due to development, will be
located underneath streets, driveways, and other paved areas as allowed by this
chapter, shall be replaced with reinforced concrete storm sewer pipes.
         (f)   Agricultural drainage systems shall be relocated within the
development area when required by the village engineer or the village field
inspector. Such relocation shall maintain sufficient slope and capacity to
prevent sedimentation and to prevent an increase in scouring or structural
damage to the conduit. However, the relocated system shall not be required to
exceed the existing slope or capacity of the existing tile. If the system is
not under the authority of a drainage district, the village shall consider the
interests of those landowners who are served by the system when drainage
systems are relocated.
         (g)   Field tile systems disturbed during the process of development
shall be reconnected by those responsible for their disturbance unless
otherwise approved by the village engineer.
         (h)   Connection of agricultural tiles to storm water systems shall be
discouraged. Where tiles are being connected to these storm water systems or at
points of ingress or egress from the development sites, observation structures
or similar maintenance and inspection access structures shall be installed.
         (i)   Surface outflows onto adjoining properties not into a defined
channel shall be designed to release as sheet flow using level spreader
trenches or alternative designs as approved by the village engineer.
   (D)   The required volume to be provided in the storm water detention basin
shall be calculated based on the need to restrict the runoff from a 100-year
frequency rainfall for the critical duration event (peak discharge) as
published by the recognized agency. The allowable release rates shall be
maintained while providing a minimum of one vertical foot of freeboard for the
100-year event. The volume for storm water storage areas shall be calculated
using a hydrograph producing runoff calculation method, including HEC-HMS, HEC-
1, TR20, and Pond Pack. This volume of storage shall be provided for the fully
developed watershed that is tributary to the area designed for detention
purposes. The storm water release rate (0.15 cfs per acre during the 100-year
event) shall be considered when calculating the storm water storage capacity
and the control structure designed to maintain a relatively uniform flow rate
regardless of the depth of storm water in the storage area. The modified
rational formula may be acceptable for sites less than five (5) acres, subject
to approval by the village engineer.
      1.   General design requirements for storm water detention basins shall
include:
         (a)   Temporary and permanent erosion control shall be required for
all detention basins in accordance with this title.
         (b)   Erosion protection shall be inspected by the owner or the
owner's representative throughout the project duration.
         (c)   To effectively reduce runoff volumes, the use of infiltration
practices including basins, trenches, and permeable pavement are encouraged.
The "Illinois Urban Manual" contains criteria for the design and use of these
practices. An appropriate sediment control device shall be provided to remove
coarse sediment from storm water flows before they reach infiltration basins or
trenches. Engineering calculations demonstrating infiltration rates shall be
included with the application.
         (d)   Detention basin side slopes above normal pool shall be designed
with permanent erosion protection consisting of suitable vegetation or other
permanent finish. Topsoil must be provided per specific basin type design
criteria. Permanent erosion protection shall be aesthetically suitable to the
development or existing surrounding land use.
         (e)   All storm water detention basins shall be provided with an
overflow structure capable of safely passing flows in excess of 100-year event
at a stage not exceeding one foot (1') above high water level. The top of the
lowest foundation grade in the vicinity of the detention basin shall be two
feet (2') above high water level. The design flow rate of the overflow
structure shall be equivalent to the 100-year peak inflow rate. A professional
engineer registered in the state of Illinois shall design weirs, dams and
specialized outflows.
         (f)   Detention basin outlets shall be constructed of reinforced
concrete pipe(s) with a minimum inside diameter of twelve inches (12"). Further
restriction to flow may be provided by a restrictor plate placed upstream of
the outlet. This may be achieved by constructing a concrete wall with a
"restrictor manhole". The orifice opening in the restrictor plate shall have a
minimum diameter of four inches (4"). More specialized designs shall be
required when release rates require restriction that cannot be achieved by the
minimum allowed four inch (4") diameter orifice opening. The more specialized
design shall include provisions to minimize clogging and that tend to self-
clean the restriction. Use of a slotted riser pipe may be considered as a last
resort, and if approved by the village engineer. However, the riser pipe must
be protected from damage due to mowing, weather, and other possible impacts.
         (g)   End sections shall be installed at all storm sewer outfalls into
a detention pond. The end section shall be precast concrete. Pipe twelve inches
(12") and larger shall have an integral bell and spigot jointing system with an
O-ring, polyisoprene rubber gasket meeting ASTM F-477. The gasket shall be
factory installed on the spigot end. End sections fifteen inches (15") or
larger in size shall have an IDOT protective grate.
         (h)   Bubble up outlets, pumped outlets and other active control
structures are prohibited.
         (i)   Temporary erosion techniques shall be used as required to ensure
a full stand of cover vegetation in minimum time.
         (j)   Detention basins and their 100-year design high water elevation
shall be contained within platted lots or easements dedicated for drainage
purposes.
         (k)   Detention basin lots shall have adequate access for maintenance
purposes as approved by the village engineer.
         (l)   Parking lot detention is intended for redevelopment areas and
shall be allowed only where approved by the village engineer. Parking lot
detention, when approved shall be in the aisleways not within the parking
stalls.
         (m)   Storm water runoff from area tributaries to the property shall
be considered in the design of the property's drainage system. Flows from
upstream areas that are not to be detained should be routed around the basin
being provided for the site being developed.
         (n)   Where storm water detention or retention basins are to be used
as part of the drainage system for a property, they shall be constructed as the
first element of the initial earthwork program unless otherwise agreed to by
the village engineer. The applicant on a regular basis and before project
completion shall remove any eroded sediment captured in these facilities in
order to maintain the design volume of the facilities.
         (o)   All storm water detention or retention basin construction shall
examine potential impacts to adjacent agricultural land and shall address
measures that will be implemented to eliminate such impacts and comply with
other relevant permitting.
         (p)   Existing wetlands, rivers, lakes, or ponds shall not be modified
for the purposes of storm water detention unless it is demonstrated that the
proposed modifications will maintain or improve their habitat and ability to
perform beneficial functions and shall comply with other relevant permitting.
Existing storage and release rate characteristics of wetlands, rivers, lakes,
ponds, or other depressional storage areas shall be maintained and the volume
of detention storage provided to meet the requirements of this section shall be
in addition to this existing storage.
         (q)   Site drainage patterns shall not be altered to substantially
decrease or increase the existing area tributary to wetlands, rivers, lakes or
ponds. Drainage patterns shall not be altered by development to direct runoff
off site to other than natural drainage outlets existing prior to development.
      2.   Verification and final approval requirements for storm water
detention basins shall include, but not be limited to:
         (a)   Erosion protection shall be inspected by the owner or the
owner's representative throughout the project duration.
         (b)   Detention basin storage volume shall be verified to the
satisfaction of the village engineer through as built surveys or other means
approved by the village engineer in advance.
         (c)   Inflow, outflow and emergency overflow elevations and
configurations shall be verified through as built surveys.
         (d)   Final vegetative cover and permanent erosion control shall be
inspected for completeness of cover.
         (e)   The basin will receive final approval upon fulfillment of
subsections (D)2(b), (D)2(c), and (D)2(d) of this section, and any and all
other requirements or agreements with the jurisdiction. The anniversary date of
maintenance and repair reporting will be recorded as such.
         (f)   All basins must receive final approval within ninety (90) days
of the substantial completion as determined by the village engineer of any of
the following:
            (1)   The first phase (as shown on approved plans) of construction
of public utilities and roadways in any approved subdivision project. Detention
structures for the ultimate development area must be constructed during the
first phase of the project, and approved at its completion unless otherwise
agreed to by the village. The detention structures must then be maintained and
repaired in conformance with this chapter, during future construction phases.
            (2)   Parking areas, floor slabs and/or other impervious areas (as
shown on approved plans, and not including sidewalks) for work on an individual
lot requiring an individual permit under this chapter. Phased construction will
be treated as in the above case.
            (3)   Mass earthwork or rough grading, if no other phased
construction is scheduled to be started within one hundred eighty (180) days.
      3.   Maintenance and repair responsibilities for storm water detention
basins shall include, but not be limited to:
         (a)   Detention basins and associated inflow and outflow systems are
maintained by the property owner absent any specific legal agreement to the
contrary.
         (b)   Maintenance agreements may be required at the option of the
village administrator or village engineer to define parties responsible for the
maintenance of detention basins.
         (c)   The detention basin owner shall be responsible for the following
items:
            (1)   An annual report on the detention basin condition shall be
submitted to the village engineer.
            (2)   At five (5) year intervals, the basin shall be inspected by a
professional engineer registered in the state of Illinois. A report of this
inspection shall be submitted to the village engineer within sixty (60) days of
the inspection. An annual report is not required the year the five (5) year
report is due.
            (3)   Detention basin owners shall notify subsequent owners of
their maintenance responsibilities and transfer basin maintenance records to
the party with active maintenance responsibility.
            (4)   These requirements shall be effective only for facilities
constructed after the passage of this title.
         (d)   Failure to receive final approval as required will be considered
a violation of this chapter.
         (e)   Final approval of the basin shall not constitute acceptance by
the village for dedication nor completion of this chapter's maintenance
requirements.
   (E)   Dry bottom storm water storage areas shall be designed to serve a
secondary purpose for recreation, open space or other types of uses that will
not be adversely affected by occasional or intermittent flooding.
      1.   A method of carrying the low flow through these areas shall be
provided in addition to a system of drains, and both shall be provided with a
positive gravity outlet to a natural channel or storm sewer with adequate
capacity as described below.
      2.   The combination of storage of the water from a 100-year critical
duration storm and the design release rate shall not result in a storage
duration in excess of seventy two (72) hours.
      3.   The maximum depth of planned storm water storage shall not exceed
four feet (4') unless the existing natural ground contours and other conditions
lend to greater storage depth, which shall be approved by the village engineer.
      4.   Minimum grades for turf areas shall be one percent (1%) and maximum
slopes shall be ten percent (10%) (10 units horizontally to 1 unit vertically).
Storage area side slopes shall be kept as close to the natural land contours as
practical and a twenty percent (20%) slope (5 units horizontally to 1 unit
vertically) or less shall be used wherever possible. If slopes greater than
twenty percent (20%) are necessary to meet storage requirements or area
restrictions, written approval shall be obtained from the village engineer and
suitable erosion control provided in addition to the protection required to
ensure public health, safety and welfare.
      5.   Outlet control structures shall be designed as simply as possible
and shall require little or no attention for proper operation.
      6.   Each storm water detention basin shall be provided with a method of
emergency overflow, overflow weir, in the event that a storm in excess of the
100-year frequency storm occurs. This overflow weir shall be designed to
function without attention and shall become part of the natural or surface
channel system described below. The top of bank for the storm water detention
area shall be one foot (1') higher than the water elevation going over the
overflow weir. Hydraulic calculations shall be submitted to substantiate all
design features.
      7.   Both outlet control structures and emergency overflow weirs shall be
designed and constructed to fully protect the public health, safety and
welfare. Storm water runoff velocities shall be kept at a minimum and turbulent
conditions at an outfall control structure will not be permitted without
complete protection for the public safety. The use of restrictive fences shall
be kept to a minimum and used only as a last resort when no other method is
feasible.
      8.   Appropriate soil conditions shall be provided in the basin. First,
compaction of both subsoil and topsoil shall be minimized (i.e., to less than
275 psi). Where subsoil compaction cannot be avoided, it should be worked to a
depth of six (6) to eight inches (8") before spreading topsoil. Second,
suitable uncompacted topsoil, at a minimum thickness of one foot (1') shall be
spread to provide a suitable growing medium for plants. Coarse soils with
minimal clay content and a high organic content are required.
      9.   Velocity dissipation measures shall be incorporated into dry basin
designs to minimize erosion at inlets and outlets and to minimize resuspension
of pollutants.
      10.   The distance between detention inlets and outlets shall be
maximized. Inlets and outlets shall be at opposite ends of the basin providing
that the orientation does not create undue hardship based on topography or
other natural constraints. Designers are encouraged to use baffles or berms in
the basin bottom to prevent short circuiting of low flows.
      11.   A sediment trap shall be constructed at each major inlet to a dry
basin during construction. The temporary sediment trap shall be designed in
accordance with criteria in the "Illinois Urban Manual".
      12.   Dry bottom basins, intended to be used for aesthetics and wildlife
shall have native plantings. This type of dry bottom basin shall be used only
if approved by the village. Deep rooted plants are required to encourage
infiltration of the water into the ground. A mixture of wet mesic and mesic
plants shall be used within the dry bottom basin. This zone can be seeded, and
a minimum of ten (10) pounds of pure live seed per acre is required. The seed
mix shall contain a variety of grasses, sedges, rushes and forbs. A minimum of
five (5) grasses, sedges, rushes and forbs are required. A nurse crop of annual
plants shall also be used to help stabilize the soils and provide conditions
suitable for the germination and growth of perennial plants.
   (F)   Wet bottom storm water storage areas shall be designed with all of the
items required for dry bottom storm water storage areas, except that a low flow
conduit and a system of drains with a positive gravity outlet shall be
eliminated. However, the following additional conditions shall be complied
with:
      1.   Shoreline protection shall be provided to prevent erosion from wave
action.
      2.   Minimum normal water depth shall be four feet (4'), excluding near
shore zones and safety ledges.
      3.   If a fish habitat is to be provided, the basin depth shall be at
least ten (10) to twelve feet (12') deep over twenty five percent (25%) of the
bottom area to prevent winterkill. These ponds must also have storm water best
management practices upstream of the pond to reduce and minimize siltation,
high nutrient loads, and other water quality concerns.
In addition to pond shape and vegetation, additional habitat features are
required to increase fish habitat. To help with fish spawning, random placement
of pea gravel on the safety bench is required. Each pea gravel spawning area
shall be approximately twenty five (25) square feet in size and four inches
(4") thick.
Random placement of rock piles and/or bundles of wood branches shall be placed
at pond depths of eight feet (8') to twelve feet (12'). The Illinois department
of natural resources has guidelines for assembling these types of fish
structures.
Fishing access along the shoreline is required. The access area shall have a
hard bottom, such as ledger stone/flagstone and access areas shall be placed at
a minimum of once every two hundred fifty feet (250') of shoreline. Paths shall
be provided to the access areas, and shall be five feet (5') wide PCC sidewalk.
      4.   Facilities shall be available to allow the pond level to be lowered
by gravity flow for cleaning purposes and shoreline maintenance and public
safety. If a positive gravity outlet is not provided by the developer, the
developer may be required to provide a pumping system to be approved by the
village for the above purpose.
      5.   Control structures for storm water release shall be designed to
operate at full capacity with only a minor increase in the water surface level.
Hydraulic calculations shall be submitted to substantiate all design features.
      6.   Aeration facilities to prevent pond stagnation shall be provided.
Design calculations to substantiate the effectiveness of these aeration
facilities shall be submitted with final engineering plans. Agreements for the
perpetual operation and maintenance of aeration facilities shall be prepared to
the satisfaction of the village.
      7.   In the event that the water surface of the pond is to be raised for
purposes of storing water for irrigation or in anticipation of the
evapotranspiration demands of dry weather, the volume remaining for storage of
excess storm water runoff shall still be sufficient to contain the 100-year
storm runoff.
      8.   Wet bottom detention basins shall be designed to remove storm water
pollutants, to be safe, to be aesthetically pleasing, and as much as feasible
to be available for recreational use.
      9.   Side slopes from the top of bank to at least one foot (1') below the
safety ledge shall be no steeper than five to one (5:1) and three to one (3:1)
from one foot (1') below the safety ledge to a depth of eight feet (8'). Slopes
below a depth of eight feet (8') are permitted to be two to one (2:1).
         (a)   Appropriate soil conditions shall be provided in the shoreline
zone. First, compaction of both subsoil and topsoil shall be minimized (i.e.,
to less than 275 psi). Where subsoil compaction cannot be avoided, it should be
disked to a depth of six (6) to eight inches (8") with a chisel plow before
spreading topsoil. Second, suitable uncompacted topsoil, at a minimum thickness
of one foot (1') shall be spread to provide a suitable growing medium for
aquatic plants. Coarse soils with minimal clay content and a high organic
content are recommended.
      10.   All wet detention basins shall have a level safety ledge.
      11.   The minimum permanent pool volume in a wet bottom basin at normal
depth shall be equal to the runoff volume from its watershed for the two (2)
year, twenty four (24) hour event.
      12.   The distance between detention inlets and outlets shall be
maximized. Inlets and outlets shall be at opposite ends of the basin providing
that the orientation does not create undue hardship based on topography or
other natural constraints. Designers are encouraged to use baffles or berms in
the basin bottom to prevent short circuiting of low flows.
      13.   Water tolerant native vegetation or grass shall be used to
landscape the shorelines of wet detention facilities. The selected plants and
planting methods shall conform to the soils, hydrology, and water quality
conditions present in such facilities, with plants being tolerant of highly
variable hydrologic conditions and degraded water quality (e.g., high turbidity
and salinity content). Plant selection should conform to the guidance in the
"Native Plant Guide For Stream And Stormwater Facilities In Northeastern
Illinois" (NRCS et al, 1997), which is hereby adopted by reference.
Native vegetation is recommended, but not required, for side slopes of all
detention facilities.
      14.   Wet bottom basin design shall include an evaluation of soil
permeability. A basin liner shall be included in the design if needed to ensure
water retention to normal pool elevation.
   (G)   On stream detention basins are discouraged but will be considered if
they provide regional public benefits and if they meet the other provisions of
this title with respect to water quality and control of the 100-year, critical
duration storm events from the property.
      1.   If on stream detention is used in watersheds larger than two hundred
(200) acres, the applicant will use hydrologic and hydraulic modeling to
demonstrate that the design will not increase the flood levels for any
properties upstream or downstream of the property.
      2.   Impoundment of the stream as part of on stream detention shall:
         (a)   Require the implementation of an effective nonpoint source
management program utilizing best management practices for runoff and sediment
reduction. This program is necessary to prevent direct discharge to the stream.
         (b)   Require the implementation of best management practices (BMPs)
for runoff reduction consistent with the hierarchy for minimization of runoff
volumes and rates as defined in this title.
         (c)   Require two (2) year, twenty four (24) hour detention/
sedimentation basins for all development consistent with the criteria of
temporary sediment trap in the "Illinois Urban Manual".
         (d)   Require a program to control nonpoint sources at the source for
prior developments constructed without appropriate storm water BMPs.
         (e)   Include a design for appropriate bank stabilization measures,
based on flow velocity calculations, and a presedimentation basin.
         (f)   Comply with other relevant permitting and/or ordinances.
      3.   Impoundment of the stream as part of on stream detention shall not:
         (a)   Prevent the migration of indigenous fish species, which require
access to upstream areas as part of their life cycle, such as for spawning.
         (b)   Cause or contribute to the degradation of water quality or
stream aquatic habitat.
         (c)   Involve any stream channelization or the filling of wetlands.
         (d)   Increase base flood elevations or high water levels of any
adjacent land.
   (H)   Fee in lieu of detention may be considered by the village for the
purpose of satisfying the requirements for storm water detention or
compensatory storage. For a development or redevelopment on a property for
which detention or compensatory storage was not previously provided, a fee in
lieu of detention or compensatory storage may be assessed against the
development prior to the issuance of a permit. Fees shall be calculated to
establish the property's fair share of costs to provide detention or
compensatory storage for the watershed or drainage basin in which the property
exists. The cost figures used for detention shall be actual costs for detention
or compensatory storage being provided by contract or estimated costs for
planned detention or compensatory storage facilities approved by the
appropriate jurisdiction official. All revenues received through such fees
shall be used for no purpose other than defraying public costs associated with
providing regional detention or compensatory storage facilities.
   (I)   Paved surfaces that are to serve as storm water storage areas shall
have minimum grades of one-half percent (1/2%) and shall be restricted to
storage depths of one foot (1') maximum. Rooftop storage shall be designed with
permanent type control inlets and parapet walls to contain runoff on the
rooftop. Emergency overflow areas shall be provided to ensure that the weight
of water stored will not exceed the structural capacity of the roof. Release
rates and storage volume requirements for paved storage areas remain the same
as outlined above. If a portion of an area within a storm water storage area is
to be paved for parking or recreation purposes, the paved surface shall be
placed at the highest elevation within the storage areas as possible. Maximum
parking lot grades shall not exceed normal design parameters of three (3) to
five percent (5%).
   (J)   Where developments form only a portion of a watershed or contain
portions of several watersheds, the requirement for providing storage shall be
based upon the proportion of the area being developed as compared to the total
watershed tributary to the storage area. Compensating storage will be
acceptable only when approved by the village. As a watershed is developed with
a series of storm water storage facilities, due consideration will be given for
calculation of the allowable release rate and capacity of the natural or
surface channel system described above.
   (K)   Plans, specifications and all calculations for storm water runoff
control as required hereunder shall be submitted to the village for review and
approval prior to the approval of a final plat, in the case of subdivisions,
mobile home parks and planned unit developments, or issuance of a building
permit, in the case of commercial or industrial construction.
   (L)   Where development of a property presents the threat of flooding or
damage by flash runoff to downstream residents, the facilities for storm water
runoff control shall be constructed prior to any earthmoving or drainage
construction on the project site.
   (M)   The construction of the storm water control system shall be
accomplished as part of the cost of land development. If the amount of storage
capacity can be increased to provide benefits to the village, negotiations for
public participation in the cost of development may be feasible.
   (N)   The ability to retain and maximize the ground water recharge capacity
of the area being developed is encouraged. Design of the storm water runoff
shall give consideration to providing ground water recharge to compensate for
the reduction in the percolation that occurs when the ground surface is paved
and roofed over. Specific design calculations and details shall be provided
with the final plans and specifications presented for village review. The use
of natural gravel deposits for the lower portions of storm runoff storage area,
the flattening of drainage slopes and the retention of existing topography are
examples of possible recharge methods.
   (O)   During the construction phases of land development, facilities shall
be provided to prevent the erosion and washing away of the earth. Silting of
downstream areas can be prevented through the strategic use of stilling basins,
sodding of runoff channels, and by limiting the period of time during which the
earth is stripped of vegetation.
   (P)   Final engineering plans shall show complete details for all of the
items covered in this chapter and shall be submitted for review and approved by
the village board prior to the start of construction. (Ord. 07-20, 9-4-2007;
amd. Ord. 20-24, 2-1-2021)
10-10-4: GENERAL PRINCIPLES AND PERMIT REQUIREMENTS:
The following general principles shall apply to any movement of earth and any
sedimentation and erosion control plan and the granting of a permit for the
execution of said plan as hereinafter provided:
   (A)   The smallest practical area of land shall be exposed at any given time
during development.
   (B)   Such minimum area exposure shall be kept to as short a duration of
time as is practical.
   (C)   Temporary vegetation or, where appropriate, mulching or other
nonviable cover shall be used to protect areas exposed during development.
   (D)   Sediment basins, debris basins, desilting basins, or silt traps shall
be installed and maintained to remove sediment from runoff waters from land
undergoing development.
   (E)   Provision shall be made to effectively accommodate the increased
runoff caused by changed soil and surface conditions during and after
development.
   (F)   Permanent, final plant covering or structures shall be installed as
soon as possible.
   (G)   The plan of development shall relate to the topography and soils of
the site so that the lowest potential for erosion is created.
   (H)   Natural plant covering shall be retained and protected so far as is
consistent with developing the site. (Ord. 07-20, 9-4-2007)
10-10-4-1: PERMIT REQUIRED:
   (A)   Before land is cleared, graded, transported, or otherwise disturbed by
the movement of earth for purposes including, but not limited to, the
construction of buildings, site development for commercial, industrial and
residential purposes, the mining of minerals, including sand and gravel, the
development of golf courses, mobile home parks and the construction of roads
and streets by any person, partnership or corporation within the village, a
site development permit or building permit embodying the proposed earth
movement shall be obtained from the building inspector where development comes
under any one or more of the following provisions, unless such development is
exempted therefrom by subsection (B) of this section:
      1.   Excavation, fill, or any combination thereof, will exceed five
hundred (500) cubic yards.
      2.   Fill will exceed three feet (3') in vertical depth at its deepest
point measured from the natural ground surface.
      3.   Excavation will exceed four feet (4') in vertical depth at its
deepest point.
      4.   Excavation, fill or any combination thereof will exceed an area of
five thousand (5,000) square feet.
      5.   Plant cover is to be removed from an area exceeding five thousand
(5,000) square feet.
   (B)   A site development permit shall not be required in the following
cases:
      1.   Basements or excavations below finished grade for septic tanks and
drain fields, tanks, vaults, tunnels, equipment basements, swimming pools,
cellars or footings of buildings or structures for which a building permit
shall have been issued by the village, unless part of a development which would
otherwise require such a permit.
      2.   Excavation or removal of vegetation in public utility easements by
public utility companies for the purpose of installing underground utilities,
except when or where trench width disturbance is greater than four feet (4') in
width.
      3.   Tilling of the soil for fire protection purposes.
      4.   Engaging in the following, if, but only if, in connection with a
farming or other agricultural or conservation enterprise:
         (a)   The construction of sod waterways, or
         (b)   The construction of terraces, or
         (c)   The construction of surface water diversions, or
         (d)   The construction of grade stabilization structures, or
         (e)   The tilling of the soil. (Ord. 07-20, 9-4-2007)
10-10-4-2: APPLICATION FOR PERMIT:
   (A)   No site development or building permit shall be issued until said
developer submits a site development plan, together with other submissions
required by this chapter, and certifies that any land clearing construction or
development involving the movement of earth shall be in accordance with such
plan and submissions.
   (B)   Each application for a site development permit shall be made by the
owner of the property or his authorized agent to the building inspector on a
form furnished for that purpose. When grading or plant cover removal is
proposed as a part of the building permit, application may be combined, and one
plot plan in the number of copies required by the building inspector may be
submitted showing building plans and the site development plans. In such
instances, a land surveyor or engineer shall certify as to the accuracy of the
existing and proposed contour lines. Each application shall be accompanied by
the following, unless the director of building and zoning finds any item
unnecessary to ensure compliance with the provisions of this chapter.
      1.   Vicinity Sketch: With respect to site developments, a vicinity
sketch, showing acreage of site, boundary line survey, zoning, type of proposed
sewer and water facilities, location of existing utilities, buildings and
drains on and within one hundred feet (100') of the site, together with a
legend and scale. There shall be included on or with such a vicinity sketch:
         (a)   A soil map of the subject property showing the predominant soil
types on the site. For the purpose of this chapter, the soil map shall be the
soil survey of Kankakee County, Illinois, prepared by the soil conservation
service of the USDA.
         (b)   Information on those areas abutting or adjacent to the site to
show existing drainage patterns and the drainage course that may affect, or be
affected by the development of the site.
         (c)   The name and address of the developer or owner.
         (d)   The name and address of any consulting firm retained by the
applicant, together with the name of the applicant's principal contact at such
firm.
         (e)   Limits of the 100-year floodplain(s) as adopted by the federal
insurance administration for the flood insurance program.
         (f)   Areas to be sodded, seeded, mulched or paved.
         (g)   Acreage of area to be vegetatively stabilized, if any.
         (h)   Areas to be left undisturbed.
      2.   Existing Topography: With respect to site grading, existing
topography of the site and a one hundred foot (100') adjacent peripheral strip,
proposed contours and final grades, and street profiles; and indicating what
measures will be employed to protect cut and fill slopes from surface runoff.
      3.   Storm Drainage: Storm drainage by means of a plan based upon a
competent storm drainage study, including a drainage area map and computations,
and indicating what conditions now prevail at proposed and natural outlets such
as:
         (a)   Whether the drainage course is bare earth or vegetated.
         (b)   Whether the natural or proposed outlet is subject to long term
or continuous flow.
         (c)   Whether the existing outlet is actively eroding.
         (d)   Whether there is evidence of high water table (permanent or
seasonal), as indicated by the soil survey of Kankakee County, Illinois, as
prepared by the soil conservation service. This information may be supplemented
by site soil borings that show ground water elevations.
         (e)   Whether the area is subject to seepage or spring flow.
         (f)   The elevation of normal water level in all proposed and natural
outlets.
         (g)   A profile below outlet for a sufficient distance to indicate the
natural gradient of the accepting natural outlet and/or stream channel.
         (h)   A cross section and profile and existing stream channels where
applicable.
         (i)   A ditch design and computations for all seeded, sodded, or bare
earth outlets, ditches and similar water conduction facilities.
      4.   Estimated Schedule And Phasing Of Development Of The Site:
 
Phase I   Stripping and/or clearing
Phase II  Rough grading and construction
Phase III Final grading and vegetative establishment
Phase IV  Maintenance
 
All site development plans submitted to the director of building and zoning for
approval shall show all the erosion and sediment control measures needed to
provide protection throughout all the phases of the construction listed above.
These plans shall also include any off site borrow and spoil areas, sewer
lines, utility lines, and haul and access road, and further indicate:
         (a)   The start of clearing date.
         (b)   Duration of exposure of disturbed areas.
         (c)   Installation of temporary sediment control measures (vegetative
and structural) by phase and date.
         (d)   Installation of storm drainage by phase and date.
         (e)   Paving on streets and parking areas, if any, by phase and date.
         (f)   Establishment of permanent vegetative cover (plans will show
what will be done to shorten the duration of exposure of disturbed areas as
soon after grading as possible), including seeding mixes and rates, type of
sod, seedbed preparation, seeding dates, lime and fertilizer application,
temporary seedings, if needed, mulching, or similar stabilization procedures.
         (g)   Details of all structural sediment control measures.
         (h)   Computations for sediment basins, if any.
      5.   Standards Incorporated: The standards and requirements of "Standards
And Specifications For Soil Sediment Control In Northeastern Illinois", as
adopted by the Kankakee County soil and water conservation district and the
Illinois environmental protection agency's "Standards And Specifications For
Soil Erosion And Sediment Control", adopted October 1987, are hereby
incorporated into this chapter and made a part hereof by this reference, for
purposes of exemplifying the considerations and factors which should enter into
the preparation of a site development plan. All mandatory requirements of the
above listed standards shall be met. (Ord. 07-20, 9-4-2007)
10-10-4-3: BUILDING PERMIT:
No building permit shall be issued for an intended building unless the proposed
drainage, earthwork and other improvements are in conformance with the site
development plan approved previously or as a part of the application for
building permit. (Ord. 07-20, 9-4-2007)
10-10-4-4: APPEALS:
The applicant, as well as any person aggrieved, may appeal the decision of the
building inspector. Within thirty (30) days after receipt of an appeal, the
plan commission shall schedule and hold a public hearing. The plan commission
shall render a decision within fifteen (15) days of the hearing. Factors to be
considered on review shall include, but not be limited to, possible saturation
of fill and unsupported cuts by water, both natural and domestic, runoff
surface waters that produce erosion, and silting of drainageways; nature and
type of soil or rock that when disturbed by the proposed grading may create
earth movement and produce slopes that cannot be landscaped, and excessive and
unnecessary scarring of the natural landscape through grading or removal of
vegetation. (Ord. 07-20, 9-4-2007)
10-10-4-5: RESPONSIBILITY:
Failure of the village officials to observe or recognize hazardous or unsightly
conditions or to recommend denial of the site development permit, or of the
plan commission to deny said permit, shall not relieve the permittee from
responsibility for the condition or damage resulting therefrom, and shall not
result in the village, its officers or agents being responsible for any
condition or damage resulting therefrom. (Ord. 07-20, 9-4-2007)
10-10-4-6: RETENTION OF PLANS:
Plans, specifications and reports for all site developments shall be retained
in original form or on microfilm by the building inspector. (Ord. 07-20, 9-4-
2007)
10-10-4-7: INSPECTIONS:
The director of building and zoning shall make inspections as hereinafter
required and shall either approve that portion of the work completed or shall
notify the permittee wherein the same fails to comply with the site development
plan. Where it is found by inspection that conditions are not substantially as
stated or shown in the said plan, the director of building and zoning may stop
further work until approval is obtained for a revised grading plan conforming
to the existing conditions. Plans for grading work, bearing the stamp of
approval of the director of building and zoning, shall be maintained at the
site during progress of the grading. Until the final inspection is made, a sign
issued by the village, indicating permission to grade has been granted by the
village, shall be prominently displayed on the front property line of the
property involved so as to be visible from the street on which the property
fronts. In order to obtain inspections in accordance with the following
schedule, the permittee shall notify the director of building and zoning at
least two (2) full working days before the said inspection is to be made.
   (A)   Rough Grading: When all rough grading has been completed; and
   (B)   Final Inspection: When all work, including installation, or all
drainage and other structures and required planting, has been completed. (Ord.
07-20, 9-4-2007)
10-10-4-8: RECORD DRAWINGS:
Upon completion of the improvements, the engineer shall provide a set of as
built plans to the building inspector along with a certification that the
completed improvements generally conform to the previously approved plans,
specifications and reports included in section
10-10-4-6 of this chapter. (Ord. 07-20, 9-4-2007)
10-10-5: NEIGHBORHOOD DRAINAGE PLANNING/SUBDIVISION PLATS:
Before approval of the final plat, the developer shall submit to the village
plan commission for their approval, a neighborhood drainage plan, showing, but
not limited to, the following:
   (A)   Existing elevations prior to any improvement at all proposed lot
corners.
   (B)   Proposed elevations at all proposed lot corners indicating an adequate
front, rear and side yard surface drainage scheme, following improvements.
   (C)   Proposed first floor elevation of all structures.
   (D)   Proposed storm sewers with their sizes, slopes, number and type of
inlets, etc.
   (E)   Storm water storage facilities accompanied by design calculations and
design details for all of the above. Before occupancy permit can be granted,
all first floor elevations and lot surface elevations shall coincide with
approved proposed elevations previously submitted above. (Ord. 07-20, 9-4-2007)
10-10-6: OPERATION STANDARDS AND REQUIREMENTS:
   (A)   Applicability: All earthmoving and grading operations not specifically
exempted by the provisions of this chapter shall comply with the applicable
standards and requirements set forth in this section, in addition to the other
requirements of this chapter.
   (B)   Handbooks Adopted By Reference: The standards and specifications of
"Erosion And Sediment Control Handbook, Kankakee County, Illinois", latest
edition, as compiled by the Kankakee County soil and water conservation
district and approved by the Kankakee County regional planning commission and
the Illinois environmental protection agency's "Standards And Specifications
For Soil Erosion And Sediment Control", adopted October 1987, are hereby
incorporated into this section and made a part hereof by this reference, for
the purpose of delineating procedures and methods of operation under
development plans approved in this chapter. In the event of conflict between
provisions of the said handbooks and other provisions of this chapter, the more
stringent requirements shall govern.
   (C)   Special Precautions:
      1.   If at any stage of the grading the director of building and zoning
determines by inspection that the nature of the formation is such that further
work as authorized by an existing permit is likely to imperil any property,
public way, watercourse or drainage structure, the building inspector may
require, as a condition to allowing the work to be done, that such reasonable
safety precautions be taken as he considers advisable to avoid the likelihood
of such peril. Special precautions may include, but shall not be limited to,
specifying a more level exposed slope, construction of additional drainage
facilities, berms, terracing, compaction, or cribbing, installation of plant
materials for erosion control, and reports of a registered engineer whose
recommendations may be made requirements for further work.
      2.   Where it appears that storm damage may result because the grading is
not complete, work may be stopped and the permittee required to install
temporary planting to control erosion, install temporary structures or take
such other measures as may be required to protect adjoining property or the
public safety. On large operations or where unusual site conditions prevail,
the building inspector may specify the time of starting grading and time of
completion or may require that the operations be conducted in specific stages
so as to ensure completion of protective measures or devices prior to the
advent of seasonal rains.
   (D)   Expiration Of Permit: Every site development permit shall expire by
limitation and become null and void if the work authorized by such permit has
not been commenced within one hundred eighty (180) days, or is not completed
within two hundred forty (240) days from date of issue; except that the
building inspector may, if the permit holder presents satisfactory evidence
that unusual difficulties have prevented work being started or completed within
the specified time limits, grant a reasonable extension of time if written
application is made before the expiration date of the said permit. (Ord. 07-20,
9-4-2007)
10-10-7: FEES AND BONDS:
   (A)   Fees: Filing and permit fees shall be set forth in the applicable
sections of this code and amendments thereto.
   (B)   Bonds: Upon approval of a site development plan or building permit
within the purview of this chapter, the developer shall post a performance bond
payable to the village, cashier's check, negotiable securities or establish an
escrow account in the amount of the estimated total cost of the site
development hereunder, as approved by the village, to ensure timely
satisfactory site development. (Ord. 07-20, 9-4-2007)
10-10-8: APPEALS AND VARIATIONS:
   (A)   Review And Appeal: The building inspector is hereby authorized and
directed to enforce all the provisions of this chapter. Upon review of property
subject to this chapter, such officer may require, by written thirty (30) day
notice, that such property be brought into compliance with this chapter. Any
person aggrieved by such determination may appeal such to the plan commission
of the village under the rules of that commission.
   (B)   Variations: The plan commission may authorize variations to any of the
requirements and regulations set forth in this chapter.
      1.   Application For Variance: Application for any variation shall be
made by a verified petition of applicant stating fully the grounds of the
application and of the facts relied upon by the petitioner. For the variation
to be granted, it shall be necessary that the plan commission find all of the
following facts with respect thereto:
         (a)   That the land is of such shape or size or is affected by such
physical conditions or is subject to such title limitations or record that it
is impossible or impractical for the subdivider to comply with all of the
regulations of this chapter.
         (b)   That the variation is necessary for the preservation and
enjoyment of a substantial property right of the petitioner.
         (c)   That the granting of the variation will not be detrimental to
the public welfare or injurious to other property in the vicinity of the
subject property.
      2.   Plan Commission: After public hearing thereon, the plan commission,
by resolution, may approve the site development permit application with the
variation and conditions it deems necessary or it may disapprove such site
development permit application and variation application, or it may take such
other action as is appropriate. (Ord. 07-20, 9-4-2007)
10-10-9: REVOCATION OF PERMIT:
   (A)   Authority: In the event any person holding a site development permit
pursuant to this chapter violates the terms of the permit, or conducts or
carries on said site development in such a manner as to materially adversely
affect the health, welfare, or safety of persons residing or working in the
neighborhood of the property of the said permittee, or conducts or carries on
said site development so that it is materially detrimental to the public
welfare or injurious to property or improvements in the neighborhood, the
building inspector shall revoke or suspend the site development permit.
   (B)   Procedure For Revoking Site Development Permit: No site development
permit shall be permanently revoked or suspended until a hearing is held by the
plan commission. Written notice of such hearing shall be served upon the
permittee, either personally or by certified mail, return receipt requested,
and shall state:
      1.   The grounds for complaint or reasons for the revocation or
suspension, in clear and concise language.
      2.   The time when, and the place where, such hearing is to be held. Such
notice shall be served by mailing by certified mail or personal service on the
permittee at least five (5) days prior to the date set for the hearing. At any
such hearing, the permittee shall be given an opportunity to be heard, and he
may call witnesses and present evidence on his behalf. Upon conclusion of such
hearing, the plan commission shall determine whether or not the permit shall be
suspended or revoked.
      3.   The plan commission shall hold the hearing to consider
recommendations for revocation or suspension of permits which have been
temporarily suspended at the next regularly scheduled meeting of the plan
commission at which all conditions of subsection (B)2 of this section can be
fulfilled. (Ord. 07-20, 9-4-2007)
10-10-10: VIOLATIONS AND PENALTIES:
   (A)   Standards And Specifications: All nonexempt developments, as set forth
in this chapter, shall comply with the standards and specifications set forth
by provisions of this chapter. It shall be unlawful for any person to initiate
such site development activities without a site development permit or building
permit or to carry on such site development activities other than as provided
in an approved site development plan. It shall be unlawful for the owner of any
property improved, graded, or developed pursuant to this chapter to alter or
change such site in contravention of the site development plan or allow the
site to remain in a condition which does not conform to the site development
plan.
   (B)   Penalties: Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter
shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor, shall be liable to a fine or penalty
as set forth in section
1-4-1 of this code and each day of violation shall be deemed a separate
offense. This penalty provision shall be in addition to all other rights and
remedies which the village may have, at law or equity, for an injunction or
other remedy and the village may pursue all remedies available to it in a court
or courts of law concurrently with proceeding to impose the penalties contained
therein. (Ord. 07-20, 9-4-2007)
CHAPTER 11
RECAPTURE FEES
SECTION:
10-11-1: Intent
10-11-2: Imposition Of Recapture Fee
10-11-3: Calculation Of Recapture Fee
10-11-4: Administration Of Recapture Fee
10-11-5: Variances And Exceptions
10-11-6: Credits
10-11-1: INTENT:
This chapter is intended to impose a recapture fee, payable at the time of
building permit issuance, in an amount based upon the gross square footage of
nonresidential development or the size of residential dwelling units in order
to finance public facilities, the demand for which is generated by new
development in designated development areas. The village is responsible for,
and will meet, through the use of general village revenues, all capital
improvement needs associated with existing development. (Ord. 07-20, 9-4-2007)
10-11-2: IMPOSITION OF RECAPTURE FEE:
No building permit shall be issued for a development in the village unless the
applicant heretofore has paid the recapture fee imposed. (Ord. 07-20, 9-4-2007)
10-11-3: CALCULATION OF RECAPTURE FEE:
The recapture fee for the sewer system shall be as provided in the following
table:
Dwelling Type PE Value Sewer Recapture Fee
Dwelling Type PE Value Sewer Recapture Fee
Detached single-family:   
2 bedroom     2.5      $3,530.00
3 bedroom     3.5      4,940.00
4 bedroom     4.5      6,350.00
5 bedroom     5.5      7,770.00
Attached single-family:   
1 bedroom     1        1,410.00
2 bedroom     2        2,820.00
3 bedroom     3        4,240.00
4 bedroom     4        5,650.00
Multi-family:   
0 bedroom     0.5      710.00
1 bedroom     1        1,060.00
2 bedroom     1.5      2,120.00
3 bedroom     2.5      3,530.00
Nonresidential:   
All           --       1,412.00
 
(Ord. 07-20, 9-4-2007)
10-11-4: ADMINISTRATION OF RECAPTURE FEE:
   (A)   Collection Of Recapture Fee: Recapture fees calculated and due
pursuant to this chapter shall be collected by the village prior to issuance of
a building permit in designated development subareas.
   (B)   Transfer Of Funds: Upon receipt of recapture fees, the village
treasurer shall be responsible for placement of such funds into a separate
account as specified.
   (C)   Establishment And Maintenance Of Account: The village treasurer shall
establish a separate interest bearing account in a bank authorized to receive
deposits of village funds. Interest earned by the account shall be credited to
that account and shall be used solely for the purpose specified for funds of
such account. The village treasurer shall maintain records for such account.
   (D)   Maintenance Of Records: The village treasurer shall maintain and keep
adequate financial records for such account, which shall show the source and
disbursement of all revenues, which shall account for all monies received, and
which shall ensure that the disbursement of funds from the account shall be
used solely and exclusively for the provision of projects specified in the
capital improvements program for the particular development subarea.
   (E)   Annual Review And Modification: The village shall annually, in
conjunction with the annual capital budget and capital improvements plan
adoption processes, review the development potential of the subarea and the
capital improvements plan, and make such modifications as are deemed necessary
as a result of:
      1.   Development occurring in the prior year;
      2.   Public facilities actually constructed;
      3.   Changing facility needs;
      4.   Inflation;
      5.   Revised cost estimates for public facilities;
      6.   Changes in the availability of other funding sources applicable to
public facility projects; and
      7.   Such other factors as may be relevant.
Modifications to the development potential, the capital improvements program,
and the recapture fee coefficients shall be recommended for adoption prior to
January 1 of each year and shall be effective on May 1. (Ord. 07-20, 9-4-2007)
10-11-5: VARIANCES AND EXCEPTIONS:
Petitions for variances and exceptions to the application of this chapter shall
be made to the president in accordance with procedures to be established by
resolution of the board. (Ord. 07-20, 9-4-2007)
10-11-6: CREDITS:
   (A)   A property owner may elect to construct a public facility listed in
the capital improvements plan. If the property owner elects to make such
improvement, the property owner must enter into the agreement with the village
prior to issuance of any building permit. In no event shall the village provide
a credit in an amount greater than the otherwise applicable recapture fee. If,
however, the amount of the credit is calculated to be greater than the amount
of the recapture fee due, the property owner may utilize such excess credit
toward recapture fees imposed on other building permits for development on the
same site and in the same ownership.
   (B)   The board must reasonably provide for credits for other past and
future monetary and nonmonetary contributions by the developer to the
construction of the same public facility, as follows:
      1.   Present value of amount contributed within the last year for any
land dedications, physical improvements, financial contributions or property
taxes;
      2.   Present land dedications and physical improvements;
      3.   Future land dedication, physical improvements, taxes, and user fees
for a period of time as approved by the village board.
   (C)   No credits shall be given for the construction of local on site
facilities required by zoning, subdivision, or other village regulations and
not included in the capital improvements program. (Ord. 07-20, 9-4-2007)
CHAPTER 12
CERTIFICATIONS
SECTION:
10-12-1: Certificates
10-12-1: CERTIFICATES:
   OWNERSHIP CERTIFICATE
STATE OF                      ) ss
COUNTY OF                           )
This is to certify that the undersigned, are the Owners of the land described
in the plat, and that they have caused the same to be surveyed and subdivided
as indicated thereon, for the uses and purposes therein set forth, that they
hereby dedicate to the public for use as streets any right or title they may
have to any land noted on the plat as streets, and do hereby acknowledge and
adopt the same under the style and title thereon indicated.
Dated this      Day of           , A.D., 20    .
   NOTARY CERTIFICATE
STATE OF                      ) ss
COUNTY OF                           )
I,                            , a Notary Public, in and for said County, in the
State aforesaid, do hereby certify that the people whose signatures appear in
the "Ownership Certificate" are personally known to me to be the same persons
whose names are subscribed to the foregoing instrument as such Owners and that
they appeared before me this day in person and acknowledged that they signed
and delivered the plat as their own free and voluntary act for the purposes
therein set forth.
Given under my hand and Notarial Seal at                ,                , this
     day of           , A.D., 20    .
   SCHOOL DISTRICT CERTIFICATE
To the best of the undersigned Owners' knowledge, the attached described
subdivision known as                                   lies within
Manteno Community                5 High School District
(Name of District) (Number of District)
Manteno Community                5 Grade School District
(Name of District) (Number of District)
Dated this      day of           , A.D., 20     .
                                              
   NOTARY CERTIFICATE
STATE OF                      ) ss
COUNTY OF                           )
I,                            , a Notary Public, in and for said County, in the
State aforesaid, do hereby certify that the people whose signatures appear in
the "School District Certificate" are personally known to me to be the same
persons whose names are subscribed to the foregoing instrument as such Owners
and that they appeared before me this day in person and acknowledged that they
signed and delivered the plat as their own free and voluntary act for the
purposes therein set forth.
Given under my hand and Notarial Seal at                     ,
                   , this      day of           , A.D., 20     .
                                , Notary Public
   VILLAGE ENGINEER'S CERTIFICATE
STATE OF ILLINOIS) ss
COUNTY OF                     )
Approved by the Village Engineer of Manteno, Illinois, on the      day of
          , A.D., 20     .
                                , Village Engineer
   PLANNING BOARD CERTIFICATE
STATE OF ILLINOIS) ss
COUNTY OF KANKAKEE)
Approved by the Plan Commission of the Village of Manteno, Illinois, at a
meeting held on the day of                      A.D., 20     .
                           , Chairman                          , Secretary
   SURVEYOR'S CERTIFICATE
STATE OF ILLINOIS) ss
COUNTY OF                  )
This is to certify that I,                  , Illinois Professional Surveyor
No.           , have surveyed and subdivided the following described property:
                           , dividing the same into lots as shown by the
annexed plat which is a correct representation of said survey and subdivision.
All distances are shown in feet and decimals thereof. I further certify that
all regulations enacted by the Village Board relative to subdivisions have been
complied with in the preparation of this plat.
Given under my hand and seal at            ,        , this      day of
         , A.D., 20     .
                                       I.P.L.S. #          
   TOPOGRAPHY
To the best of my knowledge no part of this subdivision is located within a
special flood hazard area as identified by the Federal Emergency Management
Agency, FIRM Maps, Panel Number           , Dated                  .
Dated this      day of          , A.D., 20     .
                                     , I.P.L.S. #         
   COUNTY CLERK'S CERTIFICATE
STATE OF ILLINOIS) ss
COUNTY OF KANKAKEE)
TO WHOM IT MAY CONCERN:
I,                , County Clerk of Kankakee County, Illinois, and custodian of
the records and files of said office, do hereby certify that I find from such
records and files, no delinquent general taxes, no unpaid current general
taxes, no delinquent special assessments on file against the tract of land
described on the attached plat of                             , and that there
are no unpaid deferred installments of special assessments against the said
property or any part thereof.
Dated at Kankakee, Illinois, this      day of           , A.D., 20     .
                               , County Clerk
   VILLAGE BOARD CERTIFICATE
STATE OF ILLINOIS) ss
COUNTY OF KANKAKEE)
Approved by the Village Board of Trustees of the Village of Manteno, Illinois,
at a meeting held on the      day of           , A.D., 20     .
                                                       
President   Village Clerk
   PUBLIC UTILITY EASEMENT
An easement is hereby reserved for the public for Public Utility Service, as
shown by the dotted lines on this plat, designated as "Public Utility Easement
or P.U.E.", for underground services for the purpose of serving the subdivision
and adjoining property and the right to use the highway right of way where
necessary including the right and authority to cross any lots in said
subdivision to provide utility service to said lot, to trim and keep trimmed
any trees that interfere with said public utility equipment; but same to be
used for gardens, shrubs, landscaping, and other purposes that do not interfere
with the use of said easement. No aboveground utility improvements shall be
installed where a public utility easement overlaps a drainage easement.
(Ord. 07-20, 9-4-2007)
   INGRESS / EGRESS EASEMENT
An easement is hereby reserved for and granted to unit, lot, and parcel owners,
their successors and assigns, and their invitees and licensees, for ingress and
egress across the surface of the property shown on this plat marked "Common
Area or Areas," any streets, alleys, or other right-of-ways, or any other
property designated by a separate instrument for such purposes, and recorded in
the office of the Kankakee County Recorder of Deeds.
The term "Common Area or Areas" is defined as a lot, parcel, or area of real
property, including real property surfaced with interior driveways and
walkways, the beneficial use and enjoyment of which is reserved in whole as an
appurtenance to the separately owned lots, parcels or areas within the
property, even though such areas may be designated on this plat by other terms.
   STORM-WATER AND DRAINAGE EASEMENT
An easement is hereby reserved for and granted to unit, lot, and parcel owners,
their successors and assigns, and their invitees and licensees, for storm-water
management and drainage upon, across and through the property shown on this
plat marked "Detention" or "Drainage," and any equipment, facilities, swales,
or pipes located thereupon or under designated for that purpose, which are not
otherwise dedicated or conveyed to the public, in general, and the location,
elevation, capacity and dimension of such property, equipment, facilities,
swales, or pipes shall not be altered or changed from those approved by the
Village of Manteno in the site improvement plans for the subdivision, nor shall
the flow of storm-water be restricted, blocked or altered absent the approval
of the Village of Manteno.
(Ord. 13-08, 6-3-2013)
CHAPTER 13
DETAILED SPECIFICATIONS
SECTION:
10-13-1: Details
10-13-1: DETAILS:
SANITARY SEWER, STORM SEWER AND STREET LIGHT EASEMENTS NOTE: The sanitary
sewer, storm sewer, and street light easements shown hereon are hereby granted
to the Village of Manteno.
The Village has the right to construct, reconstruct, operate, maintain, repair,
replace and renew sanitary sewers, storm sewers and water mains, lines and
pipes, (Village Utility Pipes) and all other appurtenances and equipment
incidental to, or necessary for the Village of Manteno in furnishing sanitary
sewer, storm sewer and street light service. (Village Utility Services)
The Village shall have the Right to enter upon the Property, as shown hereon to
make openings therein, and to excavate beneath the surface thereof for the
purpose of constructing, operating, maintaining, replacing, repairing or
renewing any facilities of the Village of Manteno and to carry on its business
of providing Village Utility Services by means of the facilities located in,
along or under the Property shown hereon.
The Village shall, after any excavation or construction within the Property
shown hereon, fill, level and restore the surface of the ground to
substantially the same condition it was in when entered upon by the Village of
Manteno, at its own cost and expense, as soon as practicable after such
excavation or construction is completed. Provided, however, the Village shall
not be required to repair, replace or restore any structures or pavement on the
Property.
PUBLIC UTILITY EASEMENTS
Provisions shall be made for public utility companies, including but not
limited to Northern Illinois Gas Company, Commonwealth Edison Company,
Ameritech Illinois a.k.a. Illinois Bell Telephone Company, and Comcast. The
respective utility companies shall be contacted for their most recent terms.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/a52ddd8667179438dfe82ac8fd74e09d8c5052bc/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2591.gif]
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/a52ddd8667179438dfe82ac8fd74e09d8c5052bc/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2593.gif]
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/a52ddd8667179438dfe82ac8fd74e09d8c5052bc/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2607.gif]
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/a52ddd8667179438dfe82ac8fd74e09d8c5052bc/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2635.gif]
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/a52ddd8667179438dfe82ac8fd74e09d8c5052bc/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2649.gif]
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/a52ddd8667179438dfe82ac8fd74e09d8c5052bc/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2673.gif]
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/a52ddd8667179438dfe82ac8fd74e09d8c5052bc/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2675.gif]
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/a52ddd8667179438dfe82ac8fd74e09d8c5052bc/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2681.gif]
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/a52ddd8667179438dfe82ac8fd74e09d8c5052bc/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2683.gif]
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/a52ddd8667179438dfe82ac8fd74e09d8c5052bc/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2685.gif]
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/a52ddd8667179438dfe82ac8fd74e09d8c5052bc/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2595.gif]
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/a52ddd8667179438dfe82ac8fd74e09d8c5052bc/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2597.gif]
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/a52ddd8667179438dfe82ac8fd74e09d8c5052bc/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2599.gif]
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/a52ddd8667179438dfe82ac8fd74e09d8c5052bc/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2601.gif]
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/a52ddd8667179438dfe82ac8fd74e09d8c5052bc/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2603.gif]
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/a52ddd8667179438dfe82ac8fd74e09d8c5052bc/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2609.gif]
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/a52ddd8667179438dfe82ac8fd74e09d8c5052bc/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2605.gif]
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/a52ddd8667179438dfe82ac8fd74e09d8c5052bc/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2611.gif]
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/a52ddd8667179438dfe82ac8fd74e09d8c5052bc/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2613.gif]
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/a52ddd8667179438dfe82ac8fd74e09d8c5052bc/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2615.gif]
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/a52ddd8667179438dfe82ac8fd74e09d8c5052bc/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2617.gif]
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/a52ddd8667179438dfe82ac8fd74e09d8c5052bc/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2619.gif]
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/a52ddd8667179438dfe82ac8fd74e09d8c5052bc/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2621.gif]
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/a52ddd8667179438dfe82ac8fd74e09d8c5052bc/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2623.gif]
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/a52ddd8667179438dfe82ac8fd74e09d8c5052bc/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2625.gif]
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/a52ddd8667179438dfe82ac8fd74e09d8c5052bc/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2627.gif]
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/a52ddd8667179438dfe82ac8fd74e09d8c5052bc/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2629.gif]
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/a52ddd8667179438dfe82ac8fd74e09d8c5052bc/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2631.gif]
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/a52ddd8667179438dfe82ac8fd74e09d8c5052bc/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2633.gif]
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/a52ddd8667179438dfe82ac8fd74e09d8c5052bc/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2633.gif]
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/a52ddd8667179438dfe82ac8fd74e09d8c5052bc/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2639.gif]
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/a52ddd8667179438dfe82ac8fd74e09d8c5052bc/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2641.gif]
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/a52ddd8667179438dfe82ac8fd74e09d8c5052bc/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2643.gif]
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/a52ddd8667179438dfe82ac8fd74e09d8c5052bc/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2645.gif]
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/a52ddd8667179438dfe82ac8fd74e09d8c5052bc/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2647.gif]
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/a52ddd8667179438dfe82ac8fd74e09d8c5052bc/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2651.gif]
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/a52ddd8667179438dfe82ac8fd74e09d8c5052bc/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2653.gif]
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/a52ddd8667179438dfe82ac8fd74e09d8c5052bc/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2655.gif]
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/a52ddd8667179438dfe82ac8fd74e09d8c5052bc/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2657.gif]
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/a52ddd8667179438dfe82ac8fd74e09d8c5052bc/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2659.gif]
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/a52ddd8667179438dfe82ac8fd74e09d8c5052bc/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2661.gif]
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/a52ddd8667179438dfe82ac8fd74e09d8c5052bc/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2663.gif]
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/a52ddd8667179438dfe82ac8fd74e09d8c5052bc/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2665.gif]
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/a52ddd8667179438dfe82ac8fd74e09d8c5052bc/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2667.gif]
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/a52ddd8667179438dfe82ac8fd74e09d8c5052bc/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2669.gif]
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/a52ddd8667179438dfe82ac8fd74e09d8c5052bc/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2671.gif]
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/a52ddd8667179438dfe82ac8fd74e09d8c5052bc/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2677.gif]
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/a52ddd8667179438dfe82ac8fd74e09d8c5052bc/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2679.gif]
(Ord. 07-20, 9-4-2007)
TITLE 11
IMPACT FEES
CHAPTER 1
GENERAL PROVISIONS
SECTION:
11-1-1: Short Title
11-1-2: Findings And Purpose
11-1-3: Intent
11-1-4: Donations Required
11-1-5: Donations Required From Properties Outside Village Corporate Limits
11-1-6: Donations Computed On Projected Population
11-1-7: Exhibit A, For Park Calculations
11-1-8: Exhibit B, For School Land Calculations
11-1-9: Exhibit C, For School Construction Calculations
11-1-1: SHORT TITLE:
These regulations shall be known, cited, and referenced as the DEVELOPMENT
IMPACT FEES ORDINANCE of the village of Manteno, Illinois. (Ord. 04-32, 1-24-
2005)
11-1-2: FINDINGS AND PURPOSE:
   (A)   Since 1990, the village has ranked among the fastest developing
communities in Kankakee County and southern Will County with a growth rate
exceeding the projections expressed in its comprehensive plan adopted in 1991.
   (B)   The population of the village increased by approximately eighty five
percent (85%) from three thousand four hundred sixty five (3,465) in 1990 to
six thousand four hundred fourteen (6,414) in 2000.
   (C)   The substantial and rapid population growth of the village directly
corresponds to the increase in residential housing starts since 1990 with
housing starts increasing by over three hundred forty eight percent (348%) from
1990 (29 single-family homes) to 2003 (130 single-family homes).
   (D)   Numerous factors have contributed to growth pressures in the village,
including, without limitation, the following:
      1.   Continued urbanization of the south suburban Chicago metropolitan
region.
      2.   Proximity and access to south suburban employment centers.
      3.   The general attractiveness of the rural, small community setting
offered by the village.
      4.   The decision to designate the Peotone area in Will County as the
site of the proposed south suburban regional airport.
   (E)   In order to exercise responsible growth management in its environs,
the village annexed in excess of one thousand four hundred (1,400) acres of
land during the period from 1993 to 2004. Current growth trends are expected to
continue based on the ongoing development of such annexed areas.
   (F)   Healthful, productive, and responsible community life depends, in
part, on the availability of adequate school facilities for the residents of
the village. Manteno is served by Manteno Community Unit School District 5,
which is expected to experience an increase of one thousand seventy two (1,072)
pupils by the year 2010 according to a development and enrollment study
conducted for the district in October 2002. The study questions School District
5's ability to accommodate the projected additional students with existing
facilities. School District 5 officials anticipate that as much as seventy
million dollars ($70,000,000.00) in new facilities may be required over the
next six (6) years to accommodate the projected student increase.
   (G)   The village recognizes that park land is a vital component of the
quality of life experienced by community residents. The village commitment to
advancing its park facilities program is exemplified by actions such as the
establishment of the Manteno recreation and parks commission in 1996.
   (H)   It is declared to be the policy of the village that the provision of
various public facilities required to serve new development is subject to the
control of the village in accordance with the comprehensive plan of the village
for the orderly, planned, efficient, and economical development of the village.
   (I)   New development causes and imposes increased and excessive demands
upon public facilities and services that are specifically and uniquely
attributable to those developments. Affected facilities and services include
the Manteno Community Unit School District 5 and the Manteno recreation and
parks commission system.
   (J)   The dramatic increase in the construction of residential buildings in
the village is expected to continue and is expected to place ever increasing
demands on Manteno Community Unit School District 5 and the Manteno recreation
and parks commission system.
   (K)   Development potential and property values are influenced and affected
by village policy as expressed in the comprehensive plan and as implemented by
the village zoning and subdivision ordinances and the capital improvement
budget.
   (L)   To the extent that new development places demands upon public
facilities which are specifically and uniquely attributable to that
development, those demands should be satisfied by requiring that developments
creating the demands pay the cost of meeting the demands.
   (M)   The amount of the development impact fees to be required of new
development shall be determined by the proportionate share cost of the
additional public facilities needed to support such development.
   (N)   The village board, after careful consideration, hereby finds and
declares that development impact fees required of new development to finance
specified public facilities, the demand for which is created by such
development, are in the best interests of the general welfare of the village
and its residents, are equitable, and do not impose an unfair burden on such
development. Therefore, the village board deems it necessary and desirable to
adopt this title as herein set forth. (Ord. 04-32, 1-24-2005)
11-1-3: INTENT:
This title is intended to require development impact fees, payable at the time
of building permit issuance, in an amount based upon the proportionate share of
the cost of the various public facilities required to serve new development.
(Ord. 04-32, 1-24-2005)
11-1-4: DONATIONS REQUIRED:
Unless otherwise provided for in an annexation agreement with the village, as a
condition of approval of a final plat of subdivision or of a final plat of a
planned unit development, each subdivider or developer shall be required to
dedicate land and/or make cash contributions in lieu of land for acquisition of
park and school sites; and cash donations for school construction and
recreation to serve the immediate and future needs of the residents of the
subdivision or planned unit development as hereinafter set forth. (Ord. 04-32,
1-24-2005)
11-1-5: DONATIONS REQUIRED FROM PROPERTIES OUTSIDE VILLAGE CORPORATE LIMITS:
In the event that land that is subject to subdivision approval by the village
is not within the corporate limits of the village at the time of approval of a
final plat of subdivision for the land, the impact fee shall be payable at the
time of the approval of the final plat of subdivision, unless the subdivider or
developer shall agree in a separate agreement with some form of financial
guarantee to pay the fees at the time another governmental body issues a
building permit. (Ord. 04-32, 1-24-2005)
11-1-6: DONATIONS COMPUTED ON PROJECTED POPULATION:
   (A)   For purposes of computing the amount of land donations or cash
contributions in lieu of land for park and school sites, and cash donations for
school construction and recreation facilities that will be required of each
subdivision or planned unit development to enable the village to provide
facilities and services to meet the needs of such subdivision or planned unit
development, its projected population density shall be computed in accordance
with the most current version of the table of estimated ultimate population per
dwelling unit set forth in sections
11-1-7, "Exhibit A, For Park Calculations",
11-1-8, "Exhibit B, For School Land Calculations", and
11-1-9, "Exhibit C, For School Construction Calculations", of this chapter.
   (B)   The current versions of the table of estimated ultimate population per
dwelling unit in sections
11-1-7,
11-1-8 and
11-1-9 of this chapter shall be used for all population estimates unless a
subdivider or developer files a written objection to the village data, together
with his or her own demographic study showing the estimated population to be
generated by his or her subdivision or planned unit development. In that event,
the final determination of the density formula to be used in such calculations
shall be made by the village's corporate authorities on the basis of the most
current version of the table of estimated ultimate population per dwelling
unit, data submitted by the subdivider or developer, and from other sources
which may be submitted to the village's corporate authorities by Manteno
Community Unit School District 5 and the Manteno recreation and parks
commission.
   (C)   Population density, age distribution and local conditions change over
the years and, accordingly, the table of estimated ultimate population per
dwelling unit in sections
11-1-7,
11-1-8 and
11-1-9 of this chapter shall be subject to periodic review and amendment, as
necessary, and in the sole and absolute discretion of the village's corporate
authorities. (Ord. 04-32, 1-24-2005)
11-1-7:EXHIBIT A, FOR PARK CALCULATIONS:
TABLE OF ESTIMATED ULTIMATE POPULATION PER DWELLING UNIT
                  Elementary Junior    High
Type Of Preschool Grades K-  High      School    Adults  Total Per Total Fee
Unit    0-4 Years 5 5-10     Grades 6- Grades 9- (18 and Unit      Per Unit
                  Years      8 11-13   12 14-17  up)
                             Years     Years
                     Elementary Junior    High
Type Of    Preschool Grades K-  High      School    Adults  Total Per Total Fee
Unit       0-4 Years 5 5-10     Grades 6- Grades 9- (18 and Unit      Per Unit
                     Years      8 11-13   12 14-17  up)
                                Years     Years
Single-family detached dwellings:
2 bedroom  0.113     0.136      0.048     0.020     1.700   2.017     $ 710.00
3 bedroom  0.292     0.369      0.173     0.184     1.881   2.899     1,020.00
4 bedroom  0.418     0.530      0.298     0.360     2.158   3.764     1,325.00
5 bedroom  0.283     0.345      0.248     0.300     2.594   3.770     1,327.00
or more
Single-family attached dwellings (i.e., townhouse dwellings and two-family
dwellings):
1 bedroom  0.000     0.000      0.000     0.000     1.193   1.193     420.00
2 bedroom  0.064     0.088      0.048     0.038     1.752   1.990     700.00
3 bedroom  0.212     0.234      0.058     0.059     1.829   2.392     842.00
4 bedroom  0.323     0.322      0.154     0.173     2.173   3.145     1,107.00
or more
Multiple-family dwellings and community residences:
Efficiency 0.000     0.000      0.000     0.000     1.294   1.294     455.00
1 bedroom  0.000     0.002      0.001     0.001     1.754   1.758     618.00
2 bedroom  0.047     0.086      0.042     0.046     1.693   1.914     673.00
3 bedroom  0.052     0.234      0.123     0.118     2.526   3.053     1,074.00
or more
 
Note:
The determination of the number of bedrooms contained in a building shall be
made by the village code enforcement officer. Rooms designated by an applicant
as den, library, study, sewing room, exercise room, or the like may be
designated by the code enforcement officer as bedrooms if they are suitable for
such accommodations.
(Ord. 04-32, 1-24-2005)
11-1-8:EXHIBIT B, FOR SCHOOL LAND CALCULATIONS:
TABLE OF ESTIMATED ULTIMATE POPULATION PER DWELLING UNIT
   Children Per Dwelling Unit
        Elementary           Junior              High
Type Of Grades K-  Grades K- High      Grades 6- School    Grades 9- Total Fee
Unit    5 5-10     5 Fee     Grades 6- 8 Fee     Grades 9- 12 Fee    Per Unit
        Years                8 11-13             12 14-17
                             Years               Years
        Elementary           Junior              High
Type Of Grades K-  Grades K- High      Grades 6- School    Grades 9- Total Fee
Unit    5 5-10     5 Fee     Grades 6- 8 Fee     Grades 9- 12 Fee    Per Unit
        Years                8 11-13             12 14-17
                             Years               Years
Single-family detached dwellings:
3       0.58       $580.00   0.26      $376.00   0.30      $ 720.00  $1,676.00
bedroom
4       0.64       640.00    0.38      550.00    0.42      1,008.00  2,198.00
bedroom
5
bedroom 0.86       860.00    0.68      985.00    0.57      1,368.00  3,213.00
or more
Single-family attached dwellings (i.e., townhouse dwellings and two-family
dwellings):
2       0.15       150.00    0.02      29.00     0.04      96.00     275.00
bedroom
3       0.47       470.00    0.13      188.00    0.16      384.00    1,042.00
bedroom
4
bedroom 0.93       930.00    0.34      492.00    0.41      984.00    2,406.00
or more
Low density apartment (i.e., 3- and 4-unit apartment buildings):
1       0.052      52.00     0.017     25.00     0.000     0.00      77.00
bedroom
2       0.225      225.00    0.064     93.00     0.063     151.00    469.00
bedroom
3       0.384      384.00    0.184     266.00    0.240     576.00    1,226.00
bedroom
4       0.670      670.00    0.250     362.00    0.330     792.00    1,824.00
bedroom
High density apartment (i.e., 5- and more unit apartment buildings):
1       0.026      $ 26.00   0.014     $ 20.00   0.007     $ 17.00   $ 63.00
bedroom
2       0.065      65.00     0.035     51.00     0.029     70.00     186.00
bedroom
3       0.150      150.00    0.080     116.00    0.092     221.00    487.00
bedroom
 
Note:
The determination of the number of bedrooms contained in a building shall be
made by the village code enforcement officer. Rooms designated by an applicant
as den, library, study, sewing room, exercise room, or the like may be
designated by the code enforcement officer as bedrooms if they are suitable for
such accommodations.
(Ord. 04-32, 1-24-2005)
11-1-9:EXHIBIT C, FOR SCHOOL CONSTRUCTION CALCULATIONS:
TABLE OF ESTIMATED ULTIMATE POPULATION PER DWELLING UNIT
   Children Per Dwelling Unit
        Elementary           Junior              High
Type Of Grades K-  Grades K- High      Grades 6- School    Grades 9- Total Fee
Unit    5 5-10     5 Fee     Grades 6- 8 Fee     Grades 9- 12 Fee    Per Unit
        Years                8 11-13             12 14-17
                             Years               Years
        Elementary           Junior              High
Type Of Grades K-  Grades K- High      Grades 6- School    Grades 9- Total Fee
Unit    5 5-10     5 Fee     Grades 6- 8 Fee     Grades 9- 12 Fee    Per Unit
        Years                8 11-13             12 14-17
                             Years               Years
Single-family detached dwellings:
3       0.58       $580.00   0.26      $260.00   0.30      $300.00   $1,140.00
bedroom
4       0.64       640.00    0.38      380.00    0.42      420.00    1,440.00
bedroom
5
bedroom 0.86       860.00    0.68      680.00    0.57      570.00    2,110.00
or more
Single-family attached dwellings (i.e., townhouse dwellings and two-family
dwellings):
2       0.15       150.00    0.02      20.00     0.04      40.00     210.00
bedroom
3       0.47       470.00    0.13      130.00    0.16      160.00    760.00
bedroom
4
bedroom 0.93       930.00    0.34      340.00    0.41      410.00    1,680.00
or more
Low density apartment (i.e., 3- and 4-unit apartment buildings):
1       0.052      52.00     0.017     17.00     0.000     0.00      69.00
bedroom
2       0.225      225.00    0.064     64.00     0.063     63.00     352.00
bedroom
3       0.384      384.00    0.184     184.00    0.240     240.00    808.00
bedroom
4       0.670      670.00    0.250     250.00    0.330     330.00    1,250.00
bedroom
High density apartment (i.e., 5- and more unit apartment buildings):
1       0.026      $ 26.00   0.014     $ 14.00   0.007     $ 7.00    $ 47.00
bedroom
2       0.065      65.00     0.035     35.00     0.029     29.00     129.00
bedroom
3       0.150      150.00    0.080     80.00     0.092     92.00     322.00
bedroom
 
Note:
The determination of the number of bedrooms contained in a building shall be
made by the village code enforcement officer. Rooms designated by an applicant
as den, library, study, sewing room, exercise room, or the like may be
designated by the code enforcement officer as bedrooms if they are suitable for
such accommodations.
(Ord. 04-32, 1-24-2005)
CHAPTER 2
SCHOOL DISTRICT LAND AND CASH CONTRIBUTIONS
SECTION:
11-2-1: Land Contribution To School District
11-2-2: Cash Contribution To School Districts
11-2-3: Contributions; Additional School Services
11-2-1: LAND CONTRIBUTION TO SCHOOL DISTRICT:
School sites shall be donated and conveyed to the village in accordance with
the following criteria:
   (A)   Number Of Students: The ultimate number of students that will be
generated by the proposed subdivision or planned unit development shall be
determined in accordance with the current version of the table of estimated
ultimate population per dwelling unit, set forth in section
11-1-8, "Exhibit B, For School Land Calculations", of this title.
   (B)   Land Donation To School: The amount of land required to be dedicated
shall be determined by dividing the estimated number of children in each of the
school age brackets hereinafter set forth that will be generated by the
proposed subdivision or planned unit development by the maximum recommended
number of students that can be served in the type of school assigned to such
age bracket, hereinafter set forth, and multiplying the quotient times the
minimum number of acres recommended for a school site, hereinafter set forth.
The product thereof shall be the acres of land deemed needed to have sufficient
land for school sites to serve the estimated increased children in each such
school classification.
   (C)   School Classifications And Size Of School Site: School classifications
and size of school sites shall be determined in accordance with the following
criteria:
 
                          Maximum Number Of Students Minimum Number Of Acres Of
School Classification By  For Each Such School       Land For Each School Site
Grade                     Classification             Of Such Classification/
                                                     Acres Per Student
Elementary schools grades 600                        15/0.025
K-5
Middle school grades 6-8  800                        29/0.0362
High school grades 9-12   1,250                      75/0.060
 
Note:
This schools classifications and size of school site data table shall be
subject to periodic review by Manteno Community Unit School District 5, and
School District 5 may request that the village's corporate authorities amend
such data from time to time. Any such request shall be made in writing by a
resolution adopted by the corporate authorities of School District 5.
   (D)   Location Of School Site: The comprehensive plan of the village shall
be used as a guideline in locating sites.
   (E)   Improved Sites: Prior to conveyance, all sites shall be prepared in
accordance with the village subdivision ordinance. All sites shall be conveyed
in a condition ready for full service of electrical, water, sewer and streets
(including enclosed drainage and curb and gutter) as applicable to the location
of the site, or acceptable provision made therefor. The sidewalks and trees
normally included within the definition of improved sites may be deferred due
to the delay time between conveyance of any such school sites and construction
of school facilities thereon.
   (F)   School Land Conveyed To The Village: School land conveyed to the
village shall be held by it for transfer to Manteno Community Unit School
District 5. Any school land conveyed to the village or thereafter transferred
to School District 5 which is not used for school purposes within twenty (20)
years after it is conveyed to the village shall be reconveyed to the developer.
(Ord. 04-32, 1-24-2005)
11-2-2: CASH CONTRIBUTION TO SCHOOL DISTRICTS:
   (A)   In addition to the land donation referred to in section
11-2-1 of this chapter, or a cash contribution in lieu of land referred to in
section
11-5-5 of this title, each subdivider or developer shall be required to make a
cash contribution to aid in the provision of necessary funds for the
construction, expansion or rehabilitation of a school for the use of the
children who will be generated by the proposed subdivision or planned unit
development, or for other improvements to the extent required in whole or part
by the existence of a school.
   (B)   The amount of the cash donation shall be determined by multiplying the
estimated number of children in the K-12 school age bracket that will be
generated by the proposed subdivision or planned unit development times one
thousand dollars ($1,000.00) per child as shown in section
11-1-9, "Exhibit C, For School Construction Calculations", of this title. The
contribution required for school construction shall be regularly updated,
pursuant to section
11-5-6 of this title. Funds contributed by a developer pursuant to this section
shall be deposited with the village treasurer to be held in a special fund
which shall not be used for any purpose other than for payment of the cost of
school construction, expansion or rehabilitation or for other improvements to
the extent required in whole or in part by the existence of a school. Any
interest which accrues shall also be used for the purposes set forth in this
section. Any cash donated to the village for school construction or expansion
purposes pursuant to this section which has not been expended for those
purposes within twenty (20) years shall be refunded to the developer.
   (C)   This cash contribution is a requirement of the village subdivision
code. However, in order not to make this requirement over onerous and to assist
developers in meeting this financial responsibility, the cash contributions
required in this section shall, unless specifically provided otherwise, be
payable upon the issuance of the building permit for each dwelling unit. (Ord.
04-32, 1-24-2005)
11-2-3: CONTRIBUTIONS; ADDITIONAL SCHOOL SERVICES:
   (A)   In the event that Manteno Community Unit School District 5 decides by
resolution at any time within five (5) years after approval of a plat of
subdivision or planned unit development that a land donation or cash in lieu of
a land donation will not be required by that School District 5 within the next
five (5) years to accommodate the number of students projected to be generated
by a proposed subdivision or planned unit development, but that such projected
number of students shall require the hiring of additional teachers and
expansion and creation of new programs, in order to provide School District 5
with funds to provide such services before tax revenues are generated by such
new subdivision or planned unit development, a cash contribution in the amount
of four thousand dollars ($4,000.00) per student shall be made to the village
on the basis of the most current version of the estimated ultimate population
per dwelling unit in section
11-1-8, "Exhibit B, For School Land Calculations", of this title, and all such
funds shall be paid over by the village to School District 5. The contribution
required for school services shall be regularly updated pursuant to section
11-5-6 of this title.
   (B)   The cash contributions required in this section shall be payable upon
the issuance of the building permit for each dwelling unit. (Ord. 04-32, 1-24-
2005)
CHAPTER 3
RECREATION AND PARKS LAND AND CASH CONTRIBUTIONS
SECTION:
11-3-1: Contributions; Park Sites
11-3-2: Credit For Private Open Spaces And Recreation Areas
11-3-3: Reservation Of Additional Land
11-3-1: CONTRIBUTIONS; PARK SITES:
Park sites shall be donated and conveyed to the village in accordance with the
following criteria:
   (A)   Number Of Residents: The ultimate number of residents that will be
generated by the proposed subdivision or planned unit development shall be
determined in accordance with the most current version of the table of
estimated ultimate population per dwelling unit in section
11-1-7, "Exhibit A, For Park Calculations", of this title. The amount of land
required to be dedicated for park sites in each subdivision or planned unit
development shall be determined by dividing the estimated population of such
subdivision or planned unit development by one thousand (1,000) and multiplying
the quotient times 8.8 acres of park land required for each one thousand
(1,000) people.
   (B)   Location Of Park Sites:
      1.   Except for combined school/park sites, as defined in chapter 4 of
this title, the comprehensive plan adopted by the village shall be used as a
guideline in locating sites. If the village has not planned a park within the
subdivision or planned unit development or the neighborhood in which the
subdivision or planned unit development is located, the park site shall be so
located as to be readily accessible to the people within such neighborhood.
Play and athletic fields and large park sites must be conveniently accessible
to the community at large.
      2.   Proper ingress, egress and curb cuts shall be provided. For water
areas, provisions must be made for pathway/driveway around these areas for
emergency vehicles and police patrol. Provisions for major use of a pathway/
driveway for bike riding, walkway, jogging trail and pedestrian traffic shall
be made.
   (C)   Environmental Quality:
      1.   Land to be dedicated for park sites shall be approved by the village
according to its environmental quality, as well as its suitability for active
and passive recreational activities. The land is to be dry and usable at all
times and not subject to flooding or used as detention. Should a donation
include a detention/retention area over and above the 8.8 acres required per
one thousand (1,000) of ultimate population estimated to be generated by the
development, the village may accept such additional land. No bogs or swamps
shall be acceptable as required park sites. Lakes and native prairie wetlands
shall not normally be acceptable, but may be approved by the village where the
area offers an exceptional amenity or the chance to protect a significant
natural resource. No site that has been part of an unlicensed landfill or a
toxic waste dump shall be acceptable as required park acreage.
      2.   Every effort shall be made to conserve for public use and enjoyment
those areas of significant natural and environmental value. Except in those
specific areas designated by the village for development as playfields or other
active areas, all trees, other plant materials, streams and other natural
features shall be retained on land to be dedicated for park site use, unless
specifically cited by the village for removal by the developer.
   (D)   Shape: Dedicated park sites shall be regularly configured to permit
efficient park programming, security and maintenance. Sites shall be
rectangular, or nearly rectangular, in shape with no interior angle of the
boundary line less than sixty degrees (60°), unless specifically approved by
the village. Narrow strips of land, small parcels that intrude into adjacent
orderly development, or leftover parcels that are oddly shaped or located shall
be avoided.
   (E)   Improvements:
      1.   Prior to conveyance, all sites shall be prepared in accordance with
the village subdivision ordinance and the village's storm water management
requirements, except as varied by the specific terms of this title. In
addition, in the event that a park site includes retention/detention areas,
slopes must be mowable and shall not exceed a five to one (5:1) slope. Those
areas, where by necessity and subject to the approval of the village engineer,
the grade exceeds five to one (5:1), must have a covering of flagstone or crown
vetch which eliminates the need to mow. All areas must be final graded and
seeded to meet park district specifications as to seed mixture.
      2.   All sites shall be conveyed in a condition ready for full service of
electrical, water, sewer and streets (including enclosed drainage and curb and
gutter) as applicable to the location of the site, or acceptable provision made
therefor. In addition, location of hydrants shall be made in conformance with
village requirements. Provision for water for watering vegetation and flooding
for ice skating shall be made where appropriate. Sewers for possible
installation of restrooms/shelter at a later date shall be provided.
Electricity for streetlights for future lighting for shelters and security
shall be provided. Security lighting along pathway shall be provided. (Ord. 04-
32, 1-24-2005)
11-3-2: CREDIT FOR PRIVATE OPEN SPACES AND RECREATION AREAS:
   (A)   When subdividers or developers provide their own open space for
recreation areas and facilities, it has the effect of reducing the demand for
local public recreational services. Depending on the size of the development, a
portion of the park and recreational area in subdivisions or planned unit
developments may, at the option of the village's corporate authorities, be
provided in the form of "private" open space in lieu of dedicated "public" open
space. The extent of such private open space shall be determined by the
village's corporate authorities, based upon the needs of the projected
residents and in conformance to the total park and recreation land for the
general area.
   (B)   In general, a substitution of private open space for dedicated parks
will imply a substantially higher degree of improvement and the installation of
recreational facilities, including equipment by the developer as part of his or
her obligation. Detailed plans of such areas, including specifications of
facilities to be installed, must be approved by the village's corporate
authorities, and before any credit is given for private recreation areas, the
subdivider or developer must guarantee that these private recreation areas will
be permanently maintained for such use by the execution of the appropriate
legal documents. (Ord. 04-32, 1-24-2005)
11-3-3: RESERVATION OF ADDITIONAL LAND:
Where the comprehensive or official plan of the village calls for a larger
amount of park and recreational land or school sites in a particular proposed
subdivision or planned unit development than the developer is required to
dedicate, the land needed beyond the developer's contribution shall, if so
determined by the village's corporate authorities, be reserved for subsequent
purchase by the village; provided, that such acquisition is made within one
year from the date of approval of the final plat. (Ord. 04-32, 1-24-2005)
CHAPTER 4
COMBINED SCHOOL AND PARK SITES
SECTION:
11-4-1: General Provisions
11-4-1: GENERAL PROVISIONS:
The developer, village, and Manteno Community Unit School District 5 may agree
that the developer shall dedicate and convey land (or contribute cash in lieu
of land pursuant to section
11-5-5 of this title) for combined school/park sites in lieu of land donations
otherwise required under chapters 2 and 3 of this title. The standards set
forth in chapters 2 and 3, and section
11-5-4 of this title as to location, improvements, and topography shall be
applicable to combined school and park sites. (Ord. 04-32, 1-24-2005)
CHAPTER 5
MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS
SECTION:
11-5-1: Distribution Of Plans And Plats
11-5-2: Time Of Conveyance Of Donations
11-5-3: Title Insurance, Survey, Assessment Plats
11-5-4: Topography And Grading
11-5-5: Cash Contributions In Lieu Of Land
11-5-6: Updating Of Required Contributions And Fair Market Value
11-5-1: DISTRIBUTION OF PLANS AND PLATS:
Copies of each subdivision plat or planned unit development plan shall be
transmitted to Manteno Community Unit School District 5 for its written
recommendations at the same time that they are transmitted to the planning
commission, but nothing herein contained shall be construed as requiring
receipt of a recommendation prior to action by the corporate authorities of the
village. (Ord. 04-32, 1-24-2005)
11-5-2: TIME OF CONVEYANCE OF DONATIONS:
All land donations required pursuant to this title shall be conveyed no later
than one hundred eighty (180) days after a written demand by the village. (Ord.
04-32, 1-24-2005)
11-5-3: TITLE INSURANCE, SURVEY, ASSESSMENT PLATS:
Each deed or other instrument conveying land to the village or Manteno
Community Unit School District 5 shall be accompanied by the following:
   (A)   A written commitment issued by a title insurer licensed to do business
in the state of Illinois to ensure that grantee has good merchantable title to
such real estate in an amount equal to its value computed pursuant to
subsection
11-5-5(E) of this chapter, subject only to then current general real estate
taxes as of the date of transfer; covenants, conditions and restrictions which
do not prohibit the use of the subject real estate for school or park use;
utility easements located within twenty feet (20') of the boundary lines of the
subject real estate; drainage ditches, feeders, laterals, and underground pipe
or other conduit.
   (B)   A current boundary line survey, prepared in compliance with the
Illinois plat act, 765 Illinois Compiled Statutes 205/0.01 et seq., or its
successor statute, by a state of Illinois licensed land surveyor.
   (C)   Except in instances where the real estate to be conveyed is a lot in a
recorded subdivision, an assessment plat and tax division petition in form
acceptable to the appropriate county authorities so that the land to be
conveyed can be assigned its own permanent real estate index number for
exemption purposes. (Ord. 04-32, 1-24-2005)
11-5-4: TOPOGRAPHY AND GRADING:
The slope, topography and geology of the dedicated site, as well as its
surroundings, must be suitable for its intended purposes. Grading on sites
dedicated for park and recreational uses shall not differ greatly from
surrounding land. (Ord. 04-32, 1-24-2005)
11-5-5: CASH CONTRIBUTIONS IN LIEU OF LAND:
Criteria for requiring cash contributions in lieu of land donations:
   (A)   Small Land Donations: Whenever, in the determination of the village,
any subdivision or planned unit development is so small that the school or park
sites required under the provisions of sections
11-2-1 and
11-3-1 and/or chapter 4 of this title will not be large enough for practical
development and maintenance as school or park sites, or when the available land
cannot meet the standards set forth in sections
11-2-1 and
11-3-1 of this title, or is otherwise inappropriate for park or recreational
purposes or for a school site, the village shall require the subdivider or
developer to pay a cash contribution in lieu of the land dedication required.
   (B)   Cash Contribution: The cash contribution to be paid in lieu of land
donations for school sites shall be held in trust by the village solely for use
in the acquisition of a school site to serve the immediate or future needs of
children from that subdivision or planned unit development, or for
reimbursement to Manteno Community Unit School District 5 for prior acquisition
of school sites for which bonds or other financing obligations are outstanding
which will serve immediate or future needs of children from that subdivision or
planned unit development, or for the improvement of any existing school site
which predominantly serves such needs, but not for the construction, repair or
rehabilitation of any school building or addition thereto.
   (C)   Cash Contribution For Park And Recreational Purposes: The cash
contribution to be paid in lieu of land donations for park and recreational
purposes shall be designated by the village solely for the acquisition of park
and recreational land which will be available to serve the immediate or future
needs of the residents of that subdivision or planned unit development or for
the improvement of existing park and recreational lands which predominantly
serve such needs.
   (D)   Time Limit For Cash Expenditure: If any portion of a cash contribution
in lieu of park or recreational land donations, or school site donations made
pursuant to this section is not expended for the purposes above set forth
within twenty (20) years from the date of its receipt, it shall be refunded to
the subdivider or developer who made such contribution.
   (E)   Fair Market Value: The amount of cash contributions in lieu of land
shall be based on the "fair market value" of land in the proposed subdivision
or planned unit development improved as specified in sections
11-2-1 and
11-3-1 of this title that otherwise would have been donated for park,
recreational and school sites. The village's corporate authorities have
determined that the present fair market value of such improved land in and
surrounding village is forty thousand dollars ($40,000.00) per acre. Such
figure shall be regularly updated pursuant to section
11-5-6 of this chapter, and shall be used in making any calculation herein
unless the subdivider or developer files a written objection thereto. In the
event of any such written objection, the developer shall submit an appraisal
showing the fair market value of such improved land in the area of his or her
development or other evidence thereof and final determination of such fair
market value per acre of such improved land shall be made by the corporate
authorities based upon such information submitted by the subdivider or
developer and from other sources which may be submitted to the corporate
authorities by the park district, school districts or others.
   (F)   Combinations: There will be situations in subdivisions or planned unit
developments when, in the determination of the village, a combination of land
donation and cash contribution in lieu of land is appropriate. These occasions
will arise when:
      1.   Only a portion of the land to be developed is proposed as the
location for a park or school site. That portion of the land within the
subdivision or planned unit development falling within the park or school site
shall be conveyed as aforesaid, and cash shall be donated by the developer, and
cash shall be donated in an amount equal to the difference between the fair
market value of the land donated and the fair market value of the land required
to be donated under sections
11-2-1 and
11-3-1 of this title.
      2.   A major part of a local park or recreation site or school site has
already been acquired and only a small amount of land is needed from the
proposed subdivision or planned unit development to complete the site. The
remaining amount of land shall be donated by the developer, and cash shall be
donated in an amount equal to the difference between the fair market value of
the land donated and the fair market value of the land required to be donated
under sections
11-2-1 and
11-3-1 of this title.
   (G)   Prorated: The cash contributions required in this section shall be
prorated and payable upon the issuance of the building permit for each dwelling
unit. (Ord. 04-32, 1-24-2005)
11-5-6: UPDATING OF REQUIRED CONTRIBUTIONS AND FAIR MARKET VALUE:
Population density, age distribution, land values, the cost of providing park,
school and village services, construction costs and other local conditions
change over the years. Therefore, the specific formula for the dedication of
land, or the payment of fees in lieu thereof, the required contribution for
school construction, police, fire, library and administrative services, and the
fair market value of land in and around the village shall be reviewed at least
every two (2) years and amended as necessary, and in the sole and absolute
discretion of the village's corporate authorities. (Ord. 04-32, 1-24-2005)
CHAPTER 6
ANNEXATION AGREEMENTS
SECTION:
11-6-1: Impact Fees Set Forth In Annexation Agreements
11-6-1: IMPACT FEES SET FORTH IN ANNEXATION AGREEMENTS:
Notwithstanding anything to the contrary in this title, any impact fees
established in an annexation agreement between the village and a developer or
subdivider shall supersede the fees otherwise established in this title,
including any fees otherwise provided for in chapter 5 of this title, and the
terms of payment of any such impact fees in an annexation agreement provide
that impact fees are to be paid in accordance with this title, then the amount
and manner of payment provided in this title shall apply. (Ord. 04-32, 1-24-
2005)
CHAPTER 7
INDEMNIFICATION; REMEDIES
SECTION:
11-7-1: Intergovernmental Agreement
11-7-1: INTERGOVERNMENTAL AGREEMENT:
Manteno Community Unit School District 5 shall be required, as a condition of
receiving the dedications or donations hereunder, to enter into a binding,
written intergovernmental agreement with the village, acceptable in form and
content to the village attorney, providing for the indemnification and holding
harmless of the village from any loss, claims and causes of actions of every
kind that may be incurred by the village as a result, either directly or
indirectly, of the enactment of this title, or the administration or
enforcement thereof, including any loss, claims, or causes of action incurred
as a result of a lawsuit brought or threatened by School District 5. The
intergovernmental agreement shall provide that if the village is sued by any
subdivider or developer as a result, directly or indirectly, of the enactment
of this title, the village may, at its option, undertake the defense, and the
village's costs and expenses related thereto, including attorney fees, shall be
immediately reimbursed by School District 5, as the case may be. Unless
otherwise specifically provided, the provisions of this title shall be an
implied condition of every intergovernmental agreement entered into pursuant to
this title. Where the Manteno Community Unit School District 5 improperly uses
funds or fails to use funds and does not return same as specified in this
title, the village may sue School District 5 and shall be entitled to recover
as a part of the judgment therein, or any settlement thereof, all costs and
expenses, including attorney fees, incurred by the village. (Ord. 04-32, 1-24-
2005)
