Comprehensive Ordinance List
Publisher's Note: The following table lists all ordinances passed by the
Village of Marissa. The table includes links to the ordinances, as maintained
in PDF format. For other legislation, including ordinances passed prior to
2025, please contact the Village of Marissa.
 
Ordinances that amend the Code and are not yet effective have their
identifiying information highlighted in yellow. Changes made by those
ordinances are not incorporated into the text of the Code until the amending
ordinances are effective. Ordinances that do not affect the code have been
grayed out.
 
Jump to:
2025 Ordinances
2025 Ordinances
 
Ord. No. Adopt. Date Short Title and Code Sections Affected
                     Amending Village Board meetings
25-04    6-2-2025     
                     30.046
                     Enacting a code of ordinances for the Village of Marissa
25-05    6-18-2025    
                     ADO
                     Amending installation and maintance of service lines
25-06    7-21-2025    
                     53.019, 54.004
                     Amending Ch. 150 re: Swimming pools
25-08    8-18-2025    
                     150.075; Repealing 150.076
                     Repealing owner occupied mobile housing
25-09    10-20-2025   
                     151.020
                    
 
 
VILLAGE OF MARISSA, ILLINOIS
CODE OF ORDINANCES
2025 S-1 Supplement contains:
Local legislation current through Ord. 25-08, passed 8-18-2025
Published by:
American Legal Publishing
525 Vine Street, Suite 310
Cincinnati, Ohio 45202
Tel: (800) 445-5588
Internet: http://www.amlegal.com
TITLE I: GENERAL PROVISIONS
   Chapter
      
10.   RULES OF CONSTRUCTION; GENERAL PENALTY
      
11.   CITY STANDARDS
CHAPTER 10: RULES OF CONSTRUCTION; GENERAL PENALTY
Section
   
10.001   Title of code
   
10.002   Definitions
   
10.003   Section headings
   
10.004   Rules of construction
   
10.005   Official time
   
10.006   Revivor; effect of amendment or repeal
   
10.007   Reference to other sections
   
10.008   Conflicting provisions
   
10.009   Amendments to code; alterations
   
10.010   Severability
   
10.011   Reference to public office or officer
   
10.012   Errors and omissions
   
10.013   Ordinances repealed
   
10.014   Ordinances unaffected
   
10.015   Ordinances saved
   
10.016   Technical codes
   
10.017   Catchlines; historical and statutory references
   
10.018   Public utility ordinances
   
10.019   Court proceedings
   
10.020   Village Clerk’s certificate
 
   
10.999   General penalty
§ 10.001 TITLE OF CODE.
   (A)   This codification by and for the Village of Marissa, upon the adoption
by the Board of Trustees of Trustees, is hereby declared to be and shall
hereafter constitute the official “Revised Code of Ordinances of the Village.”
The Revised Code of Ordinances shall be known and cited as the “Village Code,”
and it is hereby published by authority of the Board of Trustees and shall be
kept up-to-date as provided in §
10.999 under the direction of the Village Attorney, acting for said Board of
Trustees. Any reference to the number of any section contained herein shall be
understood to refer to the position of the same number, its appropriate chapter
and division heading and to the general penalty clause relating thereto as well
as to the section itself when reference is made to this Village Code by title
in any legal document.
(65 ILCS 5/1-2-3) (Prior Code, § 1-1-1)
   (B)   The Village Code, as hereby presented in printed form, shall hereafter
be received without further proof in all courts and in all administrative
tribunals of this state as the ordinances of the village of general and
permanent effect, except the excluded ordinances enumerated in §
10.014.
(65 ILCS 5/1-2-6) (Prior Code, § 1-1-2)
§ 10.002 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this code, the following definitions shall apply unless
the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   AGENT. A person acting on behalf of another.
   ANOTHER. When used to designate the owner of property which is the subject
of an offense, includes not only natural persons, but also every other owner of
property.
   BOARD OF TRUSTEES. The Board of Trustees of the Village of Marissa.
   CORPORATE AUTHORITIES. The Board of Trustees of the Village of Marissa.
(65 ILCS 5/1-1-2)
   COUNTY. The County of St. Clair.
   COUNTY BOARD. The County Board of St. Clair County, Illinois.
(5 ILCS 70/1.07)
   COURT. Construed to mean any court of competent jurisdiction.
   DECREE. Synonymous with JUDGMENT.
(5 ILCS 70/1.24)
   ELECTORS. Persons qualified to vote for elective officers at municipal
elections.
(65 ILCS 5/1-1-2)
   EMPLOYEES. Whenever reference is made in this code to a village employee by
title only, this shall be construed as though followed by the words “of the
village.”
   EXECUTIVE OFFICER. Words used for an executive or ministerial officer may
include any deputy or other person performing the duties of that officer,
either generally or in special cases.
(5 ILCS 70/1.08)
   FEE or FEES. A sum of money charged by the village for carrying on of a
business, profession, or occupation.
   FISCAL YEAR. Begins on May l of each year and ends on April 30 of the
following year.
(65 ILCS 5/1-1-2[5])
   HERETOFORE or HEREAFTER. HERETOFORE means any time previous to the day on
which the ordinance, resolution, or statute takes effect; HEREAFTER means at
any time after that date.
(5 ILCS 70/1.17)
   HIGHWAY, ROAD, or STREET. May include any road laid out by authority of the
United States, or of the state, or of any town or county of the state, and all
bridges thereupon. (See the definition of STREET.)
(5 ILCS 70/1.16)
   ILCS. Illinois Compiled Statutes, 1992, as heretofore and hereafter amended.
   KEEPER or PROPRIETOR. Includes all persons, whether acting by themselves, or
as a servant, agent, or employee.
   KNOWINGLY. Imports only a knowledge that the facts exist which bring the act
or mission within the provisions of this code. It does not require any
knowledge of the unlawfulness of such act or omission.
   LAND or REAL ESTATE. Includes rights and easements of an incorporeal nature.
   LEGAL HOLIDAY. The holidays as authorized and recognized by the Board of
Trustees in the employee agreement.
   LICENSE. The permission granted for the carrying on of a business,
profession or occupation.
   MAY. The act referred to is permissive.
   MAYOR. The Village President or President of the Board of Trustees of the
Village of Marissa.
(65 ILCS 5/1-1-2.1)
   MISDEMEANOR. Any offense deemed a violation of the provisions of this code
of ordinances which is a lesser offense than a felony as defined by state law.
   MONTH. A calendar month.
(5 ILCS 70/1.10)
   MUNICIPAL CODE. The Illinois Municipal Code, 65 ILCS 5.
   NEGLECT, NEGLIGENCE, NEGLIGENT, and NEGLIGENTLY. Import a want of such
attention to the nature of probable consequences of the act of omission as a
prudent human ordinarily bestows in acting in his or her own concern.
   NUISANCE. Anything offensive or obnoxious to the health and welfare of the
inhabitants of the village or any act or thing repugnant to or creating a
hazard to or having a detrimental effect on the property of another person or
to the community.
   OATH. Includes affirmation, and SWEAR includes affirm.
(5 ILCS 70/1.12)
   OCCUPANT. As applied to a building or land, includes any person who occupies
the whole or any part of such building or land whether alone or with others.
   OFFENSE. Any act forbidden by any provision of this code or the omission of
any act required by the provisions of this code.
   OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES.
      (1)   Whenever reference is made in this code to a village officer or
employee by title only, this shall be construed as though followed by the words
“of the village” and shall be taken to mean the officer or employee of the
village having the title mentioned or performing the duties indicated.
      (2)   No provision of this code designating the duties of any officer or
employee shall be so construed as to make such officer or employee liable for
any fine or penalty provided in this code for a failure to perform such duty,
unless the intention of the Board of Trustees to impose such a fine or penalty
on such officer or employee is specifically and clearly expressed in the
section creating the duty.
   OFFICIAL TIME. Central Standard Time shall be the official time for the
transaction of village business, except during applicable Daylight Saving Time
set by national or state standards when the official time shall be advanced one
hour. All clocks and other timepieces in or upon public buildings or other
premises maintained by or at the expense of the village shall be set and run at
the official time prescribed by this definition.
   OPERATOR. The person who is in charge of any operation, business, or
profession.
   OWNER. When applied to property, includes any part-owner, joint-owner,
purchaser, and seller under a contract and/or deed, or tenant in common of the
whole or part of the property, and includes any beneficiary of a land trust
which owns property.
   PERSON.
      (1)   Any legal person; includes any natural individual, firm, trust,
partnership, association, corporation, joint ventures, and bodies politic, in
his or her, or its own capacity as administrator, conservator, executor,
trustee, receiver or other representative appointed by the court.
      (2)   Whenever the word PERSON is used in any section of this code
prescribing a penalty or fine as applied to partnerships or any such word as
applied to corporations, it shall include the officers, agents, or employees
thereof who are responsible for any violation of said section.
(5 ILCS 70/1.05)
   PERSONAL PROPERTY. Includes all property except real; every description of
money, goods, chattels, effects, evidence of rights in action, and all written
instruments by which any pecuniary obligation, right, or title to property is
created, acknowledged, transferred, increased, defeated, discharged, or
diminished and every right or interest therein.
   POLICE OFFICERS. Police officers employed and in the service of the Village
of Marissa. POLICE FORCE shall be construed to include those persons in the
employ of a village as members of the Police Department, who are or shall
hereafter be appointed and sworn as POLICE OFFICERS.
(5 ILCS 70/1.20)
   PREMISES. As applied to property, includes land and buildings.
   PROPERTY. Includes real, personal, mixed estates, and other interests.
   PUBLIC AUTHORITY. Includes school districts, units of legal government, the
village, county, state, or federal governments, officers and agencies thereof,
or any commissions or committees thereof, or any duly authorized public
official.
   PUBLIC PLACE. Includes any street, sidewalk, park, cemetery, school yard,
body of water or watercourse, public conveyance, or any other place for the
sale of merchandise, public accommodation, or amusement.
   REAL PROPERTY. Includes lands, tenements, and hereditaments.
   REGISTERED MAIL. Includes certified mail, and certified mail includes
REGISTERED MAIL.
   RETAILER. Unless otherwise specifically defined, shall be understood to
relate to the sale of goods, merchandise, articles, or things in small
quantities direct to the consumer.
   SHALL. The act referred to is mandatory.
   SIDEWALK. The portion of the street between the curb lines, or the lateral
lines of a roadway, and the adjacent property lines, intended for use of
pedestrians.
(625 ILCS 5/1-188)
   SPECIAL DISTRICTS. The meaning ascribed in Article VII of the Constitution
of the State of Illinois of 1970.
(5 ILCS 70/1.29)
   STATE. The State of Illinois.
   STREET. Where the context admits, includes alleys, lanes, courts,
boulevards, squares, and other public thoroughfares.
   TENANT or OCCUPANT. As applied to premises, includes any person holding a
written or oral lease, or who actually occupies the whole or any part of the
premises, alone or with others.
   THIS CODE or THIS CODE OF ORDINANCES. The village code hereby adopted, and
as hereinafter modified by amendment, revision, and by the adoption of new
titles, chapters, or sections.
   UNITS OF LOCAL GOVERNMENT. The meaning established in § 1 of Article VII of
the Constitution of the State of Illinois of 1970.
(5 ILCS 70/1.28)
   WEEK. Seven consecutive days.
   VILLAGE. The Village of Marissa.
   WHOEVER. Includes all persons, natural and artificial; partners; principals,
agents, and employees; and all officials, public or private.
   WHOLESALER and WHOLESALE DEALER. Unless otherwise specifically defined,
shall be understood to relate to the sale of goods, merchandise, articles, or
things in quantity to persons who purchase for the purpose of resale.
   WILLFULLY. When applied to the intent with which an act is done or omitted
implies simply a purpose or willingness to commit the act or make the omission
referred to. It does not require any intent to violate law, or to injure
another, or to acquire an advantage.
   WRITTEN or IN WRITING. Includes printing, electronic, and any other mode of
representing words and letters, but when the written signature of any person is
required by law on any official or public writing or bond, required by law,
except as otherwise provided by law, it shall be:
      (1)   In the proper handwriting of that person, or in case he or she is
unable to write, his or her proper mark; or
      (2)   An electronic signature as defined in the Uniform Electronic
Transactions Act, 815 ILCS 333/2(8), except as otherwise provided by law.
(5 ILCS 70/1.15)
   YEAR. A calendar year unless otherwise expressed; and the word YEAR alone is
equivalent to the expression “Year of Our Lord.”
(5 ILCS 70/1.10)
(Prior Code, § 1-1-16)
§ 10.003 SECTION HEADINGS.
   Headings and captions used in this code are employed for reference purposes
only and shall not be deemed a part of the text of any section.
§ 10.004 RULES OF CONSTRUCTION.
   (A)   Words and phrases shall be read in context and construed according to
the rules of grammar and common usage. Words and phrases that have acquired a
technical or particular meaning, whether by legislative or judicial definition
or otherwise, shall be construed accordingly.
   (B)   As used in this code, unless the context otherwise requires, the
following rules will be followed.
      (1)   The singular shall include the plural, and the plural shall include
the singular.
(5 ILCS 70/1.03)
      (2)   Words of one gender shall include the other genders.
(5 ILCS 70/1.04)
      (3)   Words in the present tense shall include the future.
(5 ILCS 70/1.02)
      (4)   AND may be read OR, and OR may be read AND, if the context admits.
   (C)   The time within which any act provided by law is to be done shall be
computed by excluding the first day and including the last, unless the last day
is Saturday or Sunday or is a holiday as defined or fixed in any statute now or
hereafter in force in this state, and then it shall also be excluded. If the
day succeeding Saturday, Sunday, or a holiday is also a holiday or a Saturday
or Sunday, then the succeeding day shall also be excluded.
(5 ILCS 70/1.11)
   (D)   When the law requires an act to be done which may by law as well be
done by an agent as by the principal, the requirement shall be construed to
include all such acts when done by an authorized agent.
   (E)   Words purporting to give joint authority to three or more municipal
officers or other persons shall be construed as giving authority to a majority
of the officers or persons.
(5 ILCS 70/1.09)
   (F)   These rules of construction shall not apply to any provision of this
code which shall contain any express provision excluding that construction, or
when the subject matter or context of this code may be repugnant thereto.
   (G)   All general provisions, terms, phrases, and expressions shall be
liberally construed in order that the true intent and meaning of the President
and Board of Trustees may be fully carried out.
(5 ILCS 70/1.01)
   (H)   The provisions of any ordinance, insofar as they are the same as those
of any prior ordinance, shall be construed as a continuation of the prior
provisions, and not as a new enactment.
(5 ILCS 70/2)
(Prior Code, § 1-1-15)
§ 10.005 OFFICIAL TIME.
   The official time for the village shall be as set by federal law.
§ 10.006 REVIVOR; EFFECT OF AMENDMENT OR REPEAL.
   (A)   The repeal of a repealing ordinance does not revive the ordinance
originally repealed, nor impair the effect of any saving clause therein.
   (B)   The reenactment, amendment, or repeal of an ordinance does not do any
of the following, except as provided in division (C) below:
      (1)   Affect the prior operation of the ordinance or any prior action
taken thereunder;
      (2)   Affect any validation, cure, right, privilege, obligation, or
liability previously acquired, accrued, accorded, or incurred thereunder;
      (3)   Affect any violation thereof or penalty, forfeiture, or punishment
incurred in respect thereto, prior to the amendment or repeal; or
      (4)   Affect any investigation, proceeding, or remedy in respect of any
privilege, obligation, liability, penalty, forfeiture, or punishment. The
investigation, proceeding, or remedy may be instituted, continued, or enforced,
and the penalty, forfeiture, or punishment imposed, as if the ordinance had not
been repealed or amended.
   (C)   If the penalty, forfeiture, or punishment for any offense is reduced
by a reenactment or amendment of an ordinance, the penalty, forfeiture, or
punishment, if not already imposed, shall be imposed according to the ordinance
as amended.
§ 10.007 REFERENCE TO OTHER SECTIONS.
   (A)   Wherever in a penalty section reference is made to a violation of a
section or an inclusive group of sections, the reference shall be construed to
mean a violation of any provision of the section or sections included in the
reference.
   (B)   References in this code to action taken or authorized under designated
sections of this code include, in every case, action taken or authorized under
the applicable legislative provision which is superseded by this code.
   (C)   Whenever in one section reference is made to another section hereof,
the reference shall extend and apply to the section referred to as subsequently
amended, revised, recodified, or renumbered, unless the subject matter is
changed or materially altered by the amendment or revision and the context
clearly indicates that the reference to the section as amended or revised was
not intended.
§ 10.008 CONFLICTING PROVISIONS.
   (A)   If the provisions of different codes, chapters, or sections of these
codified ordinances conflict with or contravene each other, the provisions
bearing the latest passage date shall prevail.
   (B)   If the conflicting provisions bear the same passage date, the conflict
shall be construed so as to be consistent with the meaning or legal effect of
the questions of the subject matter taken as a whole.
§ 10.009 AMENDMENTS TO CODE; ALTERATIONS.
   (A)   All ordinances passed subsequent to this code which amend, repeal, or
in any way affect this code may be numbered in accordance with the numbering
system of this code and printed for inclusion herein, or in the case of
repealed chapters, sections, and subsections, or any part thereof, by
subsequent ordinances, the repealed portions may be excluded from the code by
the omission from reprinted pages affected thereby, and the subsequent
ordinances as numbered and printed or omitted, in the case of repeal, shall be
prima facie evidence of subsequent ordinances until this code of ordinances and
subsequent ordinances numbered or omitted are readopted as a new code of
ordinances by the Board of Trustees.
(65 ILCS 5/1-2-3) (Prior Code, § 1-1-3)
   (B)   (1)   It shall be deemed unlawful for any person to alter, change,
replace, or deface in any way, any section or any page of this code in such a
manner that the meaning of any phrase or order may be changed or omitted.
Replacement pages may be inserted according to the official instructions when
so authorized by the Board of Trustees. The Village Clerk shall see that the
replacement pages are properly inserted in the official copies maintained in
the office of the Village Clerk.
      (2)   Any person having in his or her custody an official copy of this
code shall make every effort to maintain said code in an up-to-date and
efficient manner. He or she shall see to the immediate insertion of new or
replacement pages when such are delivered to him or her or made available to
him or her through the office of the Village Clerk. Said code books, while in
actual possession of officials and other interested persons, shall be and
remain the property of the village and shall be returned to the office of the
Village Clerk upon termination of office or separation of duties.
(Prior Code, § 1-1-4)
§ 10.010 SEVERABILITY.
   If any provisions of a section of these codified ordinances or the
application thereof to any person or circumstance is held invalid, the
invalidity shall not affect other provisions or applications of the section or
related sections which can be given effect without the invalid provision or
application, and to this end the provisions are severable.
(Prior Code, § 1-1-11)
§ 10.011 REFERENCE TO PUBLIC OFFICE OR OFFICER.
   Reference to a public office or officer shall be deemed to apply to any
office, officer, or employee of the village exercising the powers, duties, or
functions contemplated in the provision, irrespective of any transfer of
functions or change in the official title of the functionary. These references
shall also include the designee or agent of the officer or office, unless the
law or the context clearly requires otherwise.
§ 10.012 ERRORS AND OMISSIONS.
   If a manifest error is discovered consisting of the misspelling of any word
or words, the omission of any word or words necessary to express the intention
of the provisions affected, the use of a word or words to which no meaning can
be attached, or the use of a word or words when another word or words was
clearly intended to express the intent, the spelling shall be corrected, and
the word or words supplied, omitted, or substituted as will conform with the
manifest intention, and the provision shall have the same effect as though the
correct words were contained in the text as originally published. No alteration
shall be made or permitted if any question exists regarding the nature or
extent of the error.
§ 10.013 ORDINANCES REPEALED.
   This code, from and after its effective date, shall contain all of the
provisions of a general nature pertaining to the subjects herein enumerated and
embraced. All prior ordinances pertaining to the subjects treated by this code
of ordinances shall be deemed repealed from and after the effective date of
this code of ordinances.
(Prior Code, § 1-1-8)
§ 10.014 ORDINANCES UNAFFECTED.
   All ordinances of a temporary or special nature (including, but not limited
to, tax levy ordinances; appropriation ordinances; ordinances relating to
boundaries and annexations; franchise ordinances and other ordinances granting
special rights to persons or corporations; contract ordinances and ordinances
authorizing the execution of a contract or the issuance of warrants; salary
ordinances; ordinances establishing, naming, or vacating streets, alleys, or
other public places; improvement ordinances; bond ordinances; ordinances
relating to elections; ordinances relating to the transfer or acceptance of
real estate by or from the village; and all special ordinances) as well as any
other ordinances pertaining to subjects not enumerated and embraced in this
code of ordinances, shall remain in full force and effect unless herein
repealed expressly or by necessary implication.
(Prior Code, § 1-1-8)
§ 10.015 ORDINANCES SAVED.
   Whenever an ordinance by its nature either authorizes or enables the Board
of Trustees or a certain village officer or employee to make additional
regulations for the purpose of carrying out the intent of the ordinance, all
regulations of a similar nature serving that purpose effected prior to the
codification and not inconsistent thereto shall remain in effect and are saved.
§ 10.016 TECHNICAL CODES.
   (A)   Whenever any technical codes are incorporated herein by reference, any
subsequent amendments or revisions to the technical codes shall automatically
become a part of this code and shall be made available for public inspection by
the village.
   (B)   Further, to the extent of any conflict between the technical
provisions of this code and any technical codes adopted by reference, the most
restrictive provision shall prevail.
§ 10.017 CATCHLINES; HISTORICAL AND STATUTORY REFERENCES.
   (A)    The catchlines of the several sections of this code are intended as
mere catchwords to indicate the content of the section and shall not be deemed
or taken to be titles of such sections, nor as any part of the section, nor,
unless expressly so provided, shall they be so deemed when any of such
sections, including the catchlines, are amended or reenacted.
(Prior Code, § 1-1-17)
   (B)   As histories for the code sections, the specific number and passage
date of the original ordinance, and amending ordinances, if any, are listed
following the text of the code section. Example: (Ord. 10, passed 5-13-1960;
Ord. 15, passed 1-1-1970; Ord. 20, passed 1-1-1980; Ord. 25, passed 1-1-1985)
   (C)   An “ILCS” cite included in the history indicates that the text of the
section reads either verbatim or substantially the same as the statute.
Example: (65 ILCS 5/3.1-2-1)
   (D)   An “ILCS” cite set forth as a “statutory reference” following the text
of the section indicates that the reader should refer to that statute for
further information. Example:
§ 38.04 PUBLIC RECORDS AVAILABLE.
   The village shall make available to any person for inspection or copying all
public records, as provided in the Illinois Freedom of Information Act.
   Statutory reference:
   Freedom of Information Act, see 5 ILCS 140/1 et seq.
§ 10.018 PUBLIC UTILITY ORDINANCES.
   No ordinance relating to railroads or railroad crossings with streets and
other public ways or relating to the conduct, duties, service or rates of
public utilities shall be repealed by virtue of the adoption of this code or by
virtue of §
10.014, excepting as this code shall be considered as amending such ordinance
or ordinances in respect to such provisions only.
(Prior Code, § 1-1-9)
§ 10.019 COURT PROCEEDINGS.
   (A)   (1)   No new ordinance shall be construed or held to repeal a former
ordinance, whether such former ordinance is expressly repealed or not, as to
any offense committed against such former ordinance or as to any act done, any
penalty, forfeiture, or punishment so incurred, or any right accrued or claim
arising under the former ordinance, or in any way whatever to affect any claim
arising under the former ordinance or in any way whatever to affect any such
offense or act so committed or so done, or any penalty, forfeiture, or
punishment so incurred or any right accrued or claim arising before the new
ordinance takes effect, save only that the proceedings thereafter shall conform
to the ordinance in force at the time of such proceeding, so far as
practicable.
      (2)   If any penalty, forfeiture, or punishment be mitigated by any
provision of a new ordinance, such provision may be, by the consent of the
party affected, applied to any judgment announced after the new ordinance takes
effect.
   (B)   This section shall extend to all repeals, either by express words or
implication, whether the repeal is in the ordinance making any new provisions
upon the same subject or in any other ordinance.
   (C)   Nothing contained in this chapter shall be construed as abating any
action now pending under or by virtue of any general ordinance of the village
herein repealed and the provisions of all general ordinances contained in this
code shall be deemed to be continuing provisions and not a new enactment of the
same provision; nor shall this chapter be deemed as discontinuing, abating,
modifying, or altering any penalty accrued or to accrue, or as affecting the
liability of any person, firm, or corporation, or as waiving any right of the
village under any ordinance or provision thereof in force at the time of the
adoption of this code.
(Prior Code, § 1-1-10)
§ 10.020 VILLAGE CLERK’S CERTIFICATE.
   The Village Clerk’s certificate shall be substantially in the following
form:
VILLAGE CLERK’S CERTIFICATE
STATE OF ILLINOIS         )
COUNTY OF ST. CLAIR      ) ss.            VILLAGE CLERK’S OFFICE
VILLAGE OF MARISSA         )
   I, _____________________, Village Clerk of the Village of Marissa, Illinois,
do hereby certify that the following Revised Code of Ordinances of the Village
of Marissa, Illinois of 2023, published by authority of the Village Board of
Trustees were duly passed by the Village Board of Trustees of the Village of
Marissa, Illinois, approved by the Mayor and published in book form according
to law on this date, and that these ordinances are true and perfect copies of
the ordinances, as passed, approved and now of record and on file in my office
as provided by law.
   In witness whereof, I have set my hand and affixed the corporate seal of the
Village of Marissa, Illinois, this ________ day of __________________, 20___.
__________________________________
                           VILLAGE CLERK
                           VILLAGE OF MARISSA
(Prior Code, § 1-1-12)
§ 10.999 GENERAL PENALTY.
   (A)   Fine, incarceration, and the like.
      (1)   Whoever violates any provision of this code or other ordinance of
this village for which another penalty is not specifically provided shall be
fined not less than $75, nor more than $750, for each and every violation
thereof, and every day the violation continues shall constitute a separate
offense.
      (2)   Any minor or person designated a juvenile by the state convicted of
a violation of any section of this code shall be fined not less than $75, nor
more than $750, for any one offense, but may not be confined except by
provisions of the State Juvenile Court Act of 1987, being 705 ILCS 405/1-1 et
seq.
      (3)   Whoever commits an offense against the village or aids, abets,
counsels, commands, induces, or procures its commission is punishable as a
principal.
      (4)   Whoever willfully causes an act to be done which, if directly
performed by him, her, or another would be an offense against the village, is
punishable as a principal.
      (5)   All municipal ordinance offenses may be satisfied without a court
appearance by written plea of guilty and payment of the minimum fine, plus
court costs, unless a court appearance is required by the ordinance violated.
(65 ILCS 5/1-2-7 and 5/1-2-8)
      (6)   A penalty imposed for the violation of any section of this code may
include, or consist of, a requirement that the defendant perform some
reasonable public service work, such, as but not limited to, the picking up of
litter in public parks or along public highways or the maintenance of public
facilities.
(Prior Code, § 1-1-20)
   (B)   Service by certified mail. In all actions for violation of any
municipal ordinance where the fine would not be in excess of $750 and no jail
term could be imposed, service of summons may be made by the Village Clerk by
certified mail, return receipt requested, whether service is to be within or
without the state.
(65 ILCS 5/1-2-9.1) (Prior Code, § 1-1-21)
   (C)   Application.
      (1)   (a)   The penalty provided in this chapter shall be applicable to
every section of this village code, the same as though it were a part of each
and every separate section. Any person convicted of a violation of any section
of this village code where any duty is prescribed or obligation imposed, or
where any act which is of a continuing nature or declared to be unlawful, shall
be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor.
         (b)   A separate offense shall be deemed committed upon each day such
duty or obligation remains unperformed or such act continues, unless otherwise
specifically provided in this code of ordinances.
      (2)   In all cases where the same offense is made punishable or is
created by different clauses or sections of this village code, the prosecuting
officer may elect under which to proceed, but not more than one recovery shall
be had against the same person for the same offense; provided that the
revocation of a license or permit shall not be considered a recovery or penalty
so as to bar any other penalty being enforced.
      (3)   Whenever the doing of any act or the omission to do any act
constitutes a breach of any section or provision of this village code, and
there shall be no fine or penalty specifically declared for such breach, the
provisions of this code shall apply, and a separate offense shall be deemed
committed upon each day during or on which a breach or violation occurs or
continues.
(Prior Code, § 1-1-22)
   (D)   Liability of officers. The failure of any officer or employee to
perform any official duty imposed by this code of ordinances shall not subject
such officer or employee to the penalty imposed for violation of this code of
ordinances, unless a penalty is specifically provided for.
(Prior Code, § 1-1-23)
   (E)   License. When a person is convicted of a violation of any section of
this code of ordinances, any license previously issued to him or her by the
village may be revoked by the court or by the Board of Trustees.
(Prior Code, § 1-1-24)
Statutory reference:
   Authority to imprison for certain ordinance violations, see 65 ILCS 5/1-2-
1.1
   Limitations on penalties and collection upon default in payment, see 65 ILCS
5/1-2-1
CHAPTER 11: CITY STANDARDS
Section
   
11.001   Jurisdiction
   
11.002   Corporate Seal
§ 11.001 JURISDICTION.
   Unless otherwise provided herein, this code applies to acts performed within
the corporate limits of the village. Provisions of this code also apply to acts
performed outside the corporate limits and up to the limits prescribed by law,
where the law confers power on the village to regulate such particular acts
outside the corporate limits.
(Prior Code, § 1-1-5)
§ 11.002 CORPORATE SEAL.
   (A)   The Corporate Seal of the Village shall be the same as that heretofore
provided and used by the village. It shall be circular in form with the words
“Village of Marissa, Illinois” in the exterior circle, and the word “seal” in
the center.
(65 ILCS 5/2-3-8)
   (B)   The Corporate Seal shall be used as such seal in all cases provided
for by law or by the ordinances of the village and in all other cases in which,
by law and custom, it is usual and necessary for the corporation to use a seal.
The seal shall be and remain with the Village Clerk, who shall be the
legal custodian.
(65 ILCS 5/3.1-35-90)
(Prior Code, § 1-2-18)
TITLE III: ADMINISTRATION
   Chapter
      
30.   MAYOR, BOARD, AND OFFICIALS
      
31.   ORGANIZATIONS
      
32.   EMPLOYMENT POLICIES
      
33.   GENERAL POLICIES AND PROCEDURES
      
34.   PUBLIC SAFETY AND LAW ENFORCEMENT
      
35.   FINANCE AND REVENUE
CHAPTER 30: MAYOR, BOARD, AND OFFICIALS
Section
General Provisions and Policies
   
30.001   Bidding and contract procedures
   
30.002   Claims
   
30.003   Expenses; reimbursement
   
30.004   Official records
   
30.005   Federal old age and survivor’s insurance system
   
30.006   Municipal Retirement Fund
   
30.007   Nepotism
   
30.008   Certificates of insurance
   
30.009   Official salaries
Mayor
   
30.020   Election
   
30.021   Mayor pro tem; temporary Chair
   
30.022   Chief executive officer
   
30.023   Mayor’s signature
   
30.024   Duty to appoint, supervise, and remove officers
   
30.025   Formal occasions
   
30.026   Duties; generally
   
30.027   Business License Commissioner
   
30.028   Local Liquor Commissioner
   
30.029   Health Commissioner
   
30.030   Deciding vote
Board of Trustees
   
30.045   Composition and general powers
   
30.046   Regular meetings
   
30.047   Special meetings
   
30.048   Committees of the Board of Trustees
   
30.049   Quorum
   
30.050   Members; non-attendance at meeting
   
30.051   Rules of the Board of Trustees
   
30.052   Agenda
   
30.053   Address by the public
   
30.054   Ordinances
Village Officials
   
30.065   Elections
   
30.066   Appointment of elected officials
   
30.067   Municipal officers; regulations
   
30.068   Resignation
   
30.069   Qualifications; elective office
   
30.070   Bonds
   
30.071   Liability insurance
   
30.072   Salaries regulation
Office Vacancies
   
30.085   Vacancy by resignation
   
30.086   Vacancy by death, disability, or otherwise
   
30.087   Election of an acting Mayor
   
30.088   Appointment to fill Trustee vacancy
   
30.089   Election to fill vacancies in offices with four-year terms
   
30.090   Vacancies due to election being declared void
Village Clerk
   
30.105   Appointed
   
30.106   Vacancy
   
30.107   Publication of ordinances; minutes; records
   
30.108   Delivery of papers to officers
   
30.109   Documents, commissions, licenses, and reports
   
30.110   Administration of oaths
   
30.111   Outstanding bonds
   
30.112   Successor
   
30.113   Payments
   
30.114   Notification to persons appointed to office
   
30.115   Other duties
   
30.116   Deputy Clerk
Village Treasurer
   
30.130   Committee established
   
30.131   Treasurer appointed; vacancy
   
30.132   Money; warrants; accounts; payments
   
30.133   Personal use of funds
   
30.134   Bond
   
30.135   Special assessments
   
30.136   Bookkeeping
   
30.137   Statements
   
30.138   Report of delinquent officers
   
30.139   Year-end report
   
30.140   Appropriations
   
30.141   Deposit of funds
Other Specific Appointed Officials
   
30.155   Judiciary; Village Attorney
   
30.156   Village Engineer
   
30.157   Superintendent of Public Works
   
30.158   Zoning Administrator
   
30.159   Code Enforcement Official
   
30.160   Village Collector
   
30.161   Economic Development Director
   
30.162   Village Administrator
Meeting Procedures
   
30.175   Closed sessions; recording
   
30.176   Remote meeting participation
   
Appendix A: Closed session minutes
   
Appendix B: Notice of request for placement upon Board of Trustees’ agenda
GENERAL PROVISIONS AND POLICIES
§ 30.001 BIDDING AND CONTRACT PROCEDURES.
   (A)   Competitive bidding required. Any work or other public improvement
which is not to be paid for in whole or in part by special assessment or
special taxation, and all purchases of and contracts for supplies, materials,
and services, shall, except as specifically provided herein, be based whenever
possible on competitive bids.
   (B)   Formal contract procedure. All work or other public improvements which
is not to be paid for in whole or in part by special assessment or special
taxation, and all purchases, orders, or contracts for supplies, materials,
equipment, or contractual services, except as otherwise provided herein, when
the estimated cost thereof shall exceed $20,000, shall be purchased from the
lowest responsible bidder, after due notice inviting bids, unless competitive
bidding is waived by a vote of two-thirds of the Trustees then holding office.
   (C)   Notice inviting bids. Notice inviting bids shall be published at least
once in a newspaper with general circulation within the village. The village
shall also advertise all pending work or purchases by posting a notice on the
public bulletin board in the Village Hall.
   (D)   Scope of notice. The newspaper notice required herein shall include a
general description of the work to be performed or the articles to be
purchased, shall state where specifications may be secured, and shall include
the time and place for opening bids.
   (E)   Bid deposits. When deemed necessary by the Board of Trustees, bid
deposits shall be prescribed in the public notices inviting bids. Unsuccessful
bidders shall be entitled to the return of their bid deposits upon the award of
the contract by the Board of Trustees. A successful bidder shall forfeit any
bid deposit required by the Board of Trustees upon failure on his or her part
to enter into a contract within ten days after the award.
   (F)   Bid opening procedure.
      (1)   Bids shall be submitted sealed to the village and shall be
identified as bids on the envelope.
      (2)   Bids shall be opened in public at the time and place stated in the
public notice.
      (3)   A tabulation of all bids received shall be made by the Board of
Trustees or by a village employee, in which event, a tabulation of the bids
shall be furnished to the Board of Trustees at its next regular meeting.
   (G)   Rejection of bids. The village shall have the authority to reject all
bids or parts of all bids when the public interest will be served thereby.
   (H)   Bidders in default to village. The village shall not accept the bid of
a contractor who is in default on the payment of taxes, licenses, or other
monies due the village.
   (I)   Award of contract.
      (1)   The Board of Trustees shall have the authority to award contracts
within the purview of this section.
      (2)   Contracts shall be awarded to the lowest responsible bidder on the
basis of the bid that is in the best interest of the village to accept. In
awarding the contract, in addition to price, the Board of Trustees shall
consider:
         (a)   The ability, capacity, and skill of the bidder to perform the
contract to provide the service required;
         (b)   Whether the bidder can perform the contract or provide the
service promptly, or within the time specified, without delay or interference;
         (c)   The character, integrity, reputation, judgment, experience, and
efficiency of the bidder;
         (d)   The quality of the performance of previous contracts or
services;
         (e)   The previous and existing compliance by the bidder with laws and
ordinances relating to the contract or service;
         (f)   The sufficiency of the financial resources and ability of the
bidder to perform the contract or provide the service;
         (g)   The quality, availability, and adaptability of the supplies or
contractual services to the particular use required;
         (h)   The ability of the bidder to provide future maintenance and
service for the use of the subject of the contract;
         (i)   The number and scope of conditions attached to the bid; and
         (j)   Whether the bidder has furnished a certificate of insurance
indicating workers’ compensation and employers’ liability coverage and the
policy limits for such coverage.
      (3)   The Board of Trustees shall have the authority to require a
performance bond, before entering into a contract, in such amounts as it shall
find reasonably necessary to protect the best interests of the village.
   (J)   Open market procedure. All work and purchases of supplies, materials,
and services of less than the estimated value of $20,000 shall be made in the
open market, without newspaper advertisement and without observing the
procedure prescribed by this section for the award of formal contracts.
   (K)   Professional services exempt from bidding requirements. All contracts
for professional services, including, but not limited to, attorneys, engineers,
real estate appraisers, architects, and any other profession whose ethical code
involved prohibits or discourages involvement in normal bidding procedures, may
be entered into by the village without observing the bidding procedures
prescribed by this section for the award of formal contracts.
   (L)   Emergency purchases. In case of an apparent emergency which requires
immediate work or purchase of supplies, materials, or services, the Board of
Trustees shall be empowered to secure by open market procedure as herein set
forth, at the lowest obtainable price, any work, supplies, materials, or
services regardless of the amount of the expenditure.
   (M)   Cooperative purchasing. The village shall have the authority to join
with other units of government in cooperative purchasing plans when the best
interests of the village would be served thereby.
(Prior Code, § 1-2-26)
Statutory reference:
   Related provisions, see 65 ILCS 5/2-3-8, 8-9-1, and 8-9-2
§ 30.002 CLAIMS.
   (A)   Presentation.
      (1)   All claims against the village for goods purchased, damaged, or
originating in any other way, except for claims for salaries and other
allowances that are fixed by ordinance, shall be presented on or before the
Monday preceding the monthly meeting of each month to the Village Clerk.
      (2)   All such claims must be in writing and items shall be specified.
   (B)   Exception. This does not prohibit the Board of Trustees from passing
on any claims not previously presented to the Village Clerk if, in the opinion
of the Board of Trustees, justice to the claimant requires it.
(Prior Code, § 1-2-28)
§ 30.003 EXPENSES; REIMBURSEMENT.
   Each member of the corporate authorities may receive reimbursement from the
village for expenses incurred by the member in attending committee meetings of
the corporate authorities or for other expenses incurred by the member in the
course of performing official duties.
(Prior Code, § 1-2-30)
Statutory reference:
   Related provisions, see 65 ILCS 5/3.1-50-15(b)
§ 30.004 OFFICIAL RECORDS.
   All official records, including the Corporate Seal, shall be kept in the
Village Hall.
(Prior Code, § 1-2-31)
§ 30.005 FEDERAL OLD AGE AND SURVIVOR’S INSURANCE SYSTEM.
   ELIGIBLE EMPLOYEES shall mean all employees of the village, eligible under
the Federal Act, being Old-Age, Survivors, and Disability Insurance Benefits as
authorized by the Federal Social Security Act, 42 U.S.C. subch. II, § 401 et
seq., except persons elected to office by popular election and also the Village
Treasurer and Village Attorney. Withholdings from salaries or wages of
employees for the purpose provided in sections hereof are hereby authorized to
be made in the amounts and at such times as may be required by applicable state
or federal laws or regulations, and shall be paid quarterly.
(Prior Code, § 1-2-32)
§ 30.006 MUNICIPAL RETIREMENT FUND.
   (A)   The village does hereby elect to participate in the State Municipal
Retirement Fund (IMRF).
   (B)   The standard for IMRF participation shall be a position normally
requiring performance of duty for 1,000 hours per year.
   (C)   The Village Clerk shall be directed to promptly file a certified copy
of the ordinance codified herein with the Board of Trustees of the State
Municipal Retirement Fund.
(Prior Code, § 1-2-33) (Ord. 96-9, passed 2-5-1996)
§ 30.007 NEPOTISM.
   No person elected or appointed to public office shall hire, appoint, or
authorize the hiring or appointment of his or her relative(s) or the relative
(s) of any other person holding public office to hold a position with the
village, as defined herein. RELATIVE shall be defined as any person who is a
spouse, parent, grandparent, child, grandchild, aunt, uncle, niece, nephew,
brother, sister, first cousin, brother-in-law, sister-in-law, mother-in-law,
father-in-law, son-in-law, or daughter-in-law.
(Prior Code, § 1-2-34) (Ord. 93-2, passed 3-15-1993)
§ 30.008 CERTIFICATES OF INSURANCE.
   All contractors and sub-contractors doing work for the village shall first
provide a certificate of insurance indicating workers’ compensation and
employers’ liability coverage and the policy limits for such coverage.
(Prior Code, § 1-2-35)
§ 30.009 OFFICIAL SALARIES.
   (A)   The Mayor shall receive an annual base salary of $5,000, plus $65 per
regular meeting and $60 per special meeting actually attended by the Mayor.
(Prior Code, § 1-3-1)
   (B)   The Village Clerk shall receive an annual base salary of $4,600, plus
$65 per regular meeting and $60 per special meeting actually attended by the
Village Clerk.
(Prior Code, § 1-3-2)
   (C)   Each member of the Board of Trustees shall receive a base salary of
$1,800 per year, plus $45 per regular meeting and $35 per special meeting.
(Prior Code, § 1-3-3)
   (D)   The Treasurer shall receive a salary as determined by the annual
appropriation ordinance.
(Prior Code, § 1-3-4)
   (E)   The salaries of elected officials who hold elective office for a
definite term shall neither he or she increased nor diminished during that term
and shall be fixed at least 180 days before a general municipal election in
which voting is held for those offices.
(Ord. 97-3, passed 3-17-1997; Ord. 00-06, passed 10-2-2000)
Statutory reference:
   Related provisions, see 65 ILCS 5/3.1-50-5, 5/3.1-50-10, and 5/3.1-50-15
MAYOR
§ 30.020 ELECTION.
   The Mayor shall be elected for a four-year term and shall serve until a
successor is elected and has qualified.
(Prior Code, § 1-2-50)
Statutory reference:
   Related provisions, see 65 ILCS 5/3.1-15-5 and 5/3.1-25-15
§ 30.021 MAYOR PRO TEM; TEMPORARY CHAIR.
   (A)   If the Mayor is temporarily absent because of an incapacity to perform
official duties, but the incapacity does not create a vacancy in the office,
the corporate authorities shall elect one of their members to act as Mayor pro
tem. The Mayor pro tem, during this absence or disability, shall perform the
duties and possess all the rights and powers of the Mayor, but shall not be
entitled to vote both as Mayor pro tem and as a Trustee.
   (B)   In the absence of the Mayor, or Mayor pro tem, the corporate
authorities may elect one of their members to act as a temporary Chair. The
temporary Chair shall have only the powers of a presiding officer and a right
to vote only in the capacity as trustee on any ordinance, resolution, or
motion.
(Prior Code, § 1-2-51)
Statutory reference:
   Related provisions, see 65 ILCS 5/3.1-35-35
§ 30.022 CHIEF EXECUTIVE OFFICER.
   The Mayor shall be the chief executive officer of the village and shall see
to the enforcement of all laws and ordinances. The Mayor shall preside over the
meetings of the Board of Trustees and perform such duties as may be required of
him or her by statute or law. The Mayor shall have supervision over all of the
executive officers and village employees; provided, however, his or her control
is subject to the power of the Board of Trustees to prescribe the duties of
various officers and employees. The Mayor shall have the power and authority at
any reasonable time to inspect all books, papers, and records pertaining to
village affairs and kept by any officer of the village.
(Prior Code, § 1-2-52)
Statutory reference:
   Related provisions, see 65 ILCS 5/3.1-15-10 and 3.1-35-20
§ 30.023 MAYOR’S SIGNATURE.
   (A)   The Mayor shall sign all village warrants, commissions, permits, and
licenses granted by authority of the Board of Trustees, except as otherwise
provided, and such other acts and deeds as law or ordinance may require his or
her official signature.
   (B)   The Mayor may designate another to affix his or her signature to any
written instrument that requires the Mayor’s signature. The Mayor must send
written notice of this designation to the Board of Trustees stating:
      (1)   The name of the person whom he or she has selected; and
      (2) What instrument the person will have authority to sign.
   (C)   (1)   A written signature of the Mayor executed by the person so
designated with the signature underneath the signature of the person so
designated shall be attached to the notice. The notice with the signature
attached shall be recorded in the journal of the Board of Trustees and then
filed with the Village Clerk.
      (2)   When the signature of the Mayor is placed on a written instrument
at the direction of the Mayor in the specified manner, the instrument, in all
respects, shall be as binding on the village as if signed by the Mayor in
person.
(Prior Code, § 1-2-53)
Statutory reference:
   Related provisions, see 65 ILCS 5/3.1-35-30
§ 30.024 DUTY TO APPOINT, SUPERVISE, AND REMOVE OFFICERS.
   (A)   (1)   At the first annual meeting in May, the Mayor shall appoint, by
and with the advice and consent of the Board of Trustees, all officers of the
village whose election or appointment is not otherwise provided for, and said
officers shall hold their offices for the ensuing month or year, and until
their respective successors are appointed and qualified. Any vacancy occurring
in an appointive office shall be filled in the same manner. The Mayor shall
issue a commission or certificate of appointment to all persons appointed to
office in the village.
      (2)   The Mayor shall appoint, by and with the advice and consent of the
Board of Trustees, all officers of the village whose appointment will not
otherwise be provided for by law; and whenever a vacancy shall occur in any
office, which by law or ordinance the Mayor is empowered and required to fill,
the Mayor shall, at the next regular meeting of the Board of Trustees,
communicate to it the name of the appointee to such office and pending the
concurrence of the Board of Trustees in such appointment, the Mayor may
designate some suitable person to discharge the functions of such office.
(Prior Code, § 1-2-54)
   (B)   The Mayor shall supervise the conduct of all officers of the village
and see that they faithfully and efficiently discharge the duties of their
respective offices. Except where otherwise provided by statute, the Mayor may
remove any officer appointed by the Mayor under this code of ordinances, on any
written charge, whenever the Mayor is of the opinion that the interests of the
village demand removal. The Mayor shall report the reasons for the removal to
the corporate authorities at a meeting to be held not less than five days, nor
more than ten days, after the removal. If the Mayor fails or refuses to report
to the corporate authorities the reasons for the removal, or if the corporate
authorities by a two-thirds vote of all members authorized by law to be elected
disapprove of the removal, the officer thereupon shall be restored to the
office from which the officer was removed. The vote shall be by yeas and nays,
which shall be entered upon the journal of the corporate authorities. Upon
restoration, the officer shall give a new bond and take a new oath of office.
No officer shall be removed a second time for the same offense.
(Prior Code, § 1-2-55)
   (C)   Whenever there is a dispute as to the respective duties or powers of
any appointed officer of the village, the dispute shall be settled by the
Mayor, after consultation with the Village Attorney, and the Mayor shall have
the power to delegate to any appointive officer any duty which is to be
performed when no specific officer has been directed to perform that duty.
(Prior Code, § 1-2-56)
Statutory reference:
   Provisions related to division (A)(1), see 65 ILCS 5/3.1-30-5
   Provisions related to division (A)(2), see 50 ILCS 105/2
   Provisions related to division (B), see 65 ILCS 5/3.1-35-10
§ 30.025 FORMAL OCCASIONS.
   The Mayor shall act for and on behalf of the village on formal occasions and
receptions, but in the absence or inability to attend any such function, the
Mayor may select any other village officer to so act.
(Prior Code, § 1-2-57)
§ 30.026 DUTIES; GENERALLY.
   (A)   The Mayor shall perform all the duties which are prescribed by law and
shall take care that the laws and ordinances are faithfully executed.
   (B)   The Mayor from time to time, may and annually shall give the Board of
Trustees information relative to the affairs of the village, and may recommend
for its consideration, such measures as he or she believes expedient.
(Prior Code, § 1-2-58)
Statutory reference:
   Related provisions, see 65 ILCS 5/3.1-35-5
§ 30.027 BUSINESS LICENSE COMMISSIONER.
   The Mayor is hereby designated as License Commissioner to issue and revoke
any and all business licenses as prescribed by law, with the advice and consent
of the Board of Trustees.
(Prior Code, § 1-2-59)
§ 30.028 LOCAL LIQUOR COMMISSIONER.
   The Mayor is hereby designated as Local Liquor Commissioner with all the
powers to license and/or revoke any village liquor license according to state
and village laws.
(Prior Code, § 1-2-60)
Statutory reference:
   Related provisions, see 235 ILCS 5/4-2
§ 30.029 HEALTH COMMISSIONER.
   The Mayor is hereby declared to be Health Commissioner with all powers to
abate and remove all nuisances or health hazards within the jurisdictional
boundaries of the village authority as prescribed by law.
(Prior Code, § 1-2-61)
§ 30.030 DECIDING VOTE.
   (A)   The Mayor shall preside at all meetings of the Board of Trustees. The
Mayor shall not vote on any ordinance, resolution, or motion, except:
      (1)   Where the vote of the Board of Trustees has resulted in a tie;
      (2)   Where one-half of the Board of Trustees elected have voted in favor
of an ordinance, resolution, or motion, even though there is no tie; or
      (3)   Where a vote greater than a majority of the corporate authorities
is required by the Illinois Compiled Statutes to adopt an ordinance,
resolution, or motion.
   (B)   In each instance specified, the Mayor shall vote. Nothing in this
section shall deprive an Acting Mayor or Mayor pro-tem from voting in his or
her capacity as a Trustee, but he or she shall not be entitled to another vote
in his or her capacity as Acting Mayor or Mayor pro-tem.
(Prior Code, § 1-2-62)
Statutory reference:
   Related provisions, see 65 ILCS 5/3.1-40-30 and 5/3.1-45-5
BOARD OF TRUSTEES
§ 30.045 COMPOSITION AND GENERAL POWERS.
   (A)   The Board of Trustees shall consist of six Trustees, elected in
conformity with this code of ordinances and state laws governing elections in
villages and shall have such powers as are granted by ILCS Chapter 65, as
amended.
   (B)   The term of office shall be for four years or until their successors
are elected and have qualified.
(Prior Code, § 1-2-1)
Statutory reference:
   Related provisions, see 65 ILCS 5/3.1-25-5 and 5/3.1-10-50(d)
§ 30.046 REGULAR MEETINGS.
   (A)   (1)   The regular stated meetings of the Village Board shall be held
in the Village Hall Building on the first Monday and third Monday of each month
at 7:00 p.m.
      (2)   When the meeting date falls upon a legal holiday, the meeting shall
be held on the following day at the same hour and place, unless otherwise
designated.
   (B)   Adjourned and reconvened meetings may be held at such times as may be
determined by the Trustees.
(Prior Code, § 1-2-2) (Ord. 2024-07, passed 8-21-2024; Ord. 25-04, passed 6-2-
2025)
Statutory reference:
   Related provisions, see 5 ILCS 120/1 et seq. and 65 ILCS 5/3.1-40-25 and 5/
3.1-45-5
§ 30.047 SPECIAL MEETINGS.
   (A)   Special meetings of the Board of Trustees may be called by the Mayor
or any three Trustees by giving at least 48 hours’ notice thereof by delivering
to them personally written or printed notices of the time of such meeting at
the residences of the Trustees.
   (B)   Such notices shall be served by mail, by the Chief of Police or his or
her designated representative. Said notices shall specify the purpose of said
special meeting and the business to be taken up at that time and place. Such
notice shall be posted at the Village Hall and shall be provided to any local
newspaper of general circulation or any local radio or television station that
has filed an annual request for such notice. Said notice shall be provided to
such news media in the same manner as said notice is given to the Mayor and
members of the Board of Trustees; provided such news media has given the
village an address within the village at which such notice may be given.
(Prior Code, § 1-2-3)
Statutory reference:
   Related provisions, see 5 ILCS 120/2.02 and 120/2.03, and 65 ILCS 5/3.1-40-
25 and 5/3.1-45-5
§ 30.048 COMMITTEES OF THE BOARD OF TRUSTEES.
   (A)   (1)   The following standing committees of the Board of Trustees are
hereby established, to-wit:
         (a)   Public Improvements, including:
      1.   Parks;
      2.   MAC Building; and
      3.   Streets.
         (b)   Public Safety, including:
      1.   Police;
      2.   Ambulance;
      3.   Nuisance;
      4.   Zoning; and
      5.   E.S.D.A.
         (c)   Utilities, including:
      1.   Water; and
      2.   Sewer.
         (d)   Finance, including:
      1.   Ordinances;
      2.   Personnel; and
      3.   Budget.
      (2)   The committees shall be appointed annually by the Mayor. In
addition, the Mayor shall appoint a chair of each committee.
      (3)   The Mayor shall be ex-officio Chair of each and every standing
committee.
      (4)   So far as is practicable, reports of committees shall be in
writing.
      (5)   As provided by law, any report of a committee of the Board of
Trustees shall be deferred for final action thereon to the next regular meeting
of the same after the report is made, upon the request of any two Trustees
present.
      (6)   Each standing committee of the Board of Trustees shall exercise a
general supervision over the affairs of the department of municipal government
with which it is connected; shall ascertain the condition and needs of said
department; shall, from time to time, report the same to the Mayor and Board of
Trustees so that a full understanding thereof may be had, and generally, shall
do all acts necessary to promote the efficiency of the department.
      (7)   All committee meetings are subject to the Open Meeting Act
requirements, being 5 ILCS 120/1, and minutes shall be taken.
(Prior Code, § 1-2-4)
   (B)   Special committees may be appointed by the Mayor, subject to the
advice and consent of the Board of Trustees, as may be needed from time to
time.
(Prior Code, § 1-2-5)
Statutory reference:
   Provisions related to division(A)(5), see 65 ILCS 5/3.1-40-35 and 5/3.1-45-5
   Provisions related to division(A)(7), see 5 ILCS 120/1 and 120/2.06
§ 30.049 QUORUM.
   At all meetings of the Board of Trustees, a majority of the corporate
authorities shall constitute a quorum for the transaction of business, and if
no such quorum attends such meeting of the Board of Trustees, the Trustees may
adjourn from day to day until a quorum is present, and shall have power to
compel the attendance of absent members, except when such members are
physically unable to attend such meetings.
(Prior Code, § 1-2-6)
Editor’s note:
   When the Board of Trustees has a Mayor and six Trustees, a quorum is four,
which may consist of the Mayor and three Trustees, or four Trustees.
Statutory reference:
   Related provisions, see 65 ILCS 5/3.1-40-20 and 5/3.1-45-5
§ 30.050 MEMBERS; NON-ATTENDANCE AT MEETING.
   Any member of the Board of Trustees who shall neglect or refuse to attend at
least two regular and/or special Board of Trustees meetings per month without
good and sufficient reason to be passed upon by the Board of Trustees shall not
receive compensation for that meeting. All members shall be allowed two
absences in each fiscal year for which compensation shall be paid.
(Prior Code, § 1-2-7)
Cross-reference:
   Salaries, see §
30.009
Statutory reference:
   Related provisions, 65 ILCS 5/3.1-40-20 and 5/3.1-45-5
§ 30.051 RULES OF THE BOARD OF TRUSTEES.
   The following rules of order and procedure shall govern the deliberations
and meetings of the Board of Trustees.
   (A)   Order of business.
      (1)   The order of business shall be as follows:
         (a)   Call to order by presiding officer;
         (b)   Roll call;
         (c)   The reading of the journal of the proceedings of the last
preceding meeting or meetings, and correction and approval of the same, unless
dispensed with by the Board of Trustees and correction of the journal of the
proceedings of previous meetings;
         (d)   Reports and communications from the Mayor and other village
officers;
         (e)   Visitors (see §
30.053 );
         (f)   Reports of standing committees;
         (g)   Reports of special committees;
         (h)   Presentation of communications, petitions, resolutions, orders,
and ordinances by the Board of Trustees;
         (i)   Unfinished business; and
         (j)   Miscellaneous business.
      (2)   All questions relating to the priority of business shall be decided
by the Chair without debate, subject to appeal.
   (B)   Duties of presiding officer. The presiding officer shall preserve
order and decorum and may speak to points of order in preference to other
Trustees, and shall decide all question of order, subject to appeal.
   (C)   Duties of members.
      (1)   While the presiding officer is putting the question, no member
shall walk across or out of the Board Chamber.
      (2)   (a)   Every member, prior to his or her speaking, making a motion
or seconding the same shall not proceed with his or her remarks until
recognized and named by the Chair.
         (b)   He or she shall confine himself or herself to the question under
debate, avoiding personalities and refraining from impugning the motives of any
other Trustee’s argument or vote.
   (D)   Visitors. No person other than a member of the Board of Trustees shall
address that body on the same question unless such person has been recognized
by the presiding officer.
   (E)   Debate.
      (1)   No Trustee shall speak more than once on the same question, except
by consent of the presiding officer or unless three-fourths of the corporate
authorities agree that one’s right to debate should be limited to speak only
once, and then not until every other Trustee desiring to speak shall have had
an opportunity to do so; provided, however, that the proponent of the matter
under consideration, as the case may be, shall have the right to open and close
debate.
      (2)   No Trustee shall speak longer than ten minutes at any one time,
except by consent of the Board of Trustees; and in closing debate on any
question as provided above, the speaker shall be limited to five minutes,
except by special consent of the Board of Trustees.
      (3)   The Board of Trustees, by motion, may limit debate. The presiding
officer shall have the right to participate in debate. While a member is
speaking, no Trustee shall hold any private discussion, nor pass between the
speaker and the Chair.
   (F)   Call of Trustees to order. A Trustee, when called to order by the
Chair, shall thereupon discontinue speaking and take his or her seat and the
order or ruling of the Chair shall be binding and conclusive, subject only to
the right to appeal.
   (G)   Appeals from decision of the Chair.
      (1)   Any Trustee may appeal to the Board of Trustees from a ruling of
the Chair, and if the appeal is seconded, the Trustee making the appeal may
briefly state his or her reason for the same, and the Chair may briefly explain
his or her ruling; but there shall be no debate on the appeal and no other
person shall participate in the discussion. The presiding officer shall have
the right to participate in debate.
      (2)   The Chair shall then put the question, “Shall the decision of the
Chair be sustained?” If a majority of the Trustees present vote “No,” the
decision of the Chair shall be overruled; otherwise, it shall be sustained.
   (H)   Question of personal privilege. The right of a member to address the
Board of Trustees on a question of personal privilege shall be limited to cases
in which his or her integrity, character, or motives are assailed, questioned,
or impugned.
   (I)   Voting. Every other member who shall be present when a question is
stated from the Chair shall vote thereon, unless he or she is personally
interested in the question, in which case, he or she shall take whatever steps
are necessary to ensure that his or her vote is not taken.
   (J)   Special order of business. Any matter before the Board of Trustees may
be set down as a special order of business at a time certain if two-thirds of
the Trustees present vote in the affirmative, but not otherwise.
   (K)   Seconding of motions required; written motions. No motion shall be put
or debated in the meeting or in committee unless it be seconded. When a motion
is seconded, it shall be stated by the presiding officer before debate, and
every motion in the Board of Trustees, except motions of procedure, shall be
reduced to writing if required by a member, and the proposer of the motion
shall be entitled to the floor.
   (L)   Division of questions. If any question under consideration contains
several distinct propositions, the Board of Trustees, by a majority vote of the
Trustees present may divide such question.
   (M)   Record of motions. In all cases where a resolution or motion is
entered in the journal, the name of the Trustee moving the same shall be
entered also.
   (N)   Announcement and changes of vote. The result of all votes by yeas and
nays shall not be announced by the Village Clerk, but shall be handed by him or
her to the Chair for announcement, and no vote shall be changed after the tally
list has passed from the hands of the Village Clerk.
   (O)   Precedence of motions.
      (1)   When a question is under debate, the following motions shall be in
order and shall have precedence over each other in order, as listed:
         (a)   To adjourn to a day certain;
         (b)   To adjourn;
         (c)   To take a recess;
         (d)   To lay on the table;
         (e)   The previous question;
         (f)   To refer;
         (g)   To amend;
         (h)   To defer or postpone to a time certain;
         (i)   To defer or postpone (without reference to time); and
         (j)   To defer or postpone indefinitely.
      (2)   Divisions (O)(1)(b), (O)(1)(d), and (O)(1)(e) above are to be
decided without debate.
   (P)   Motions to adjourn.
      (1)   A motion to adjourn the village shall always be in order, except:
         (a)   When a Trustee is in possession of the floor;
         (b)   While the yeas and nays are being called;
         (c)   When the members are voting;
         (d)   When adjournment was the last preceding motion; or
         (e)   When it has been decided that the previous question shall be
taken.
      (2)   A motion simply to adjourn shall not be subject to amendment or
debate, but a motion to adjourn to a time certain shall be.
      (3)   The Board of Trustees may, at any time, adjourn over one or more
regular meetings on a vote of a majority of all the Board of Trustees
authorized by law to be elected.
   (Q)   Previous question. When the previous question is moved on the main
question and seconded, it shall be put on this form: “Shall the main question
now be put?” If such motion be carried, all further amendments and all further
motions and debate shall be excluded, and the question put without delay upon
the pending amendment in proper order and then upon the main question.
   (R)   Motions to lay on the table and to take from the table. A motion
simply to lay the question on the table shall not be debatable, but a motion to
lay on the table and publish, or with any other condition, shall be subject to
amendment and debate.
      (1)   A motion to take any motion or other proposition from the table may
be proposed at the same meeting at which such motion or proposition was laid
upon the table; provided two-thirds of the Trustees vote therefor.
      (2)   A motion to lay any particular motion or proposition on the table
shall apply to that motion or proposition only.
      (3)   An amendment to the main question or other pending question may be
laid on the table and neither the main question, nor such other pending
question shall be affected thereby.
   (S)   Indefinite postponement; motion to defer or postpone without any
reference to time. When consideration of a motion or other proposition is
postponed indefinitely, it shall not be again taken up at the same meeting.
      (1)   A motion to postpone indefinitely shall not open the main question
to debate.
      (2)   A motion to defer or postpone without any reference to time shall
not be construed as a motion to postpone indefinitely, but shall be considered
to be of the same general nature and to possess the same general attributes so
far as applicable under these rules, as a motion to postpone indefinitely or to
a time certain.
   (T)   Motion to refer. A motion to refer to a standing committee shall take
precedence over a similar motion to refer to a special committee.
   (U)   Motion to amend. A motion to amend an amendment shall be in order, but
one to amend an amendment to an amendment shall not be entertained.
      (1)   An amendment modifying the intention of a motion shall be in order,
but an amendment relating to a different subject shall not be in order.
      (2)   On an amendment to “strike out and insert,” the paragraph to be
amended shall first be read as it stands, then the words proposed to be
stricken out, then those to be inserted, and finally, the paragraph as it will
stand if so amended shall be read.
      (3)   An amendment to the main question or other pending questions may be
referred to a committee and neither the main question, nor such other pending
question shall be affected thereby.
   (V)   Filling of blanks. When a blank is to be filled and different sums or
times proposed, the question shall be taken first on the least sum or the
longest time.
   (W)   Motion to substitute. A substitute for any original proposition under
debate or for any pending amendment or such proposition may be entertained
notwithstanding that at such time, further amendment is admissible; and if
accepted by the Board of Trustees by a vote shall entirely supersede such
original proposition or amendment, as the case may be, and cut-off all
amendments appertaining thereto.
   (X)   Reconsideration. A vote or question may be reconsidered at any time
during the same meeting, or at the first regular meeting held thereafter. A
motion for reconsideration having been once made and decided in the negative
shall not be renewed, nor shall a motion to reconsider be reconsidered. A
motion to reconsider must be made and seconded by Trustees who voted on the
prevailing side of the question to be reconsidered, unless otherwise provided
by law; provided, however, that where a motion has received a majority vote in
the affirmative, but is declared lost solely on the ground that a greater
number of affirmative votes is required by statute for the passage or adoption
of such motion, then in such case, a motion to reconsider may be made and
seconded only by those who voted in the affirmative on such question to be
reconsidered.
   (Y)   Adoption of Robert’s Rules of Order Revised. The rules of
parliamentary practice comprised in the latest published edition of Robert’s
Rules of Order Revised shall govern the Board of Trustees in all cases to which
they are applicable and in which they are not inconsistent with the special
rules of the Board of Trustees.
   (Z)   Temporary suspension of rules; amendment of rules. These rules may be
temporarily suspended by a vote of two-thirds of the corporate authorities
entitled by law to be elected and shall not be repealed, altered, or amended,
unless by concurrence of two-thirds of all the corporate authorities entitled
by law to be elected.
   (AA)   Censure of trustees; expulsion of trustees. Any Trustee acting or
appearing in a lewd or disgraceful manner, or who uses opprobrious, obscene,
and insulting language to or about any member of the Board of Trustees, or who
does not obey the order of the Chair, shall be, on motion, censured by a
majority vote of the members present, or expelled by a two-thirds vote of all
Trustees elected.
(Prior Code, § 1-2-11)
Statutory reference:
   Related provisions, see 65 ILCS 5/3.1-40-15 and 5/3.1-45-5
§ 30.052 AGENDA.
   An itemized agenda, along with all necessary supporting documentation shall
be furnished to each member of the Board of Trustees no later than the close of
business on the day preceding the regular Board of Trustees meeting. In the
case of matters of emergency which could not have been reasonably foreseen in
sufficient time to comply with this section, a revised agenda shall be
furnished to each member of the Board of Trustees prior to the opening of the
Board of Trustees meeting.
(Prior Code, § 1-2-12)
Statutory reference:
   Related provisions, see 5 ILCS 120/2.02
§ 30.053 ADDRESS BY THE PUBLIC.
    Any person may address the Board of Trustees with regard to items of
proposed business under the following rules.
   (A)   (1)   At the meeting, once called upon by the Mayor or Trustee having
the floor, he or she shall rise (if not physically impaired) and state his or
her name and address for the record and, unless further time is granted by the
Board, limit remarks to three minutes.
      (2)   All remarks shall be addressed to the Board of Trustees, not to any
member thereof.
   (B)   (1)   No person other than the Trustee recognizing the individual
addressing the Board of Trustees and the person having the floor shall be
permitted to enter into any discussion directly or through a member of the
Board of Trustees without the permission of the Mayor.
      (2)   No questions shall be asked of a Trustee except through the Mayor.
Any person making personal or impertinent remarks or who shall become
disruptive addressing the Board of Trustees shall be forthwith evicted from the
Board of Trustees room by the Mayor.
   (C)   (1)   The Chief of Police or his or her authorized designee shall be
the Sergeant of Arms at the Board of Trustees’ meetings. He or she shall carry
out all orders and instructions of the Mayor for the purposes of maintaining
order and decorum.
      (2)   The Sergeant of Arms shall remove any person violating order or
decorum of the meeting. Such removal may be accompanied by further prosecution
for any violation of any ordinance under this code of ordinances.
(Prior Code, § 1-2-13) (Ord. 11-06, passed 7-18-2011; Ord. 2024-07, passed 8-
21-2024)
§ 30.054 ORDINANCES.
   (A)   (1)   Attorney. It shall be the duty of the Village Attorney to
prepare such ordinances as may be required by the Board of Trustees.
      (2)   Introduced. When a proposed ordinance is introduced, it shall be
read one time by title only and referred to the proper committee, unless the
Board of Trustees shall otherwise specifically direct.
      (3)   Vote required; yeas and nays record. The passage of all ordinances
for whatever purpose, and of any resolution or motion to create any liability
against a village, or for the expenditure or appropriation of its money, shall
require the concurrence of a majority of all members then holding office on the
Board of Trustees, including the Mayor, unless otherwise expressly provided by
the code of ordinances or any other act governing the passage of any ordinance,
resolution, or motion; provided that, where the Board of Trustees consists of
an odd number of Trustees, the vote of the majority of the Trustees shall be
sufficient to pass an ordinance. The yeas and nays shall be taken upon the
question of the passage of the designated ordinances, resolutions, or motions
and recorded in the journal of the Board of Trustees. In addition, the
corporate authorities at any meeting may by unanimous consent to take a single
vote by yeas or nays on the several questions of the passage on any two or more
of the designated ordinances, orders, resolutions, or motions placed together
for voting purposes in a single group. The single vote shall be entered
separately in the journal under the designation “omnibus vote,” and in such
event the Village Clerk may enter the words “omnibus vote” or “consent agenda”
in the journal in each case in lieu of entering names of the members of Board
of Trustees voting “yea” and of those voting “nay” on the passage of each of
the designated ordinances, orders, resolutions, and motions included in such
omnibus group or consent agenda. The taking of such single or omnibus vote and
such entries of the words “omnibus vote” or “consent agenda” in the journal
shall be a sufficient compliance with the requirements of this section to all
intents and purposes and with like effect as if the vote in each case had been
separately by yeas and nays on the question of the passage of each ordinance,
order, resolution and motion included in such omnibus group, and separately
recorded in the journal. Likewise, the yeas and nays shall be taken upon the
question of the passage of any other resolution or motion at the request of any
trustee and shall be recorded in the journal.
      (4)   Ordinances; approval; veto.
         (a)   All resolutions and motions:
      1.   Which create any liability against the village;
      2.   Which provide for the expenditure or appropriation of its money; or
      3.   To sell any village property, and all ordinances passed by the Board
of Trustees shall be deposited with the Village Clerk.
         (b)   If the Mayor approves such resolution or motion, the Mayor shall
sign them. Those ordinances, resolutions, and motions which the Mayor
disapproves shall be returned to the Board of Trustees, with his or her written
objections, at the next regular meeting of the Board of Trustees occurring not
less than five days after their passage.
         (c)   The Mayor may disapprove of any one or more sums appropriated in
any ordinance, resolution, or motion making an appropriation, and, if so, the
remainder shall be effective. However, the Mayor may disapprove entirely of an
ordinance, resolution, or motion making an appropriation. If the Mayor fails to
return any ordinance or any specified resolution or motion with his or her
written objections, within the designated time, it shall become effective
despite the absence of the Mayor’s signature.
(Prior Code, § 1-2-14)
   (B)   Every resolution and motion, specified in division (A) above, and
every ordinance, that is returned to the Board of Trustees by the Mayor shall
be reconsidered by the Board of Trustees at the next regular meeting. If, after
reconsideration, two-thirds of all the Trustees then holding office on the
Board of Trustees shall agree at that regular meeting to pass an ordinance,
resolution, or motion, notwithstanding the Mayor’s refusal to approve it, then
it shall be effective. The vote on the question of passage over the Mayor’s
veto shall be by yeas and nays, and shall be recorded in the journal.
(Prior Code, § 1-2-15)
   (C)   No vote of the Board of Trustees shall be reconsidered or rescinded at
a special meeting unless there are present at the special meeting at least as
many Trustees as were present when the vote was taken.
(Prior Code, § 1-2-16)
Statutory reference:
   Provisions related to division (A), see 65 ILCS 5/3.1-40-40 and 5/3.1-40-45
   Provisions related to division (B), see 65 ILCS 5/3.1-40-50 and 5/3.1-45-5
   Provisions related to division (C), see 65 ILCS 5/3.1-40-55 and 5/3.1-45-5
VILLAGE OFFICIALS
§ 30.065 ELECTIONS.
   The provisions of the ILCS Chapter 10 concerning municipal elections shall
govern the conduct of the village elections. The inauguration of newly elected
village officials shall occur at the first regular or special meeting of the
Board of Trustees in the month of May following the general municipal election
in April.
(Prior Code, § 1-2-19)
Statutory reference:
   Related provisions, see 65 ILCS 5/3.1-10-10 and 5/3.1-10-15
§ 30.066 APPOINTMENT OF ELECTED OFFICIALS.
   No Trustee of the village, during the term of office for which he or she is
elected, may accept or be appointed to or hold any office appointed by the
Mayor except if such Trustee is granted a leave of absence from such office.
However, such Trustee may serve as a volunteer firefighter and receive
compensation for such service. Any appointment in violation of this section is
void. One member may serve on the Library Board.
(Prior Code, § 1-2-20)
Statutory reference:
   Provisions related to the Library Board, see 75 ILCS 5/4-1 and 50 ILCS 105/2
   Related provisions, see 65 ILCS 5/3.1-15-15
§ 30.067 MUNICIPAL OFFICERS; REGULATIONS.
   (A)   Effect. The provisions of this section shall apply alike to all
officers and employees of the village regardless of the time of creation of the
office or position or the time of the appointment of the officer or employee.
   (B)   Qualifications; appointive office.
      (1)   No person shall be eligible for any appointive municipal office
unless that person is a qualified elector of the village or otherwise provided
by law.
      (2)   The residency requirements do not apply, however, to municipal
engineers, health officers, attorneys, or other officers who require technical
training or knowledge, to appointed village treasurers, or to appointed village
collectors (unless the village has designated by ordinance that the Village
Clerk shall also hold the office of collector).
   (C)   Bond. Every officer and employee shall. If required by the Board of
Trustees upon entering upon the duties of his or her office, give a bond in
such amount and with such sureties as may be determined by the Board of
Trustees, conditioned upon the faithful performance of the duties of his or her
office or position.
   (D)   Books delivered to successor. Every officer shall, upon going out of
office, deliver to his or her successor, all books, papers, furniture, and
other things appertaining to such office, and which are the property of the
village. Within five days after notification and request, any person who has
been an officer of a municipality is required to deliver to his or her
successor in office, all property, books, and effects in his or her possession
belonging to the village, or pertaining to the office he or she has held. Upon
his or her refusal to do so, he or she shall be liable for all damages caused
thereby, and shall, upon conviction, be penalized according to the provisions
of §
10.999. He or she shall not receive his or her final check until his or her
Village Code Book and keys are turned over to the Village Clerk.
   (E)   Books open to inspection. Every officer shall, at all times when
required, submit the books and papers of his or her office to the inspection of
the Mayor or any committee or member of the Board of Trustees.
   (F)   Fees; report of fees. No officer of the village shall be entitled to
charge or receive any fees as against the village. All officers of the village
entitled to receive fees shall keep a correct account thereof, and make a
report thereof under oath to the Board of Trustees prior to the regular meeting
of each month. In the report, they shall specify from whom such fees were
received, for what service, and when received. All fees received shall be paid
over into the Village Treasury.
   (G)   Other rules and regulations. Every officer of the village shall
perform such other duties and be subject to such other rules and regulations as
the Board of Trustees may provide by law.
   (H)   Oath.
      (1)   Before entering upon the duties of their respective offices, all
municipal officers, whether elected or appointed shall take and subscribe to
the following oath: “I, do solemnly swear that I will support the Constitution
of the United States and the Constitution of the State of Illinois, and that I
will faithfully discharge the duties of the office of, according to the best of
my ability.”
      (2)   The Mayor and the Village Clerk shall have the power to administer
this oath or affirmation upon all lawful occasions.
(Prior Code, § 1-2-21)
Cross-reference:
   Administration of oaths, see §
30.110
Statutory reference:
   Additional powers and duties; authority, see 65 ILCS 5/3.1-10-40
   Appointive office; qualifications, see 65 ILCS 5/3.1-10-6
   Bond, see 65 ILCS 5/3.1-10-30
   Books delivered to successor, see 65 ILCS 5/3.1-10-35
   Oath, see 65 ILCS 5/3.1-15-20
§ 30.068 RESIGNATION.
   Any officer of the village may resign from office. If such officer resigns
he or she shall continue in office until his or her successor has been chosen
and has qualified. If there is a failure to appoint a village officer, or the
person appointed fails to qualify, the person filling the office shall continue
in office until his or her successor has been chosen and has qualified.
(Prior Code, § 1-2-22)
Statutory reference:
   Related provisions, see 65 ILCS 5/3.1-10-50
§ 30.069 QUALIFICATIONS; ELECTIVE OFFICE.
   (A)   A person is not eligible for an elective municipal office unless that
person is a qualified elector of the village and has resided in the
municipality at least one year next preceding the election or appointment
except as provided by statute.
   (B)   A person is not eligible for an elective municipal office if that
person is in arrears in the payment of a tax or other indebtedness due to the
municipality or has been convicted in any court located in the United States of
any infamous crime, bribery, perjury, or other felony until completion of his
or her sentence.
   (C)   If a person is a resident of a municipality immediately prior to the
active duty military service of that person or that person’s spouse, resides
anywhere outside of the municipality during that active duty military service,
and immediately upon completion of that active duty military service is again a
resident of the municipality, then the time during which the person resides
outside the municipality during the active duty military service is deemed to
be time during which the person is a resident of the municipality for purposes
of determining the residency requirement under division (A) above.
(Prior Code, § 1-2-23)
§ 30.070 BONDS.
   (A)   Amount. Bonds of village officers required under 65 ILCS 5/3.1-10-30
shall be executed in the following penal sums:
      (1)   Mayor: $50,000;
      (2)   Village Treasurer: $100,000; and
      (3)   Village Clerk $100,000.
   (B)   Premium payment by village. The surety bonds required by law shall be
paid by the village.
   (C)   Surety. The Board of Trustees shall not receive or approve any bond or
security whereon the name of the Board of Trustees, any one of the Trustees or
any elected or appointed officer of the village appear as bondsperson or
security. If, by mistake, a bond containing the name of any such officer is
approved by the Board of Trustees or if any bondsperson, after becoming such is
elected or appointed to any village office, this section shall not act as a
release of any such obligation incurred.
(Prior Code, § 1-2-24)
Statutory reference:
   Related provisions, see 5 ILCS 270/1
§ 30.071 LIABILITY INSURANCE.
   (A)   Purchase. The Board of Trustees shall have the power to purchase
liability insurance covering and insuring all municipal officers, employees,
and elected officials; said insurance to cover incidents occurring while in the
performance of their duties, which insurance may insure, cover, and protect any
liability which the municipal corporation, officer, employee, or elected
official may incur. When the insurance has been purchased, the village shall be
responsible for all premiums and deductible charges called for by any valid
liability insurance policy covering the municipal corporation, officer,
employee, or elected official.
   (B)   Indemnification.
      (1)   If the Board of Trustees elects not to purchase liability insurance
covering and insuring municipal officers, elected officials, and employees as
provided in this section, then the village shall indemnify and cause to defend
municipal officers, elected officials, and employees from any claim filed by an
individual, partnership, or corporation when the claim is founded on any act or
omission of the municipal officers, elected officials, or employees while in
the performance of their official duties, except the village shall not
indemnify, but shall defend any municipal officer, elected official, or
employee from any claim made by an individual, partnership, or corporation
wherein the claim alleges that the municipal officer, elected official, or
employee acted intentionally, maliciously, or wantonly and further, shall not
indemnify or cause to defend the officials or employees where the claim is
directly or indirectly related to the negligent care or use of a vehicle as
defined by the Illinois Compiled Statutes, and the village shall not indemnify
any municipal officer, elected official, or employee from any claim made by a
municipal officer, elected official, or employee.
      (2)   Notwithstanding any other provisions of this code of ordinances,
the village shall not indemnify or cause to defend any municipal officers,
elected officials, or employees if the municipal officers, elected officials,
or employees have liability insurance insuring the municipal officers, elected
officials, or employees from the alleged claim; however, the village shall
indemnify the municipal officer, elected official, or employee the personal
deductible limits of his or her personal policy.
(Prior Code, § 1-2-25)
Statutory reference:
   Related provisions, see 745 ILCS 10/2-201 et seq.
§ 30.072 SALARIES REGULATION.
   (A)   Elected. No salary or compensation of any elected municipal officer
who is elected for a definite term of office shall be increased or diminished
during such term.
   (B)   Appointed. No salary or compensation of any appointed official who is
appointed for a definite term of office shall be decreased during such term,
but may be increased.
(Prior Code, § 1-2-27)
Editor’s note:
   The salary of appointed officials and employees may be established in the
appropriation ordinance or annual budget. The salary of elected officials must
be established in an ordinance other than the appropriation ordinance at least
180 days before the beginning of the terms of the officers whose compensation
is to be filed.
Statutory reference:
   Related provisions, see 65 ILCS 5/3.1-50-5 and 5/3.1-50-10
OFFICE VACANCIES
§ 30.085 VACANCY BY RESIGNATION.
   A resignation is not effective unless it is in writing, signed by the person
holding the elective office, and notarized.
   (A)   Unconditional resignation. An unconditional resignation by a person
holding the elective office may specify a future date, not later than 60 days
after the date the resignation is received by the officer authorized to fill
the vacancy, at which time it becomes operative, but the resignation may not be
withdrawn after it is received by the officer authorized to fill the vacancy.
The effective date of a resignation that does not specify a future date at
which it becomes operative is the date the resignation is received by the
officer authorized to fill the vacancy. The effective date of a resignation
that has a specified future effective date is that specified future date or the
date the resignation is received by the officer authorized to fill the vacancy,
whichever date occurs later.
   (B)   Conditional resignation. A resignation that does not become effective
unless a specified event occurs can be withdrawn at any time prior to the
occurrence of the specified event, but if not withdrawn, the effective date of
the resignation is the date of the occurrence of the specified event or the
date the resignation is received by the officer authorized to fill the vacancy,
whichever date occurs later.
   (C)   Vacancy upon the effective date. For the purpose of determining the
time period that would require an election to fill the vacancy by resignation
or the commencement of the 60-day time period referred to in §
30.088, the resignation of an elected officer is deemed to have created a
vacancy as of the effective date of the resignation.
   (D)   Duty of the Village Clerk. If a resignation is delivered to the
Village Clerk, the Village Clerk shall forward a certified copy of the written
resignation to the official who is authorized to fill the vacancy within seven
business days after receipt of the resignation.
(Prior Code, § 1-2-37)
§ 30.086 VACANCY BY DEATH, DISABILITY, OR OTHERWISE.
   (A)   Death or disability. A vacancy occurs in an office by reason of the
death of the incumbent. The date of the death may be established by the date
shown on the death certificate. A vacancy occurs in an office by permanent
physical or mental disability rendering the person incapable of performing the
duties of the office. The corporate authorities have the authority to make the
determination whether an officer is incapable of performing the duties of the
office because of a permanent physical or mental disability. A finding of
mental disability shall not be made prior to the appointment by a court of a
guardian ad litem for the officer or until a duly licensed doctor certifies, in
writing, that the officer is mentally impaired to the extent that the officer
is unable to effectively perform the duties of the office. If the corporate
authorities find that an officer is incapable of performing the duties of the
office due to permanent physical or mental disability, that person is removed
from the office and the vacancy of the office occurs on the date of the
determination.
   (B)   Other causes.
      (1)   Abandonment. A vacancy occurs in an office by reason of abandonment
of office, removal from office, or failure to qualify, or more than temporary
removal of residence from the village, as the case may be. The corporate
authorities have the authority to determine whether a vacancy under this
section has occurred. If the corporate authorities determine that a vacancy
exists, the office is deemed vacant as of the date of that determination for
all purposes including the calculation under §§
30.088 and
30.089.
      (2)   Guilty of a criminal offense. An admission of guilt of a criminal
offense that upon conviction would disqualify the municipal officer from
holding the office, in the form of a written agreement with state or federal
prosecutors to plead guilty to a felony, bribery, perjury, or other infamous
crime under state or federal law, constitutes a resignation from that office,
effective on the date the plea agreement is made. For purposes of this section,
a conviction for an offense that disqualifies a municipal officer from holding
that office occurs on the date of the return of a guilty verdict or, in the
case of a trial by the court, on the entry of a finding of guilt.
   (B)   Election declared void. A vacancy occurs on the date of the decision
of a competent tribunal declaring the election of the officer void.
(Prior Code, § 1-2-38)
§ 30.087 ELECTION OF AN ACTING MAYOR.
   (A)   The election of an acting Mayor pursuant to §§
30.089 or
30.090 does not create a vacancy in the original office of the person on the
Board of Trustees, unless the person resigns from the original office following
election as acting Mayor.
   (B)   If the person resigns from the original office following election as
acting Mayor, then the original office must be filled pursuant to the terms of
this section and the acting Mayor shall exercise the powers of the Mayor and
shall vote and have veto power in the manner provided by law for a Mayor. If
the person does not resign from the original office following election as
acting Mayor, then the acting Mayor shall exercise the powers of the Mayor, but
shall be entitled to vote only in the manner provided for as the holder of the
original office and shall not have the power to veto. If the person does not
resign from the original office following election as acting Mayor, and if that
person’s original term of office has not expired when a Mayor is elected and
has qualified for office, the acting Mayor shall return to the original office
for the remainder of the term thereof.
(Prior Code, § 1-2-40)
§ 30.088 APPOINTMENT TO FILL TRUSTEE VACANCY.
   (A)   An appointment by the Mayor or acting Mayor, as the case may be, of a
qualified person as described in §
30.069 to fill a vacancy in the office of a Trustee must be made within 60 days
after the vacancy occurs.
   (B)   Once the appointment of the qualified person has been forwarded to the
corporate authorities, the corporate authorities shall act upon the appointment
within 30 days. If the appointment fails to receive the advice and consent of
the corporate authorities within 30 days, the Mayor or acting Mayor shall
appoint and forward to the corporate authorities a second qualified person as
described in §
30.069.
   (C)   (1)   Once the appointment of the second qualified person has been
forwarded to the corporate authorities, the corporate authorities shall act
upon the appointment within 30 days. If the appointment of the second qualified
person also fails to receive the advice and consent of the corporate
authorities, then the Mayor or acting Mayor, without the advice and consent of
the corporate authorities, may make a temporary appointment from those persons
who were appointed, but whose appointments failed to receive the advice and
consent of the corporate authorities.
      (2)   The person receiving the temporary appointment shall serve until an
appointment has received the advice and consent and the appointee has qualified
or until a person has been elected and has qualified, whichever first occurs.
(Prior Code, § 1-2-41)
§ 30.089 ELECTION TO FILL VACANCIES IN OFFICES WITH FOUR-YEAR TERMS.
   (A)   If a vacancy occurs in an elective municipal office with a four-year
term and there remains an unexpired portion of the term of at least 28 months,
and the vacancy occurs at least 130 days before the general municipal election
next scheduled under the general election law, then the vacancy shall be filled
for the remainder of the term at that general municipal election. Whenever an
election is held for this purpose, the Village Clerk shall certify the office
to be filled and the candidates for the office to the proper election
authorities as provided in the general election law.
   (B)   If a vacancy occurs with less than 28 months remaining in the
unexpired portion of the term or less than 130 days before the general
municipal election, then:
      (1)   Mayor.
         (a)   If the vacancy is in the office of Mayor, the vacancy must be
filled by the corporate authorities electing one of their members as acting
Mayor. Except as set forth in §
30.087, the acting Mayor shall perform the duties and possess all the rights
and powers of the Mayor until a Mayor is elected at the next general municipal
election and has qualified.
         (b)   However, in villages with a population of less than 5,000, if
each of the Trustees either declines the election as acting Mayor or is not
elected by a majority vote of the Trustees presently holding office, then the
Board of Trustees may elect as acting Mayor any other village resident who is
qualified to hold municipal office, and the acting Mayor shall exercise the
powers of the Mayor and shall vote and have veto power in the manner provided
by law for a Mayor.
      (2)   Trustee. If the vacancy is in the office of a Trustee, the vacancy
must be filled by the the Mayor or acting Mayor, as the case may be, in
accordance with §
30.088; and
      (3)   Other elective office. If the vacancy is in any elective municipal
office other than Mayor or a Trustee, the Mayor or acting Mayor, as the case
may be, must appoint a qualified person to hold the office until the office is
filled by election, subject to the advice and consent of the Board of Trustees,
as the case may be.
(Prior Code, § 1-2-42)
§ 30.090 VACANCIES DUE TO ELECTION BEING DECLARED VOID.
   In cases of vacancies arising by reason of an election being declared void
pursuant to §
30.086(B)(3), persons holding elective office prior thereto shall hold office
until their successors are elected and qualified or appointed and confirmed by
advice and consent, as the case may be.
(Prior Code, § 1-2-43)
Statutory reference:
   Related provisions, see 65 ILCS 5/3.1-10-50
VILLAGE CLERK
§ 30.105 APPOINTED.
   (A)   The Village Clerk shall be appointed by the Board President, subject
to the concurrence of two-thirds of the Board of Trustees.
   (B)   The term for the Village Clerk shall run concurrent with the term of
the Mayor. If a vacancy occurs in the office of Village Clerk, it shall be
filled in the same manner as initial appointments are made.
(Prior Code, § 1-2-66) (Ord. 2019-03, passed 2-4-2019)
§ 30.106 VACANCY.
   Whenever there is a vacancy in the office of Village Clerk; the office shall
be filled by the Mayor with the advice and consent of the Board of Trustees for
the remainder of the term. See §§
30.085 through
30.090 for further provisions concerning vacancies.
(Prior Code, § 1-2-67)
Statutory reference:
   Related provisions, see 65 ILCS 5/3.1-25-90
§ 30.107 PUBLICATION OF ORDINANCES; MINUTES; RECORDS.
   (A)   Ordinances. The Village Clerk shall cause all ordinances passed by the
Board of Trustees and approved by the Mayor, imposing any fine, penalty,
imprisonment, or forfeiture, or making any appropriation to be published or
printed in book or pamphlet form, published by authority of the corporate
authorities, or be published at least once within 30 days after passage, in one
or more newspapers published in the village.
   (B)   Minutes; records.
      (1)   Open meetings. The Village Clerk shall attend all meetings of the
Board of Trustees and shall keep in a suitable book to be styled “The Journal
of the Village Board,” a full and faithful record of its proceedings. The
Village Clerk shall record and properly index in a book kept for that purpose,
all ordinances passed by the Board of Trustees, and at the foot of the record
of each ordinance so recorded, the Village Clerk shall make a memorandum of the
date of the passage, when published, and a memorandum of the publication of
such ordinance.
      (2)   Closed meetings.
         (a)   The Village Clerk shall prepare and preserve the minutes of
closed meetings according to the exception provisions of the Open Meetings Act,
5 ILCS 120/2(c).
         (b)   At least twice a year, corporate authorities shall meet to
review minutes of all closed sessions and make a public statement as to whether
there is still a need to maintain such matters in confidence or whether minutes
or portions of minutes from closed meetings no longer require confidential
treatment and are available for public inspection.
   (C)   Bonds. The Village Clerk shall also record in proper books for the
purpose, all official bonds and note upon each bond so recorded when the same
was entered of record and the book and pages where recorded.
   (D)   Issue notices. The Village Clerk shall issue and cause to be served
upon all Trustees notices of all special meetings of the Board of Trustees;
also notices to the members of the different committees of that body and all
persons whose attendance may be required before any such committee, when so
directed by the Chair thereof.
(Prior Code, § 1-2-68)
Statutory reference:
   Bonds, see 65 ILCS 5/3.1-35-110
   Closed meetings, see 5 ILCS 120/2.06(c)
   Issue of notices, see 65 ILCS 5/1-2-4, 5/1-2-5, and 5/3.1-35-90
   Open meetings, see 65 ILCS 5/3.1-35-90
   Ordinances, see 65 ILCS 5/1-2-5
§ 30.108 DELIVERY OF PAPERS TO OFFICERS.
   The Village Clerk shall deliver to the several committees of the Board of
Trustees and to the officers of the village, all petitions, communications,
reports, and resolutions, orders, claims, and other papers referred to those
committees or officers by the Board of Trustees on demand therefor. The Village
Clerk shall also, without delay, deliver to the Mayor all ordinances or
resolutions, orders, and claims in his or her charge which may require to be
approved or otherwise acted upon by the Mayor.
(Prior Code, § 1-2-69)
Statutory reference:
   Related provisions, see 65 ILCS 5/3.1-35-90
§ 30.109 DOCUMENTS, COMMISSIONS, LICENSES, AND REPORTS.
   (A)   The Village Clerk shall prepare all commissions, licenses, permits,
and other official documents required to be issued by him or her under this
code of ordinances and shall attest the same with the corporate seal, and the
Village Clerk shall, in like manner, attest all deeds for the sale of real
estate owned and conveyed by this village.
(Prior Code, § 1-2-70)
   (B)   The Village Clerk shall report to the Board of Trustees at its regular
meeting each month and more often if the Board of Trustees so requires the data
contained in the license register with respect to licenses issued during the
previous month.
(Prior Code, § 1-2-71)
   (C)    In all cases where the village requires a license to be obtained for
the purpose of engaging in or carrying on any business or occupation, and the
licensee is required to obtain plates, tags, or stickers from the Village
Clerk, it shall be the duty of the Village Clerk to deliver such plates, tags,
or stickers to the person paying the license fee.
(Prior Code, § 1-2-72)
   (D)   The Village Clerk shall, on or before the regular meeting in each
month, make out and submit to the Board of Trustees a statement or report in
writing of all the monies received and warrants drawn during the preceding
month, showing therein from or what sources and on what account monies were
received, and for what purposes and on what account the warrants were drawn or
paid.
(Prior Code, § 1-2-75)
§ 30.110 ADMINISTRATION OF OATHS.
   The Clerk shall have the power to administer oaths or affirmations for all
lawful purposes.
(Prior Code, § 1-2-73)
Statutory reference:
   Related provisions, see 65 ILCS 5/3.1-15-20
§ 30.111 OUTSTANDING BONDS.
   The Village Clerk shall keep in his or her office in a book or books kept
expressly for that purpose a correct list of all the outstanding bonds of the
village, showing the number and amount of each, for and to whom the bonds are
issued; and when the village bonds are issued, purchased, paid, or cancelled,
the book or books shall show that fact; and in the annual report, the Village
Clerk shall describe particularly the bonds sold during the year and the terms
of sale with each and every item of expense thereof.
(Prior Code, § 1-2-74)
Statutory reference:
   Related provisions, see 65 ILCS 5/3.1-35-110
§ 30.112 SUCCESSOR.
   The Village Clerk shall carefully preserve all books, records, papers, maps,
and effects of every detail and description belonging to the village or
pertaining to the office, and not in actual use and possession of other village
officers; and upon the expiration of his or her official term, the Village
Clerk shall deliver all such books, records, papers, and effects to the
successor in office.
(Prior Code, § 1-2-76)
Statutory reference:
   Related provisions, see 65 ILCS 5/3.1-10-35
§ 30.113 PAYMENTS.
   The Village Clerk shall prepare daily an itemized list of all monies
received and shall deliver a copy of the same to the Village Treasurer and
shall also pay over to the Village Treasurer all monies received in the office
and take a receipt therefor.
(Prior Code, § 1-2-77)
§ 30.114 NOTIFICATION TO PERSONS APPOINTED TO OFFICE.
   Within five days after an appointment is made, the Village Clerk shall
notify all persons appointed to office of their appointment. The office becomes
vacant unless the person appointed qualifies within ten days after such notice.
(Prior Code, § 1-2-78)
§ 30.115 OTHER DUTIES.
   In addition to the foregoing duties, the Village Clerk shall perform all
such other duties pertaining to the office as are or may be imposed upon the
office by law or resolution or ordinance of the Board of Trustees.
(Prior Code, § 1-2-79)
Statutory reference:
   Related provisions, see 65 ILCS 5/3.1-10-40
§ 30.116 DEPUTY CLERK.
   (A)   The Village Clerk, when authorized by the Board of Trustees, may
appoint the Deputy Clerk who shall have the power and duty to execute all
documents required by any law to be executed by the Village Clerk and affix the
seal of the village thereto whenever required. In signing any documents, the
Deputy Clerk shall sign the name of the Village Clerk followed with the word
“By” and the Deputy Clerk’s name and the words “Deputy Clerk.”
   (B)   The powers and duties herein described shall be executed by such
Deputy Clerk only in the absence of the Village Clerk from the Village Clerk’s
office in the Village Hall, and only when either written direction has been
given by the Village Clerk to such Deputy Clerk to exercise such power or the
Board of Trustees has determined by resolution that the Village Clerk is
temporarily or permanently incapacitated to perform such functions.
(Prior Code, § 1-2-80)
Statutory reference:
   Related provisions, see 65 ILCS 5/3.1-10-45, 5/3.1-30-10, and 5/3.1-35-95
VILLAGE TREASURER
§ 30.130 COMMITTEE ESTABLISHED.
   (A)   (1)   There is hereby established a department of the municipal
government of the village, which shall be known as the “Finance Committee.”
      (2)   It shall embrace the Board of Trustees’ Committee on Finance, the
Village Treasurer, and the Budget Officer.
(Prior Code, § 1-2-82)
   (B)   The standing Committee on Finance shall exercise a general supervision
over the affairs of the Finance Department.
   (C)   The standing Committee on Finance shall ascertain the condition and
needs thereof; shall, from time to time, report the same to the Mayor and Board
of Trustees so that a full understanding thereof shall be had and generally,
shall do all the acts necessary to promote the efficiency of the Finance
Department.
(Prior Code, § 1-2-83)
§ 30.131 TREASURER APPOINTED; VACANCY.
   The Village Treasurer shall be appointed for a one-year term by the Mayor
with the advice and consent of the Board of Trustees and shall serve until a
successor is appointed and has qualified. All vacancies shall be filled in the
manner prescribed in §§
30.085 through
30.090.
(Prior Code, § 1-2-84)
Statutory reference:
   Related provisions, see 65 ILCS 5/3.1-30-5
§ 30.132 MONEY; WARRANTS; ACCOUNTS; PAYMENTS.
   (A)   (1)   The Village Treasurer shall receive all monies belonging to the
village and shall pay all warrants signed by the Mayor and countersigned by the
Village Clerk and not otherwise; and shall keep a separate account of each fund
or appropriation and the debits and credits belonging thereto.
      (2)   The Village Treasurer shall give to every person paying money into
the Village Treasury a receipt therefor, specifying the date of payment, and
upon what account paid, and shall file copies of such receipts with the Village
Clerk with the monthly reports.
(Prior Code, § 1-2-85)
   (B)   The Village Treasurer shall keep a register of all warrants redeemed
and paid, showing the number, date, and amount of each, the fund from which
paid, and the name of the person to whom and when paid; and the Village
Treasurer shall cancel all warrants as soon as they are redeemed.
(Prior Code, § 1-2-86)
Statutory reference:
   Provisions related to division (A), see 65 ILCS 5/3.1-35-40
   Provisions related to division (B), see 65 ILCS 5/3.1-35-40 and 5/3.1-35-45
§ 30.133 PERSONAL USE OF FUNDS.
   The Village Treasurer shall keep all money belonging to the municipality and
in the Village Treasurer’s custody separate and distinct from the Treasurer’s
own money and shall not use, either directly or indirectly, the village’s
monies or warrants for the personal use and benefit of the Village Treasurer or
of any other person. Any violation of this provision shall subject the Village
Treasurer to immediate removal from office by the corporate authorities, who
may declare the Village Treasurer’s office vacant.
(Prior Code, § 1-2-87)
Statutory reference:
   Related provisions, see 65 ILCS 5/3.1-35-55
§ 30.134 BOND.
   (A)   The Village Treasurer shall give bond conditioned upon the faithful
performance of his or her duties and to indemnify the village for any loss due
to neglect of duty or wrongful act on his or her part; and the amount of such
bond shall not be less than 10% of the highest amount of taxes and special
assessments received by the Village Treasurer during any fiscal year in the
preceding five fiscal years, nor less than one and one-half times the largest
amount which the Board of Trustees estimates will be in his or her custody at
any one time, nor less than three times the number of residents of the village,
as determined by the last Federal Census.
   (B)   Such bond shall be filed with the Village Clerk as required by
statute.
(Prior Code, § 1-2-88)
Statutory reference:
   Related provisions, see 65 ILCS 5/3.1-10-45
§ 30.135 SPECIAL ASSESSMENTS.
   The Village Treasurer shall collect all payments on special assessments and
shall see to it that the same are properly recorded and credited to the
particular account entitled thereto.
(Prior Code, § 1-2-89)
Statutory reference:
   Related provisions, see 65 ILCS 5/3.1-35-85
§ 30.136 BOOKKEEPING.
   The Village Treasurer shall keep the books and accounts in such a manner as
to show with accuracy, all monies received and disbursed for the village,
stating from whom and on what account received, and to whom and on what account
paid out, and in such a way that the books and accounts may be readily
investigated and understood, and the books and accounts and all files and
papers of the office shall be, at all times, open to examination by the Mayor
or the Finance Committee of the Board of Trustees.
(Prior Code, § 1-2-90)
Statutory reference:
   Related provisions, see 65 ILCS 5/3.1-35-40
§ 30.137 STATEMENTS.
   The Village Treasurer shall report to the corporate authorities at the
regular monthly meeting, a full and detailed account of all receipts and
expenditures of the village as shown by his or her books up to the time of the
report.
(Prior Code, § 1-2-91)
Statutory reference:
   Related provisions, see 65 ILCS 5/3.1-35-45
§ 30.138 REPORT OF DELINQUENT OFFICERS.
   It shall be the duty of the Village Treasurer to report to the Village Clerk
any officer of the village authorized to receive money for the use of the
village who may fail to make a return of the monies received by the Village
Treasurer at the time required by law or by ordinances of the village.
(Prior Code, § 1-2-92)
§ 30.139 YEAR-END REPORT.
   (A)   Within six months after the end of each fiscal year, the Village
Treasurer shall prepare and file annually with the Village Clerk an account of
monies received and expenditures incurred during the preceding fiscal year as
specified in this section. The Village Treasurer shall show the following in
such account:
      (1)   All monies received by the village, indicating the total amounts in
the aggregate received in each account of the village, with a general statement
concerning the source of such receipts; provided, however, for the purposes of
this division (A)(1), the term ACCOUNT shall not be construed to mean each
individual taxpayer, householder, licensee, utility user, or such other persons
whose payments to the village are credited to the general account;
      (2)   Except as provided in division (A)(3) below all monies paid out by
the village where the total amount paid during the fiscal year exceeds $2,500,
giving the name of each person to whom paid, on what account paid, and the
total amount in the aggregate paid to each person from each account;
      (3)   All monies paid out by the village as compensation for personal
services, giving the name of each person to whom paid, on what account paid,
and the total amount in the aggregate paid to each person from each account;
and
      (4)   (a)   A summary statement of operations for all funds and account
groups of the village as excerpted from the annual financial report, as filed
with the appropriate state agency of the state.
         (b)   Upon receipt of such account from the Village Treasurer, the
Village Clerk shall publish the account at least once in one or more newspapers
published in the village.
   (B)   The Village Treasurer shall file a copy of the report with the County
Treasurer, as provided in 65 ILCS 5/3.1-35-70.
(Prior Code, § 1-2-93)
Statutory reference:
   Related provisions, see 65 ILCS 5/3.1-35-65
§ 30.140 APPROPRIATIONS.
   (A)   The Village Treasurer shall on or before May 15 in each year, and
before the annual appropriations to be made by the Board of Trustees, submit to
the Board of Trustees a report of the estimates as nearly as may be of monies
necessary to defray the expenses of the corporation during the current fiscal
year. The Village Treasurer shall, in said report, classify the different
objects and branches of expenditures, giving as nearly as may be the amount
required for each; and for the purpose of making such a report, the Village
Treasurer is hereby authorized to require of all officers their statement of
the condition and expenses of their respective offices or departments with any
proposed improvements, and the probable expense thereof, all contracts made and
unfinished and the amount of any and all unexpended appropriations of the
preceding year.
   (B)   The Village Treasurer shall, in such report, show the aggregate income
of the preceding fiscal year, from all sources, the amount of liabilities
outstanding upon which interest is to be paid, the bonds and debts payable
during the year, when due and when payable; and in such report, shall give such
other information to the Board of Trustees as he or she may deem necessary to
the end that the Board of Trustees may fully understand the money exigencies
and demands upon the corporation for the current year.
(Prior Code, § 1-2-94)
Statutory reference:
   Related provisions, see 65 ILCS 5/3.1-35-115
§ 30.141 DEPOSIT OF FUNDS.
   (A)   The Village Treasurer is hereby required to keep all funds and monies
in his or her custody belonging to the village in such places of deposit as
have been designated by §
30.132(A). When requested by the Village Treasurer, the corporate authorities
shall designate a bank or banks in which may be kept the funds and monies of
the village in the custody of the Village Treasurer. When a bank or savings and
loan association has been designated as a depository, it shall continue as such
depository until ten days have elapsed after a new depository is designated and
has qualified by furnishing the statements of resources and liabilities as
required by this section. When a new depository is designated, the corporate
authorities shall notify the sureties of the Village Treasurer of that fact in
writing at least five days before the transfer of funds. The Treasurer shall be
discharged from responsibility for all funds or money that the Treasurer
deposits in a designated bank or savings and loan association while the funds
and money are so deposited.
   (B)   The Village Treasurer may require any bank or savings and loan
association to deposit with the Treasurer securities or mortgages that have a
market value at least equal to the amount of the funds or monies of the village
deposited with the bank or savings and loan association that exceeds the
insurance limitation provided by the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation or
the Federal Savings and Loan Insurance Corporation.
   (C)   The Village Treasurer may enter into agreements of any definite or
indefinite term regarding the deposit, redeposit, investment, reinvestment, or
withdrawal of village funds.
   (D)   (1)   Each Village Treasurer may:
         (a)   Combine monies from more than one fund of a single municipality
for the purpose of investing those funds; and
         (b)   Join with other municipal treasurers or municipalities for the
purpose of investing the municipal funds of which the Treasurer has custody.
      (2)   Joint investments shall be made only in investments authorized by
law for the investment of municipal funds.
      (3)   When monies of more than one fund of a single municipality or
monies of more than one municipality are combined for investment purposes, the
monies combined for that purpose shall be accounted for separately in all
respects and the earnings from investments shall be separately and individually
computed, recorded, and credited to the fund or municipality, as the case may
be, for which the investment was acquired.
   (E)   No bank or savings and loan association shall receive public funds as
permitted by this section unless it has complied with the requirements
established by § 6 of the Public Funds Investment Act, being 30 ILCS 235/6.
   (F)   The following bank(s) are herewith designated as places of deposit
where the Village Treasurer of the village is required to keep all funds and
monies in his or her custody belonging to the village:
      (1)   Regions Bank, Marissa Branch within the village; and
      (2)   The State Treasurer’s Investment Pool.
(Prior Code, § 1-2-95)
Statutory reference:
   Related provisions, see 65 ILCS 5/3.1-35-50 and 30 ILCS 235/6
OTHER SPECIFIC APPOINTED OFFICIALS
§ 30.155 JUDICIARY; VILLAGE ATTORNEY.
   (A)   Appointment. The Village Attorney shall be appointed by the Mayor, by
and with the advice and consent of the Board of Trustees for the term of one
year, unless sooner removed for cause, and until a successor shall have been
appointed and qualified. The Village Attorney shall have full charge of the law
affairs of the village and shall be known as the Village Attorney and shall
receive an annual salary as determined by the appropriation ordinance,
compensation for office services and advice, and shall receive reasonable fees
for other services rendered when, in his or her judgment, or in the judgment of
the Mayor or Board of Trustees, the same are necessary or are for the best
interests of the village.
(Prior Code, § 1-2-97)
   (B)   Duties.
      (1)   Prosecute for village. The Village Attorney shall prosecute or
defend on behalf of the village in all cases in which the interests of the
corporation or any officer thereof are involved; and the Village Clerk shall
furnish him or her with certified copies of any ordinance, bond, or paper in
keeping necessary to be filed or used in any suit or proceedings.
      (2)   Preparation of ordinances. The Village Attorney shall, when
required, advise the Board of Trustees or any officer in all matters of law in
which the interests of the corporation are involved, and shall draw such
ordinances, bonds, forms, and contracts, or examine and pass upon the same, as
may be required by the Mayor, the Board of Trustees, or any committee thereof.
      (3)   Judgments. The Village Attorney shall direct executions to be
issued upon all judgments recovered in favor of the village, and shall direct
their prompt service. The Village Attorney shall examine all the bills of the
officers of courts, and of other officers of the law, and shall certify to
their correctness and the liability of the village therefor.
      (4)   Violations of ordinances. The Village Attorney shall institute and
prosecute an action in every case of violation of a village ordinance, when
instructed to do so by the Mayor or the Board of Trustees.
      (5)   Prosecution of suits. The Village Attorney shall not be required to
prosecute any suit or action arising under the ordinances of the village when,
upon investigation of the same, the Village Attorney shall become satisfied
that the complaint was instituted maliciously, vexatiously, or without just
cause; and shall dismiss or discontinue any such suit or proceeding upon such
terms as he or she may deem just or equitable.
      (6)   Collection of taxes. The Village Attorney is hereby authorized and
instructed to enforce the collection of any and all taxes and special
assessments in the collection of which the village is interested and to attend
all sales of real or personal property made to enforce the collection of such
taxes or special assessments and to bid thereat on behalf of the village.
      (7)   Commissions. The Village Attorney shall act as the legal advisory
for the Utilities Systems, for the Plan Commission, for the Zoning Board of
Appeals, and for all other boards and commissions hereafter established by the
Board of Trustees. The Village Attorney shall perform all legal services as may
be required for those boards and commissions.
(Prior Code, § 1-2-98)
   (C)   Prosecutor’s fee.
      (1)   For each complaint that is prosecuted on behalf of the village to
enforce the provisions of general ordinances of the village, and also to
enforce provisions of state statutes and statutes affecting the affairs of the
village, there shall be added as costs to be assessed against the defendant in
each case the sum of $50 to be known as the “Village Prosecutor’s fee.” Upon
said defendant being found guilty of the charges as set up in the complaint
that is filed on behalf of the village in any of the two above- named
situations, it shall be the duty of the court before whom such matter is heard
to assess a village prosecutor’s fee in the sum of $50, which shall be paid
directly to the Village Prosecutor by the Circuit Court Clerk, and that the
fine or penalty as assessed by the court for the violation of the complaint
shall be paid to the Village Clerk.
(Prior Code, § 1-2-99)
Statutory reference:
    Related provisions, see 65 ILCS 5/3.1-30-5
§ 30.156 VILLAGE ENGINEER.
   (A)   Appointment. With the advice and consent of the Board of Trustees, the
Mayor may appoint an engineer for the village, who shall serve for the term of
one year.
(Prior Code, § 1-2-101)
   (B)   Duties; salary. The Village Engineer shall make and submit plans,
estimates, and specifications for any public work which may be proposed or
ordered by the Board of Trustees. He or she shall also examine all public works
under his or her charge and see that the plans, estimates, and specifications
for the same are properly executed. He or she shall receive a salary to be
determined on a project by project basis.
(Prior Code, § 1-2-102)
§ 30.157 SUPERINTENDENT OF PUBLIC WORKS.
   (A)   Appointment; term. The Superintendent of Public Works shall be
appointed for a one year term by the Mayor with the advice and consent of the
Board of Trustees at the first regular meeting of the village in the month of
May or as soon thereafter as practical.
(Prior Code, § 1-2-105)
   (B)   Duties. The Superintendent of Public Works shall be a full time
position and shall report to the Mayor or the Chair of the Public Works
Committee as directed. The Superintendent of Public Works shall have the
following responsibilities:
      (1)   Organize, direct, and coordinate the activities of the streets,
alleys, sanitation, and parks to ensure work is carried out in an organized and
efficient manner;
      (2)   Oversees the procurement, management, and maintenance of the
village’s fleet of equipment, construction, maintenance, and operation of
village-owned facilities;
      (3)   Responsible for planning long-term programs, for resolving
administrative problems, and for managing the departmental budget;
      (4)   Confers with and advises the Mayor and Chair of the Public Services
Committee on problems and improvements relating to the activities of his or her
department;
      (5)   Develops general policies, in consultation with the Public Services
Committee, for maximum utilization of available financial resources through
appropriate allocations of manpower and equipment services;
      (6)   Meets with vendors, contractors, consultants, and others regarding
departmental activities;
      (7)   Attend regularly scheduled Board of Trustees meetings and other
meetings as directed;
      (8)   Disseminates information such as water or sewer breaks, roadway
closures, or other information to the Mayor, Board of Trustees, village
departments, general public, press, and emergency and service providers in a
timely manner;
      (9)   Maintains a constant working relationship with regulatory units of
government;
      (10)   Prepares the annual department revenue and expenses budget after
consultation with the Finance Committee;
      (11)   Demonstrates continuous effort to improve operations, decrease
turnaround times, streamline work processes, and work cooperatively and jointly
to provide quality seamless service; and
      (12)   Such other duties as directed by the Board of Trustees.
(Prior Code, § 1-2-106)
   (C)   Compensation. The Village Superintendent of Public Works shall be
compensated as determined by the Board of Trustees.
(Prior Code, § 1-2-107)
(Ord. 08-07, passed 7-7-2008)
§ 30.158 ZONING ADMINISTRATOR.
   (A)   Creation of office. There is hereby created the executive position of
Zoning Administrator, which officer and organizational personnel shall be
appointed by the Mayor at the first regular meeting in May, with the advice and
consent of the Board of Trustees. His or her term of office shall be for one
year, or until his or her successor is appointed and has qualified.
(Prior Code, § 1-2-110)
   (B)   Duties. The Zoning Administrator or his or her authorized
representative shall administer and enforce the Zoning Code, as amended from
time to time and is in effect in accordance with the powers and duties therein
set forth, and in furtherance of such authority, he or she shall:
      (1)   Issue all zoning certificates and make and maintain records
thereof;
      (2)   Issue temporary certificates of zoning compliance as authorized by
the Zoning Code;
      (3)   Conduct inspections of buildings, structures, and land to determine
compliance with the Zoning Code and the Floodplain Code and to notify in
writing the person responsible for any violation found, indicating the nature
of the violation and ordering the action necessary to correct it;
      (4)   Order the discontinuance of illegal use of land, buildings, or
structures, removal of illegal buildings, structures, or of illegal additions,
alterations, or structural changes, discontinuance of any illegal work being
done, or shall take any other action authorized by statute or by the Zoning
Code to ensure compliance with or to prevent violation of the provisions;
      (5)   Prepare and cause to be published on or before March 31 of each
year a map showing the existing zoning use, divisions, restrictions,
regulations, and classifications in effect on the preceding December 31;
      (6)   Maintain permanent and current records of the Zoning Code,
including, but not limited to, all maps, amendments, special use permits,
planned building developments, variances, appeals, and applications therefor;
      (7)   Provide and maintain a source of public information relative to all
matters arising out of the Zoning Code;
      (8)   Receive, file, and forward to the Plan Commission all applications
for amendments, use variances and special permits and other matters on which
the Plan Commission is required to act upon under the Zoning Code;
      (9)   Receive, file, and forward to the Zoning Board of Appeals all
applications for variance, appeals and other matters upon which the Board of
Trustees is required to act upon under the Zoning Code;
      (10)   Keep the Mayor and the Board of Trustees advised of zoning
activities by written report once each month, including statements of permits
and certificates issued and orders promulgated; and
      (11)   The Zoning Administrator may request and shall receive so far as
may be necessary in the discharge of his or her duties, the assistance and
cooperation of the Mayor in enforcing order, of the Village Attorney in
prosecuting violators, and of other village officials and officers.
(Prior Code, § 1-2-111)
§ 30.159 CODE ENFORCEMENT OFFICIAL.
   (A)   Creation of office.
      (1)   There is hereby created the executive position of Code Enforcement
Officer, which officer and organizational personnel shall be appointed by the
Mayor at the first regular meeting in May, with the advice and consent of the
Board of Trustees.
      (2)   He or she shall perform such other code inspection or enforcement
duties as may be from time to time designated by the Mayor and/or the Board of
Trustees.
(Prior Code, § 1-2-112)
   (B)   Duties.
      (1)   The Code Enforcement Officer or his or her authorized
representative shall administer and enforce such codes and ordinances as are
established by the Board of Trustees from time to time and are in effect in
accordance with the powers and duties therein set forth, and in furtherance of
such authority, he or she shall:
         (a)   Perform such acts including but not limited to inspections,
giving of notices and effectuating such court orders as may be necessary for
the enforcement of the codes and ordinances of the village as they relate to
nuisances, occupancy of buildings, mobile homes, weeds, trees, and bushes,
together with such other or similar matters as may be designated by the Mayor
or the Board of Trustees and consistent with the codes and ordinances of the
village; and
         (b)   Keep the Mayor and Board of Trustees advised of enforcement
activities by written report once each month, including statements of notices
of violations, permits, and certificates issued and orders promulgated.
      (2)   The Code Enforcement Officer may request and shall receive so far
as may be necessary in the discharge of duties, the assistance and cooperation
of the Mayor in enforcing orders, of the Village Attorney in prosecuting
violators, and of other village officials and officers.
      (3)   (a)   The Code Enforcement Officer shall perform such duties as
prescribed by codes and laws of the village and as may be specifically assigned
to him or her by the Board of Trustees
         (b)    Such codes and laws may include, but not be limited to,
occupancy permit inspections, the Mobile Housing Code, and the Subdivision
Code, as adopted and amended from time to time by the Board of Trustees.
(Prior Code, § 1-2-113)
Cross-reference:
   Building inspections, see §
158.043
§ 30.160 VILLAGE COLLECTOR.
   (A)   Compensation. Compensation shall be such amount as shall be determined
by the Mayor, with the advice and consent of the Board of Trustees with the
understanding that this shall be a full time position with attendant holiday,
and insurance benefit.
(Prior Code, § 1-2-114)
   (B)   Duties. The duties to be performed by the Village Collector include
the following:
      (1)   Those duties as set out in 65 ILCS 5/3.1-35-102 through 5/3.1-35-
130;
      (2)   Prepare and file village and/or departmental compliance reports to
appropriate administrative agencies, being county, state, and federal;
      (3)   Assist the office of the Mayor, assistance may take the form of
performing either secretarial or administrative tasks as may be required by the
Mayor from time to time;
      (4)   At the direction of the Mayor, provide assistance to such other
officers of the village as may from time to time be deemed necessary;
      (5)   At the direction of the Mayor, provide assistance to various
departments of the village including both secretarial and administrative
assistance; and
      (6)   Such other tasks as may be reasonably required to assist in the
carrying out of village business as may be required by the Mayor.
(Prior Code, § 1-2-115)
   (C)   Term. This position shall be of such term or duration as may be
determined by the Mayor, with the advice and consent of the Board of Trustees.
Any person employed in this capacity shall be deemed an employee at will and
may be terminated by the Mayor, subject to § 12.1 of the Personnel Policy for
the village.
(Prior Code, § 1-2-116)
(Ord. 93-3, passed 5-12-1993)
§ 30.161 ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT DIRECTOR.
   There is hereby created the executive position of Economic Development
Director, which officer and organizational personnel may be appointed by the
Mayor at the first regular meeting in May, with the advice and consent of the
Board of Trustees. The term of office shall be for one year, or until his or
her successor is appointed and has qualified.
(Prior Code, § 1-2-117) (Ord. 05-11, passed 12-12-2005)
§ 30.162 VILLAGE ADMINISTRATOR.
   (A)   Purpose.
      (1)   The Village Administrator is hired to serve the Council and the
community, and he or she brings to the village the benefits of his or her
training and experience in administering municipal projects and programs.
      (2)   The filling of this position shall be at the discretion of the
Village President and the Board of Trustees. The Village President may appoint
an individual to fill this position with the advice and consent of the Board of
Trustees, for a one-year term from appointment. This position does not have to
be filled if, in the opinion of the Village President and Board of Trustees, it
is not needed.
   (B)   Qualifications. The following shall be the qualifications for the
Village Administrator:
      (1)   Experience in government, preferable at the municipal level;
      (2)   Experience of training in finances, including budgeting and
management of finances;
      (3)   Knowledge of the village government; preferably, the village;
      (4)   Proven competence in all areas of municipal government;
      (5)   Good public relations skill;
      (6)   Flexibility of schedule that will enable this person to perform all
of the duties of the office; and
      (7)   Critical thinking skills to approach complex village issues
creatively.
   (C)   Duties of the office.
      (1)   Act as the economic development director of the village;
      (2)   Complete all federal and state paperwork needed;
      (3)   Oversee the special projects, designated by the Village President
and the Board of Trustees;
      (4)   Oversee the motor fuel tax program;
      (5)   Act as a go-between for the Village President and the Board of
Trustees on matters concerning the village;
      (6)   Delegating tasks, planning, prioritizing, assigning, supervising,
and reviewing the weekly work of full-time, part-time and temporary Street
Department staff;
      (7)   Oversee sewer plant;
      (8)   Negotiate contracts with waste management and relay to the Board
for Board approval;
      (9)   Supervise all grant work including county and IGD;
      (10)   Coordinating and ensuring the prompt completion of village
projects;
      (11)   Serving as a liaison with the Board and other government and
public agencies;
      (12)   Provide advice and make recommendations for the renewal of health
insurance for employees;
      (13)   Negotiate employee contracts for Board approval;
      (14)   Assist in preparing, managing, and proposing annual budget; and
      (15)   Perform all functions of the Village Treasurer.
   (D)   Chain of command. The Village Administrator shall answer directly to
the Village President and the Board of Trustees. He or she shall take no action
or start on any project that has not been approved by the Board of Trustees, or
in an emergency, the Village President. He or she shall be answerable directly
to the Village President during the time between monthly meetings of the Board
of Trustees.
   (E)   Salary, benefits, and term of contract. The Village Administrator
shall be paid a salary as agreed upon by the Village Board. Any benefits given
to the Village Administrator shall be negotiated like the other employees.
(Ord. 23-03, passed 9-7-2023)
MEETING PROCEDURES
§ 30.175 CLOSED SESSIONS; RECORDING.
   (A)   Recording closed sessions. The village shall keep a verbatim record of
all closed or executive session meetings of the corporate authorities of the
village or any subsidiary “public body” as defined by the State Open Meetings
Act, 5 ILCS 120/1. The verbatim record shall be in the form of an audio or
video recording as determined by the corporate authorities.
(Prior Code, § 1-5-1)
   (B)   Responsibility for recording closed sessions and maintaining
recordings. The Village Clerk or his or her designee shall be responsible for
arranging for the recording of such closed or executive sessions. In the
absence of the Village Clerk or his or her designee, the meeting Chair will
arrange for the audio or video recording of the closed or executive session of
the Board of Trustees. Each subsidiary public body of the village shall
designate an individual who will be responsible for the recording of any and
all closed or executive sessions of the subsidiary body and for providing the
Village Clerk with a copy of such recording. The Village Clerk, or his or her
designee, shall securely maintain the verbatim recordings of all closed
sessions of the corporate authorities of the village and all subsidiary public
bodies of the village.
(Prior Code, § 1-5-2)
   (C)   Closed session minutes. In addition to the recordings of the closed
and executive session as addressed in this division (C), the village will keep
minutes of all closed meetings in accordance with the requirements of the Open
Meetings Act, 5 ILCS 120/2.06.
(Prior Code, § 1-5-3)
   (D)   Procedure for recording. At the beginning of each closed session,
those present shall identify themselves by voice for the audio recording. If
the meeting is videotaped, those present shall individually appear on camera
and identify themselves by voice at the beginning of the closed session. The
meeting Chair shall also announce the times the closed session commences and
ends at the appropriate points on the recording.
(Prior Code, § 1-5-4)
   (E)   Back-up equipment/procedure for equipment malfunction. The village
shall maintain sufficient tapes, batteries, and equipment for the village to
comply with this division (E). The Village Clerk or his or her designee shall
periodically check the equipment to confirm that it is functioning. In the
event that anyone present at a closed session determines that the equipment is
not functioning properly, the closed session will be temporarily suspended to
attempt to correct any malfunction. In the event that an equipment malfunction
cannot be corrected immediately, the closed session will terminate until such
time as the closed session may proceed with a functioning recording device.
(Prior Code, § 1-5-5)
   (F)   Procedure for review of closed session minutes and recordings. At one
meeting at least every six months, the agenda shall include the item: “Review
of the minutes and recordings of all closed sessions that have not yet been
released for public review, and determination of which minutes, if any, may be
released.” Minutes shall be reviewed in closed session and shall not be
released unless the corporate authorities of the village find that it is no
longer necessary to protect the public interest or the privacy of an individual
by keeping them confidential. As to any minutes not released, the corporate
authorities shall find that the “need for confidentiality still exists” as to
those minutes. Minutes of closed sessions shall be kept indefinitely.
(Prior Code, § 1-5-6)
   (G)   Maintenance and public release of recordings and access to tapes. The
audio or video tape recordings of closed sessions shall be maintained for 18
months after the closed session and shall not be released to the public unless
such release is required by a court order or specifically authorized for
release by a vote of the Board of Trustees. Members of the corporate
authorities may listen to the closed session recordings in the presence of the
Village Clerk or his or her designee. Copies of such tapes will not be made or
provided to anyone unless specifically authorized by vote of the Board of
Trustees.
(Prior Code, § 1-5-7)
   (H)   Procedure for destruction of recordings. The Village Clerk or his or
her designee is hereby authorized to destroy the audio and video recordings of
those closed sessions for which:
      (1)   The corporate authorities of the village have approved the minutes
of the closed sessions as to accurate content, regardless of whether the
minutes have been released for public review;
      (2)   More than 18 months have elapsed since the date of the closed
session;
      (3)   There is no court order requiring the preservation of such
recording; and
      (4)   The corporate authorities of the village have not passed a motion
requiring the preservation of the verbatim recording of that meeting.
(Prior Code, § 1-5-8)
Statutory reference:
   Related provisions, see 5 ILCS 120/2
§ 30.176 REMOTE MEETING PARTICIPATION.
   (A)   Statutory authority for participation. Pursuant to the Open Meetings
Act, 5 ILCS 120/7, the village does hereby establish a policy that permits
members of the corporate body to attend meetings by means other than physical
presence.
(Prior Code, § 1-5-11)
   (B)   Definition. The term MEETING shall mean any gathering, whether in
person or by video or audio conference, telephone calls, electronic means (such
as, without limitation, electronic mail, electronic chat, and instant
messaging), or other means of contemporary interactive communication, of a
majority of a quorum of the members of a public body held for the purpose of
discussing public business, or such other definition as shall be contained
within the state statutes.
(Prior Code, § 1-5-12)
   (C)   Amendment to previous terms. The definition of MEETING set forth in
division (B) above shall supersede and replace any other definition used in any
previous or existing ordinance.
(Prior Code, § 1-5-13)
   (D)   Remote participation policy. The village hereby adopts the Remote
Participation Policy, as outlined in this division (D), that permits a member
of the public body to attend and participate in any meeting of a public body as
defined in the Open Meetings Act, being 5 ILCS 120/1.02, from a remote location
via telephone, video, or internet connection; provided that such attendance and
participation is in compliance with the policy and any applicable laws.
      (1)   Policy statement. It is the policy of the village that a member of
any group associated with this unit of government which is subject to the
provisions fo the Open Meetings Act may attend and participate in any open or
closed meeting of that covered group from a remote location via telephone,
video, or internet connection; provided that such attendance and participation
is in compliance with this policy and any other applicable laws.
      (2)   Prerequisites. A member of the covered group of the village shall
be provided the opportunity to attend an open and closed meeting or only one of
such meetings from a remote location if the member meets that following
conditions and a majority of a quorum of the covered body votes to approve the
remote attendance:
         (a)   The member must notify the recording secretary or clerk of the
covered body at least 24 hours before the meeting unless advance notice is
impractical;
         (b)   The member must meet one of three reasons described herein why
he or she is unable to physically attend the meeting, including either:
      1.   The member cannot attend because of personal illness or disability;
      2.   The member cannot attend because of employment purposes or the
business of the village; or
      3.   The member cannot attend because of a family or other emergency.
         (c)   A quorum of the covered body must be physically present.
      (3)   Voting procedure. After roll call, a vote of the covered body shall
be taken, considering the prerequisites set forth in division (D)(2) above, on
whether to allow an off-site Board of Trustees member to participate remotely.
All of the members physically present are permitted to vote on whether remote
participation will be allowed. A vote may be taken to permit remote
participation for a stated series of meetings if the same reason applies in
each case. Otherwise, a vote must be taken to allow each remote participation.
      (4)   Quorum and vote required. A quorum must be established by members
physically present at any meeting before it can be considered whether to allow
a member to participate in the meeting remotely. A vote of a majority of a
quorum shall be necessary to decide the issue. For the meeting to continue,
there shall always need to be a quorum physically present.
      (5)   Minutes. The member participating remotely shall be considered an
off-site participant and counted as present by means of video or audio
conference, for that meeting of the members is allowed to participate. The
meeting minutes of the village shall also reflect and state specifically
whether each member is physically present, present by video, or present by
audio means.
(Prior Code, § 1-5-14)
APPENDIX A: CLOSED SESSION MINUTES
NOTE: The identifying names have been changed to preserve confidentiality for
the village.
Inventory Date Purpose Discussion Proposed Action Comments
Inventory Date Purpose Discussion Proposed Action Comments
                                              
                                              
                                              
                                              
                                              
                                              
                                              
                                              
                                              
                                              
                                              
                                              
                                              
                                              
                                              
                                              
                                              
                                              
                                              
                                              
                                              
                                              
                                              
                                              
                                              
                                              
                                              
 
Key
Personnel
P/L      Pending Litigation
L/A      Land Acquisition
CB      Collective Bargaining
(Prior Code, Ch. 1, Addendum A)
APPENDIX B: NOTICE OF REQUEST FOR PLACEMENT UPON BOARD OF TRUSTEES’ AGENDA
I, ___________________________________________________________(name), do hereby
request placement upon the agenda of the Board of Trustees’ regularly scheduled
meeting on _____________
_________________________________ (date) to address the Board with regards to:
___________________________________________________________________________________
___________________________________________________________________________________
___________________________________________________________________________________
___________________________________________________________________________________
(short explanation of proposed business)
   Dated this _____________ (day) of ____________________ (month),
_____________ (year).
                                          Sincerely,
                                          ________________________________
                                          APPLICANT
                                          ________________________________
                                          Printed Name
                                          ________________________________
                                          ________________________________
                                          Address
                                          ________________________________
                                          Telephone Number
Please keep in mind that pursuant to §
30.053 that establishes rules governing the address of the Board of Trustees,
all remarks must be kept to a maximum of five minutes, shall be addressed to
the Board of Trustees, and shall not be disruptive to the business of the Board
of Trustees. The Mayor is empowered to remove individuals from any meeting
should they fail to adhere to the rules regarding address of the Board of
Trustees.
(Prior Code, Ch. 1)
CHAPTER 31: ORGANIZATIONS
Section
Management Association
   
31.001   Participation
   
31.002   Contribution
Plan Commission
   
31.015   Established
   
31.016   Membership
   
31.017   Term of office
   
31.018   Procedure
   
31.019   Powers and duties
   
31.020   Land subdivision; resubdivision; Official Map
   
31.021   Improvements
   
31.022   Further purposes
   
31.023   Expenditures
MANAGEMENT ASSOCIATION
§ 31.001 PARTICIPATION.
   The Board of Trustees does hereby authorize and approve membership in the
State Municipal League Risk Management Association and directs the Mayor and
the Village Clerk to execute an Intergovernmental Cooperation Contract with the
State Municipal League Risk Management Association for membership for a period
of one year, beginning the date the State Municipal League Risk Management
Association commences providing risk coverage to its members and each year
thereafter, unless this subchapter is repealed.
(Prior Code, § 1-4-1) (Ord. 2018-12, passed 11-5-2018)
§ 31.002 CONTRIBUTION.
   (A)   Each member hereby agrees to contribute to the State Municipal League
Risk Management Association a sum of money to be determined by the State
Municipal League Risk Management Association at the time of application based
on the needs of the State Municipal League Risk Management Association and the
loss experience of the member, which sum shall constitute the cost of the
member’s contribution for membership in the State Municipal League Risk
Management Association.
   (B)   Membership contributions for second and subsequent years shall be
calculated in accordance with the loss experience of the village, and the needs
of the State Municipal League Risk Management Association including total
losses and expenditures of the Self-Insured Retention Fund of the State
Municipal League Risk Management Association.
(Prior Code, § 1-4-2) (Ord. 2018-12, passed 11-5-2018)
PLAN COMMISSION
§ 31.015 ESTABLISHED.
   A Plan Commission is hereby created under authority of the 65 ILCS 5/11-12-
4 through 5/11-12-12.
(Prior Code, § 4-1-1) (Ord. 414, passed 5-3-1966)
§ 31.016 MEMBERSHIP.
   The Plan Commission shall consist of seven members; said members to be
residents of Marissa Township, appointed by the Mayor on the basis of their
particular fitness for their duty on the Plan Commission, and subject to the
approval of the Board of Trustees.
(Prior Code, § 4-1-2) (Ord. 03-10, passed 4-21-2003)
§ 31.017 TERM OF OFFICE.
   (A)   The members shall serve for a period of three years. Vacancies shall
be filled by appointment for the unexpired term only.
   (B)   All members of the Plan Commission shall serve without compensation,
except that if the Board of Trustees deems it advisable, they may receive such
compensation as provided by the Board of Trustees by appropriation.
(Prior Code, § 4-1-3) (Ord. 414, passed 5-3-1966)
§ 31.018 PROCEDURE.
   The Plan Commission shall elect such officers as it may deem necessary and
adopt rules and regulations of organization and procedure consistent with this
code of ordinances and state law. The Plan Commission shall keep written
records of its proceedings. It shall be open at all times for and to the
inspection of the public, and the Plan Commission shall file an annual report
with the Mayor and Board of Trustees setting forth its transactions and
recommendations.
(Prior Code, § 4-1-4) (Ord. 414, passed 5-3-1966)
§ 31.019 POWERS AND DUTIES.
   The Plan Commission shall have the following powers and duties:
   (A)   (1)   To prepare and recommend to the Board of Trustees a
comprehensive plan for the present and future development or redevelopment of
the village and contiguous unincorporated territory not more than one and one-
half miles beyond the corporate limits of the village and not included in any
other municipality. Such plan may be adopted in whole or in separate
geographical or functional parts, each of which, when adopted, shall be the
official comprehensive plan or part thereof of the village. Such plan shall be
advisory except as to such part thereof as has been implemented by ordinances
duly enacted by the Board of Trustees; and
      (2)   All requirements for public hearing, filing of notice of adoption
with the County Recorder of Deeds, and filing of the plan and ordinances with
the Village Clerk shall be complied with as provided for by law. To provide for
the health, safety, comfort, and convenience of the inhabitants of the village
and contiguous territory, such plan or plans shall establish reasonable
standards of design for subdivisions and for resubdivisions of unimproved land
and of areas subject to redevelopment in respect to public improvements as
herein defined and shall establish reasonable requirements governing the
location, width, course, and surfacing of public streets and highways, alleys,
ways for public service facilities, curbs, gutters, sidewalks, street lights,
parks, playgrounds, school grounds, size of lots to be used for residential
purposes, storm water drainage, water supply and distribution, sanitary sewers,
and sewage collection and treatment. The requirements specified herein shall
become regulatory only when adopted by law.
   (B)   To designate land suitable for annexation to the village and the
recommended zoning classification for such land upon annexation;
   (C)   To recommend to the Board of Trustees from time to time such changes
in the comprehensive plan or any part thereof, as may be deemed necessary;
   (D)   To prepare and recommend to the Board of Trustees from time to time
plans and/or recommendations for specific improvements in pursuance to the
Official Comprehensive Plan;
   (E)   To give aid to the officials of the village charged with the direction
of projects for improvements embraced within the official plan or parts
thereof, to further the making of such improvements and generally, to promote
the realization of the Official Comprehensive Plan;
   (F)   To arrange and conduct any form of publicity relative to its
activities for the general purpose of public understanding;
   (G)   To cooperate with municipal or regional plan commissions and other
agencies or groups to further the local plan program and to assure harmonious
and integrated planning for the area, subject to approval of the Board of
Trustees; and
   (H)   To exercise such other powers germane to the powers granted under
authority of an act of the General Assembly of the State, as may be conferred
by the Board of Trustees.
(Prior Code, § 4-1-5) (Ord. 414, passed 5-3-1966)
§ 31.020 LAND SUBDIVISION; RESUBDIVISION; OFFICIAL MAP.
   (A)   At any time or times before or after the formal adoption of the
Official Comprehensive Plan by the corporate authorities, an official map may
be designated by ordinance, which may consist of the whole area included within
the Official Comprehensive Plan or one or more geographical or functional parts
and may include all or any part of the contiguous unincorporated area within
one and one-half miles from the corporate limits of the village. All
requirements for public hearing, filing notice of adoption with the County
Recorder of Deeds and filing of the plan and ordinances, including the official
map with the Village Clerk shall be complied with as provided for by law.
   (B)   No map or plat of any subdivision or resubdivision presented for
record affecting land within the corporate limits of the village or within
contiguous territory which is not more than one and one-half miles beyond the
corporate limits shall be entitled to record or shall be valid unless the
subdivision shown thereon provides for standards of design and standards
governing streets, alleys, public ways, ways for public service facilities,
street lights, public grounds, size of lots to be used for residential
purposes, and distribution, sanitary sewers, and sewage collection and
treatment in conformity with the applicable requirements of the code of
ordinances, including the Official Map.
(Prior Code, § 4-1-6) (Ord. 414, passed 5-3-1966)
Statutory reference:
   Related provisions, see 65 ILCS 5/11-12-12
§ 31.021 IMPROVEMENTS.
   The Village Clerk shall furnish the Plan Commission for its consideration, a
copy of all ordinances, plans and data relative to public improvements of any
nature. The Plan Commission may report in relation thereto, if it deems a
report necessary or advisable, for the consideration of the Board of Trustees.
(Prior Code, § 4-1-7) (Ord. 414, passed 5-3-1966)
§ 31.022 FURTHER PURPOSES.
   The Plan Commission shall recommend the boundaries of districts for land use
and shall recommend regulations to the corporate authorities for the following:
   (A)   To regulate and limit the height and bulk of buildings hereafter to be
erected;
   (B)   To establish, regulate, and limit the building or setback lines on or
along the street, traffic way, drive, parkway, or storm or flood water runoff
channel or basin;
   (C)   To regulate and limit the intensity of the use of lot areas and to
regulate and determine the area of open spaces, within and surrounding such
buildings;
   (D)   To classify, regulate, and restrict the location of trades and
industries and the location of buildings designed for specified industrial,
business, residential, and other uses;
   (E)   To divide the entire village into districts of such number, shape,
area, and of such different classes (according to use of land and buildings,
height, and bulk of buildings, intensity of the use of lot area, area of open
spaces, or other classification), as may be deemed best suited to carry out the
purpose of this section;
   (F)   To fix standards to which buildings or structures therein shall
conform;
   (G)   To prohibit uses, buildings, or structures incompatible with the
character of such districts; and
   (H)   To prevent additions to and alteration or remodeling of existing
buildings or structures in such a way as to avoid the restrictions and
limitations lawfully imposed under this section.
(Prior Code, § 4-1-8) (Ord. 414, passed 5-3-1966)
§ 31.023 EXPENDITURES.
   Expenditures of the Plan Commission shall be at the discretion of the Board
of Trustees and if the Plan Commission shall deem it advisable to secure
technical advice or services, it shall be done upon authority of the Board of
Trustees and appropriations by the Board of Trustees therefor.
(Prior Code, § 4-1-9) (Ord. 414, passed 5-3-1966)
Statutory reference:
   Related provisions, see 65 ILCS 5/11-12
CHAPTER 32: EMPLOYMENT POLICIES
Section
General Provisions
   
32.001   Purpose
   
32.002   Definitions
   
32.003   Code of Ethics
   
32.004   Grievance procedure
Pre-Employment Verification Policy
   
32.015   General policy
   
32.016   Required verifications
   
32.017   Optional verifications
Hiring Policy
   
32.030   Requirements
   
32.031   Location of residence; limitations
   
32.032   Application forms
   
32.033   Promotions
   
32.034   Probationary period
Compensation, Hours, and Leave
   
32.045   Compensation
   
32.046   Work week
   
32.047   Lunch hours
   
32.048   Time and attendance
   
32.049   Holiday pay
   
32.050   Vacation pay schedule
   
32.051   Paid holidays
   
32.052   Bereavement pay
   
32.053   Personal leave
   
32.054   Sick leave
   
32.055   Illness or injury at work
   
32.056   Maternity leave
   
32.057   Leave of absence
   
32.058   Layoffs and resignation
   
32.059   Specified wages
Employee Benefits
   
32.070   Insurance
   
32.071   Training
   
32.072   Death benefits
   
32.073   Travel
   
32.074   Reimbursement of other expenses
   
32.075   Illinois Municipal Retirement Fund
Regulations and Restrictions
   
32.090   Accidents and injuries
   
32.091   Appearance
   
32.092   Use of department property
   
32.093   Telephone usage
   
32.094   Correspondence
   
32.095   Photo ID
   
32.096   Speech and dissemination of information
   
32.097   Relations with creditors
   
32.098   Possession of firearms
   
32.099   Ethics
   
32.100   Other employment
   
32.101   Physical examinations
   
32.102   Training cost reimbursement
   
32.103   Prescription drug use
   
32.104   Computer usage procedure
Drug-Free Workplace Policy
   
32.115   Purpose
   
32.116   Definitions
   
32.117   Statement
   
32.118   Requirements for village
   
32.119   Violations
   
32.120   Employee assistance
   
32.121   Status of employment; rehabilitation costs
Electronic Communications
   
32.135   Purpose; policy changes
   
32.136   Definitions
   
32.137   Ownership
   
32.138   Use of electronic communications
   
32.139   Prohibited communications
   
32.140   No presumption of policy
   
32.141   Village’s right to monitor use
   
32.142   Prohibited activities
   
32.143   Passwords
   
32.144   Internet usage
   
32.145   Records
   
32.146   E-mail addresses and access
   
32.147   Viruses and tampering
   
32.148   Disclaimer of liability for internet use
   
32.149   Disclaimer not to waste resources
   
32.150   Freedom of Information Act requests
   
32.151   Credit card use on the internet
   
32.152   Violations
Rights of Employees and Employer
   
32.165   Personnel file
   
32.166   References
   
32.167   Safety
   
32.168   Village’s rights
   
32.169   New regulations
   
32.170   Management responsibilities
   
32.171   Length of service
   
32.172   Exemptions to labor agreements
Sexual Misconduct Policy
   
32.185   Statement
   
32.186   Reporting procedures; designated Sexual Abuse Coordinator
   
32.187   Child abuse
Discipline Procedures
   
32.200   Procedure, generally
   
32.201   Verbal and written reprimand
   
32.202   Probation
   
32.203   Administrative leave
   
32.204   Suspension
   
32.205   Dismissal
   
32.206   Code of Conduct
   
32.207   Political activities
   
Appendix A:    Employee notification of Personnel Code, drug-free workplace
policy, sexual misconduct policy, and disclaimer of employment
   
Appendix B:   Discipline form
   
Appendix C:   Americans with Disabilities Act grievance procedure
   
Appendix D:    Request for family or medical leave
   
Appendix E:    Request for special leave
Cross-reference:
   Drug and alcohol testing policy and procedure, see §§
33.040 through
33.047
   Sexual harassment prevention policies, see §§
33.075 through
33.081
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 32.001 PURPOSE.
   (A)   The purpose of the Employee Code, being this Chapter 32, is to
implement and maintain a uniform system of employment within all departments of
the village, and shall hereinafter be referred to as “the Code.” The Code is
designed to provide employees and management with information pertaining to the
employment policies and procedures applicable to all village employees.
   (B)   All policies and procedures contained in the Employee Code went into
effect February 20, 2012, immediately upon passage by the Board of Trustees and
approval by the Mayor.
   (C)   All employees shall be required to adhere to the policies and
procedures as they are outlined in this Code, unless otherwise covered by a
collective bargaining agreement.
   (D)   Upon adoption by the Board of Trustees, the Employee Code shall be the
nonexclusive policy of all departments of the village concerning terms and/or
conditions of employment.
   (E)   In order to implement and carry out the express provisions and the
intent of the Employee Code, all Superintendents may pronounce policies
consistent with the Employee Code. A copy of any such policy shall be
distributed to the Mayor and the Board of Trustees.
   (F)   Nothing in the Code shall in any way affect the village’s or the
Superintendent’s right to develop and disseminate information concerning the
operations of any department and employee’s job functions, duties, and job
position description.
   (G)   All employees shall sign the employee notification letter found in
Appendix A of this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 11-1-1)
§ 32.002 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   DEPARTMENT. The governmental unit for whom the employee is directly working
for and rendering services.
   EMPLOYEE. A person working as a volunteer or for remuneration for services
rendered to the village. An elected official is not an employee whose personal
rights are affected by the Code.
   EMPLOYER. The village.
   FULL-TIME EMPLOYEE. Those employees scheduled to work a minimum of 40 hours
per work week on a continuous basis. FULL-TIME employees are eligible for
overtime pay and compensatory time.
   IMMEDIATE SUPERVISOR. The individual to whom the employee shall immediately
report and be responsible for his or her work. An IMMEDIATE SUPERVISOR may be
the Mayor or the Superintendent.
   PART-TIME EMPLOYEE. The term shall mean any person working less than 1,000
hours or more per year. PART-TIME employees are eligible for overtime pay.
   SPECIAL ASSIGNMENT.
      (1)   NONPROFESSIONAL. NONPROFESSIONAL employees are like the SPECIAL
ASSIGNMENT professional employees, except that NONPROFESSIONAL are entitled to
overtime and compensatory time, but not to benefits.
      (2)   PROFESSIONALS. Professionals and those employees hired for a
specific project for a limited period and may include those hired to fill in
summer vacations, illness, and the like. Such employees are hired with the
understanding that their employment is to terminate upon completion of the
project or at the end of the period. SPECIAL ASSIGNMENT may be either full-time
or part-time as determined by the requirements of the job. PROFESSIONAL
employees are not entitled to overtime and compensatory time, but are entitled
to other benefits.
   SUPERINTENDENT. The one individual ultimately responsible for all operations
of the department.
   VOLUNTEERS. Individuals who accept on an unpaid basis various work
assignments for any department. These individuals receive no wages or benefits.
(Prior Code, § 11-2-1)
§ 32.003 CODE OF ETHICS.
   (A)   High standards of conduct on or off the job is a necessity, as it
reflects both upon the individual and the image of the village.
   (B)   The use of common sense, good ethical standards, and discretion will
guide employees in proper conduct. Failure to maintain reasonable standards is
cause for dismissal.
(Prior Code, § 11-2-2)
§ 32.004 GRIEVANCE PROCEDURE.
   (A)   The purpose of a grievance procedure is to establish and maintain
harmonious and cooperative working relationships between the village and its
employees, to assure equitable treatment of employees, and to provide
expeditious means of resolving employee dissatisfaction over circumstances or
conditions of employment. (See Appendix C of this chapter for Disability Act
procedure.)
   (B)   Strict adherence to the grievance procedures and time limits is
mandatory, except that the time limits may be extended for good cause.
   (C)   A GRIEVANCE is defined as a dispute, disagreement, complaint, or any
matter concerning any terms or conditions of employment, or concerning the
application of any departmental policy, or concerning any employee
relationship, or work related issue.
   (D)   As used in this section, the term DAYS shall mean working days of the
employee filing the grievance.
   (E)   At any step, if a written response is not provided to the grieving
employee within the ten-day time frame, the grievance will be considered denied
at that step, and the employee may proceed to the next step.
   (F)   (1)   If any superintendent is disciplined and/or discharged by the
Mayor with the advice and consent of the Board of Trustees, the discipline and/
or discharge shall constitute the final resolution of the matter and there
shall be no access in this instance to the various steps of the grievance
procedure.
      (2)   The failure of a reappointment of a superintendent by the Mayor
shall not be interpreted to constitute discipline and/or discharge of an
ongoing employment relationship with the village.
   (G)   (1)   (a)   A grieving employee shall within five days after he or she
learns of the circumstances or conditions which prompted the grievance, submit
the grievance to the employee’s Superintendent, in writing, informing such
Superintendent of the grievance and the particulars concerning the same.
         (b)   The Superintendent shall provide a written response to the
grieving employee within ten days after receiving the grievance.
      (2)   If the grievance is not resolved to the employee’s satisfaction,
the employee may submit the grievance to the Mayor by summarizing the grievance
in writing.
      (3)   The grievance must be submitted to the Mayor within five days of
the decision of the Superintendent.
      (4)   For all other employees, the grievance shall be before the Mayor.
(Prior Code, § 11-15-1)
PRE-EMPLOYMENT VERIFICATION POLICY
§ 32.015 GENERAL POLICY.
   (A)   This policy is intended to serve as a guide relating to the hiring of
permanent full and part-time employees.
(Prior Code, § 11-3-1)
   (B)   (1)   The village has elected to institute a preemployment
verification process. Other information may also be gathered as part of the
preemployment verification process.
      (2)   Each employee is subject to a six-month probationary period and
results of the pre-employment verification process may impact permanent
employment. Results of this process will remain completely confidential.
(Prior Code, § 11-3-2)
§ 32.016 REQUIRED VERIFICATIONS.
   (A)   Identity and criminal record check. The Mayor or a person designated
by the Mayor shall verify the personal identity of each employee with the
Social Security Administration to ensure valid social security numbers.
Criminal record checks shall also be reviewed by the corporate authorities.
   (B)   Motor vehicle. A motor vehicle check is required for all employees who
driving during working hours or drive municipal vehicles. This check includes
the verification that the employee has a valid driver’s license and other
accident and conviction history. Motor vehicle information shall be reviewed
annually as long as the employee’s job duties include operating a motor
vehicle.
(Prior Code, § 11-3-3)
§ 32.017 OPTIONAL VERIFICATIONS.
   (A)   Employment. The Mayor or a person designated by the Mayor shall verify
past employment at the request of the Board of Trustees. All information on the
application must be legible. The following fields are required:
      (1)   Employer’s name;
      (2)   Address;
      (3)   City;
      (4)   State; and
      (5)   Start date.
   (B)   Licenses, certifications, and degrees.
      (1)   To verify education, the following fields shall be completed:
         (a)   College name;
         (b)   Address;
         (c)   City and state; and
         (d)   Degree received.
      (2)   If needed, the applicant must provide a transcript directly from
the institution.
   (C)   Certification verification/professional license. If needed, applicant
shall provide a copy of a professional license so it may be verified.
   (D)   Credit report. A credit report shall be required for all employees
involved in accounting or cashiering functions. Other employment positions
susceptible to collusion or fraudulent activities may also be considered as a
basis for a credit report. These positions requiring a credit report shall be
documented and shall be filed with the Village Clerk. A credit report may also
be requested if an employee changes their job duties to a position that
requires a credit check.
      (1)   A credit report request requires the approval of the employee or
potential employee. The “Request, Consent, and Authorization for Release of
Personal Information and the Disclosure” document (all three) must include his
or her signature.
      (2)   If available, submit a job description to accompany the application
and verification request.
(Prior Code, § 11-3-4)
HIRING POLICY
§ 32.030 REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   Generally. Employment is based on each applicant’s qualifications as
compared with the requirements of the available position. Consideration is
given to ability, experience, education, training, and character. No
consideration shall be given to the applicant’s political party affiliation or
support in regard to any decisions on hiring, promotion, transfer, or recall.
   (B)   Hiring procedure; full-time. It is the policy of the village to
advertise for positions of full-time employment with the village. The personnel
committee will review all applications and make their recommendations to the
Board of Trustees. The Chief of Police will review all applications for police
officer vacancies, both full-time and part-time, and make his or her
recommendations to the Mayor. The Board of Trustees will make the final
decision of hiring full-time employees.
   (C)   Hiring procedure; part-time.
      (1)   A PART-TIME EMPLOYEE is an employee of the village that works less
than a full-time employee. In the event the Mayor determines that a part-time
employee is required, the Mayor shall review the applications with the Street
Superintendent and may request the Chief of Police provide a background check
on the individual. The Mayor will make the final decision regarding the hiring
of part-time employees. The Board of Trustees may limit the number of part-time
employees hired by the village.
      (2)   All part-time employees shall be “employees at will” during the
time they are part-time. Any part-time employee may become a full-time
employee, but will have to be hired in accordance with division (B) above.
(Prior Code, § 11-4-1)
§ 32.031 LOCATION OF RESIDENCE; LIMITATIONS.
   All full-time village employees shall maintain their place of residence
within five miles of the corporate limits, with the following exceptions:
   (A)   Current employees residing outside the prescribed area may continue to
do so;
   (B)   Employees who were appointed on, or after, October 1, 1990, and who
reside outside the prescribed area as of the effective date of their
appointment must comply with the residency requirement prior to the completion
of 180 days of service, unless said residence requirement is altered or waived
by the Mayor and Board of Trustees;
   (C)   Clerical employees and such other position classifications as may be
determined by the Board of Trustees not to be subject to emergency recall shall
be exempt from the foregoing residency limitation;
   (D)   Current employees who are separated from the service of the village
and later resume employment by the village must comply with the residency
requirement; and
   (E)   Residence shall be as determined by statute for voting purposes.
(Prior Code, § 11-4-2) (Ord. 624, passed 9-14-1990; Ord. 14-08, passed 10-6-
2014)
§ 32.032 APPLICATION FORMS.
   (A)   Applications for positions with the village shall be filed on forms
furnished by the Village Clerk. All successful applicants shall produce an
original Social Security card. The Street Superintendent may require
certificates of competency, licenses, medical examinations, post-offer medical
examination, drug and alcohol tests, background investigations, references,
police checks, motor vehicle reports/driving history, oral interviews, or other
evidence of special qualifications. The Street Superintendent may reject
applications of persons who are found to lack any of the requirements
established for the position.
   (B)   The Mayor with the advice and consent of the Board of Trustees shall
appoint all employees. In considering applications of various individuals,
length of service shall be used as a factor in the selection of applicants, but
will not be considered the sole or even the predominant factor. No employee
shall be hired and placed on the payroll and receive fringe benefits until all
employment related forms, including, but not limited to, the employment
application form, are filled out and forwarded to the Village Clerk.
(Prior Code, § 11-4-3)
§ 32.033 PROMOTIONS.
   (A)   Employees are encouraged to apply for job openings in higher
classifications and will be considered for promotion for job openings upon
written application. All full-time employees may be considered for promotions.
Probationary employees may apply, but do not have to be considered, depending
upon the discretion of the Street Superintendent.
   (B)   When an employee is promoted, the employee will be placed on
probation. At the end of the probationary period, the employee’s performance
will be formally evaluated and one of the following actions shall be taken by
the village or the Street Superintendent based upon employee’s performance and
conduct:
      (1)   The employee may assume the new position having successfully
completed the probationary period;
      (2)   The probationary period may be extended; and
      (3)   The employee may be demoted to a position commensurate with the
employee’s ability, if the lower position is available.
(Prior Code, § 11-4-4)
§ 32.034 PROBATIONARY PERIOD.
   (A)   All full-time employees of the village shall be probationary employees
for six months commencing their first working day as full-time employees. The
probationary period may be extended by the Board of Trustees. During said
probation period, such employees shall not be entitled to any sick or personal
leave with pay. After the successful completion of the probationary period,
said employees will be entitled to five sick and two personal days.
   (B)   If an employee of the village changes job classifications, then he or
she shall be required to commence a subsequent six-month probationary period to
commence the first day after all required off-site training has been completed.
If off-site training is required, then the employee shall successfully complete
the off-site training before the six-month probationary period shall commence.
(Prior Code, § 11-4-5)
COMPENSATION, HOURS, AND LEAVE
§ 32.045 COMPENSATION.
   (A)   Employees shall receive their paycheck on a bi-weekly basis. The
paycheck actually issued will be for the preceding pay period, unless otherwise
covered by a collective bargaining agreement.
(Prior Code, § 11-5-1)
   (B)   The basic rate of pay shall be set forth by the Board of Trustees.
(Prior Code, § 11-5-2)
   (C)   Overtime at one and one-half times the regular rate of pay is
available to employees working in excess of a 40-hour work period.
(Prior Code, § 11-5-3)
   (D)   Employees are eligible for a salary increase after the completion of
the probationary period.
(Prior Code, § 11-5-4)
(Ord. 2024-09, passed 11-20-2024)
§ 32.046 WORK WEEK.
   The following shall be the parameters for the work week:
   (A)   The work week for the employees of the Street Department shall be from
7:00 a.m. to 3:30 p.m., or as otherwise specified. No person employed by the
Street Department shall work for more than 16 hours in any 24-hour period.
   (B)   The work week for the employees of the Water Department shall be from
7:00 a.m. to 3:30 p.m., or as otherwise specified.
   (C)   Whenever necessary, each superintendent shall provide for the
continuous operation of their department.
   (D)   No work shall be performed at home, without prior approval of the
Superintendent.
   (E)   Prior approval of immediate supervisors is necessary for any employee
to work early or stay late to do work related activity.
(Prior Code, § 11-6-1)
§ 32.047 LUNCH HOURS.
   The following shall apply for lunches:
   (A)   Each superintendent shall establish the lunch schedule for his or her
own department; and
   (B)   Travel time to and from any eating place is included in the lunch
period. The lunch break cannot be used for compensatory time or as a substitute
for tardiness. Lunch periods may not be taken at the end of the day or in
conjunction with a rest period, unless the employee has obtained written
approval from his or her immediate supervisor.
(Prior Code, § 11-6-2)
§ 32.048 TIME AND ATTENDANCE.
   (A)   Each superintendent shall maintain accurate daily attendance records.
An employee shall be at his or her place of work in accordance with the
attendance rules. Tardiness or other abuse of regular attendance will not be
tolerated. The attendance records will indicate information in order to
properly pay employees for actual work performed. An employee shall have the
right to review his or her attendance record on file in the department.
   (B)   No person will be permitted to sign in or out for another employee.
   (C)   An employee shall, whenever possible, provide advance notice of
absence from work.
   (D)   When village offices and buildings are open, but inclement weather
prevents employees from reaching the buildings, employees may account for such
absences by using accrued time, such as vacation and compensatory time earned,
or the employee may elect to be docked for time off. Sick leave may not be used
to cover absence due to inclement weather.
(Prior Code, § 11-6-3) Penalty, see §
10.999
§ 32.049 HOLIDAY PAY.
   (A)   All full-time and salaried-exempt employees shall have time off with
full salary payment on the day designated as a holiday by the Board of
Trustees.
   (B)   All full-time employees covered by the Employee Code who are required
to work on an official holiday shall receive a rate of one and one-half times
the regular rate of pay for the hours work on such holiday. The Superintendent
shall approve the use of time with pay. If the employee is covered by a
collective bargaining unit (“CBA”), the terms of the CBA will control this
issue.
   (C)   The term LAST SCHEDULED WORK DAY means the employee’s full day of
work.
   (D)   (1)   To be eligible for holiday pay, the employee must work both the
day before and the day after the holiday.
      (2)   The exception allows for absences for good cause that are approved
by the Superintendent or Mayor.
      (3)   Samples of this exception include the holiday, the Superintendent
or Mayor approving for good cause hospitalization the day before or the day
after the holiday, and a Superintendent or Mayor approving for good cause an
employee calling in sick the day before or the day after a holiday, and placing
the call at the last minute. In each of these examples, the Superintendent or
Mayor shall exercise judgment as to whether the sickness or hospitalization is
for “good cause.”
(Prior Code, § 11-6-4) (Ord. 2024-09, passed 11-20-2024)
§ 32.050 VACATION PAY SCHEDULE.
   (A)   The following shall be the vacation benefits for full-time employees:
      (1)   One week of vacation for employee after one year of continuous
work;
      (2)   Two weeks of vacation for employee for service of two years and up
to six years of service;
      (3)   Three weeks of vacation after employee has completed five years or
more of service; and
      (4)   Four weeks of vacation after employee has completed 20 years or
more of service.
   (B)   Earned vacations must be taken during each calendar year, or otherwise
with approval of the Board of Trustees.
(Prior Code, § 11-7-1)
§ 32.051 PAID HOLIDAYS.
   (A)   Paid holidays include:
      (1)   New Year’s Day;
      (2)   Martin Luther King Jr. Day;
      (3)   Memorial Day;
      (4)   Independence Day;
      (5)   Labor Day;
      (6)   Thanksgiving Day;
      (7)   Veteran’s Day;
      (8)   Christmas Day; and
      (9)   The employee’s birthday.
   (B)   If a paid holiday falls on a full-time employee’s day off, that
employee will be paid eight hours straight time in the paid holiday category.
   (C)   If a full-time employee works on a paid holiday those hours worked,
which are scheduled or unscheduled, will be paid at time and one-half. The
holiday will be paid at eight hours straight time.
   (D)   If a paid holiday falls on a shift of a full-time employee of the
Police Department, that employee will be allowed to take a vacation day on that
holiday. The employee shall be paid eight hours straight time for the vacation
day and eight hours straight time for the paid holiday.
   (E)   If a full-time employee must be called back to work, for an emergency
situation, while on vacation or while taking a personal day, the vacation or
personal day shall cease. That employee will be paid for the number of hours
worked at their normal rate of pay. The employee’s remaining vacation or
personal time will be rescheduled.
(Prior Code, § 11-7-2)
§ 32.052 BEREAVEMENT PAY.
   Each employee will be allowed three days off with pay when a death occurs to
a member of his or her immediate family. These members include mother, father,
sister, brother, wife, children, or stepchildren, stepfather, stepmother,
stepbrother, or stepsister, mother-in-law, or father-in-law. These days must be
workdays and they end at the day of the funeral, unless other arrangements are
approved in advance.
(Prior Code, § 11-7-3)
§ 32.053 PERSONAL LEAVE.
   (A)   Each employee will be allowed to take off three days each calendar
year for personal reasons, and the employee will be paid his or her regular pay
for these days.
   (B)   However, personal days not taken each year shall be paid in lieu of by
December 31 of each year.
(Prior Code, § 11-7-4)
§ 32.054 SICK LEAVE.
   (A)   Each employee will be entitled to ten sick days per calendar year.
   (B)   After two consecutive days off due to illness, a doctor’s verification
shall be obtained and provided to the village in order for the employee to be
credited for the sick days utilized.
   (C)   Each employee will be entitled to accumulated sick leave of 200 hours.
   (D)   (1)   The Superintendent shall establish notification requirements for
taking sick leave.
      (2)   The employee shall state the nature of the illness or injury,
location of confinement, and the telephone number where the employee can be
reached. The employee must also state whether the absence is claimed to be from
a previous injury sustained while on duty.
      (3)   Supervisors are to be kept informed daily, whenever possible, of
the employee’s condition. Upon return to work, employees will inform their
supervisor or superintendent as to the cause of illness and indicate whether a
continuing impairment might have occurred.
   (E)   In order to continue active work assignments or to resume work after
an illness or injury or disability, employees shall provide the department with
a written physician’
      (1)   Upon returning to work after prolonged illness for five consecutive
days or more;
      (2)   Upon returning to work from an extended leave of absence;
      (3)   After the employee has a potentially disabling illness, injury, or
condition; or
      (4)   Upon returning to work after a diagnosed communicable disease.
(Prior Code, § 11-7-5)
§ 32.055 ILLNESS OR INJURY AT WORK.
   (A)   Any employee who is ill or injured on the job shall immediately notify
the superintendent, who may require the employee to be transported to a
hospital for examination by a physician or surgeon.
   (B)   For employees on an eight-hour work schedule, if an employee becomes
ill while at work after the first two hours of work, the employee shall lose
one-half day of accumulated sick time. For employees on a 12-hour work
schedule, if an employee becomes ill at work after the first three hours of
work, the employee shall lose one-half day of accumulated sick time.
(Prior Code, § 11-7-6)
§ 32.056 MATERNITY LEAVE.
   Pregnancy shall be considered the same as any short-term disability, and
request for pregnancy leave shall be made through the disability leave clause.
Request for parental leave following child birth shall be made through the
Leave of Absence clause, §
32.057(C)(7), Family and Medical Leave Act, being 29 C.F.R. § 825.100.
(Prior Code, § 11-7-7)
§ 32.057 LEAVE OF ABSENCE.
   (A)   No employee on leave of absence may earn vacation, or sick leave,
except when the leave was for the purpose of accepting a temporary work
assignment in another office. All types of leave of absence do not earn
vacations or sick leave while the employee is on leave of absence.
   (B)   While the employee is on leave of absence, the length of service still
continues to accumulate except for special leave situations under division (C)
(1) below, “special leave,” and for division (C)(7), Family and Medical Leave
Act, being 29 C.F.R. § 825.100, situations. Length of service is specifically
prohibited from accumulating on special leave cases and on Family and Medical
Leave Act situations. The prohibition on length of service accumulation is not
contained in any other type of leave of absence situation. Therefore, the Code
should be construed to allow accumulation of length of services while on leave
of absence other than special leave and the Family and Medical Leave Act.
   (C)   Employee shall be granted an excused leave of absence for the
following:
      (1)   Special leave.
         (a)   All full-time and salary exempt employees who have completed one
full year of continuous service may request a special leave. Special leave will
only be granted for personal reasons, and must be approved by the employee’s
superintendent. Special leave shall be granted without pay. The period for
special leave shall not exceed six months. An extension may be granted up to a
maximum of six months for a total of one year. In order to continue to receive
medical and insurance benefits during a special leave, the employee shall
contribute both the employee and the employer’s share of IMRF and insurance
costs. Length of service or benefits shall not accrue or accumulate during a
special leave. A person either hired or promoted to fill the position vacated
by the person on leave shall be considered in that position temporarily and
shall relinquish it upon the employee’s return.
         (b)   If a special leave is approved by the Board of Trustees,
coverage under State Municipal Retirement Fund (IMRF) may be maintained
pursuant to IMRF rules and regulations. A request form for special leave is
found in Appendix E at the conclusion of this chapter.
      (2)   Military. Any full-time, salaried exempt, or part-time employee who
is a member of a Reserve Component of the Armed Services, the State National
Guard, or the State Naval Militia, shall be allowed annual leave with pay for
15 days and the village shall pay the difference in salary and any additions or
extensions thereof without pay as may be necessary for the employees to fulfill
the military reserve obligation. Such leaves will be granted without loss of
length of service or other accrued benefits.
         (a)   In case of an emergency call up (or order to state active duty)
by the Governor, the leave shall be granted for the duration of said emergency
with pay and without loss of length of service or other accrued benefits.
         (b)   Military earnings during the military reserve obligation or for
the emergency call shall be submitted and assigned to the village, and the
village shall return it to the payroll fund from which the employee’s payroll
check was drawn. If military pay exceeds the employee’s earning for the period,
the Board of Trustees shall return the difference to the employee.
         (c)   To be eligible for military reserve leave or emergency call up
pay, the employee shall provide the village with a certificate from the
commanding officer of the employee’s unit that the leave taken was for either
such purpose.
         (d)   Full-time employees entering into military service as a result
of voluntary enlistment, induction into the service by draft, or conscription
will be afforded all of the privileges provided by the Service Member’s Tenure
Act, 330 ILCS 60/1 et seq.
      (3)   Jury duty. An employee shall be excused from work for days in which
the employee serves on jury duty. The employee shall receive his or her regular
pay for jury service. The employee shall present proof of jury service and the
amount of pay received shall be turned over to the Village Treasurer. The
employee shall also turn over to the village any expense allowances paid by the
court, if the jury duty is located at the County Courthouse. If an employee is
given an early release from jury duty, the employee shall then report to his or
her regular work assignment.
      (4)   Witness. An employee shall be excused from work when lawfully
subpoenaed to serve as a witness. The employee must present written proof of
the summons to testify to qualify for an excused absence. Notice to employee’s
supervisor should be made in advance of appearing in court. An employee’s
excused absence from work shall be on an unpaid basis, unless the employee’s
witness activity is work related and the witness activity is requested by the
village. The employee shall turn over to the village any witness fee when the
employee’s witness activity is work related. The employee may choose to use a
vacation day, if the witness activity is not work-related.
      (5)   Village disability leave.
         (a)   To be eligible for village disability leave, the employee must
submit to the Board of Trustees a medical opinion that the employee cannot work
in his or her normal job position, and a medical opinion that the employee may
possibly be able to return to work within the next six months. Employees are
not eligible for disability benefits until they have been employed at least one
year. Employees may be required to use their accrued sick or vacation time to
continue regular wages.
         (b)   Employees shall submit a letter requesting disability leave to
their Superintendent within a reasonable amount of time before disability leave
is taken. Upon return to work, employees shall submit a release statement from
their physician to the superintendent. If the superintendent has reason to
believe that the employee is unable to perform the normal duties or the
employee is able to perform duties and is still absent, he or she may seek and
rely upon the decision of an impartial physician. The Board of Trustees shall
select a physician who is not a village employee to act as an impartial
physician.
      (6)   Educational leave.
         (a)   The Board of Trustees may grant an employee an educational leave
of absence for the purpose of engaging in a training course. No educational
leave may be granted unless in the judgment of the Board of Trustees the
training course would benefit the village by improving the employee’s
qualifications to perform the duties of the employee’s position or by
qualifying the employee for advancement in rank or grade to another position in
the village service. The employee shall receive his or her regular pay during
an education leave of absence for training courses when so authorized by the
Board of Trustees.
         (b)   Employees may request an educational leave without pay to seek
further professional training in specialty fields. Such leave may be up to ten
months in duration and requires the approval of the Board of Trustees.
         (c)   An employee on education leave without pay does not accrue
vacation or sick leave credit for the period of leave. When ready to return to
work, the employee will be offered the first available full-time position at
the same job level the employee held prior to departing on educational leave
without pay.
      (7)   Family and Medical Leave Act.
         (a)   1.   An employee is eligible for a leave of absence through the
Family and Medical Leave Act of 1993. In order to be eligible for leave, an
employee must have worked for the employer at least 12 months and must have
worked at least 1,250 hours over the previous 12 months prior to the leave.
            2.   Eligible female and male employees are allowed up to 12 weeks
of leave per 12- month period following the birth of a child, the placement of
a child for adoption or foster care, or the serious health condition of the
employee or an immediate family member (defined for purposes of this Family and
Medical Leave Act situation as including the employee’s child, spouse, or
parent). The leave for birth or placement must take place within 12 months of
the birth or placement of the child.
         (b)   The employee’s leave shall be unpaid. The employee may, upon
approval of the Board of Trustees, use accumulated sick leave and/or vacation
leave. During the leave, the village shall continue to provide coverage under
its group health plan. Following return upon leave, the employee shall be
returned to a position with equivalent pay, benefits, and other terms and
conditions of employment.
         (c)   In order to utilize leave of absence pursuant to the Family
Medical Leave Act, the employee should give 30 days’ notice.
         (d)   For leave based upon serious health conditions, the employer may
require certification from the employee’s health care provider for leave.
Employer reserves the right to require a second medical opinion at the
employee’s own expense. The request form is found in Appendix D at the
conclusion of this chapter.
      (8)   Expiration of leave. When an employee returns from a leave of six
months or less, the superintendent shall return the employee to the same or
similar position in the same class in which the employee was incumbent prior to
commencement of such leave.
         (a)   An employee’s same or similar position will not be protected for
reductions in force or where the position has been eliminated. Employees are
subject to termination if they are absent from work for more than six months.
         (b)   No employee may be absent without permission of the supervisor
to which assigned. In the absence of extenuating circumstances, an employee who
is absent from work for any reason and fails to notify his or her supervisor
within two working days will be considered to have resigned.
         (c)   No employee on leave of absence may earn vacation, or sick
leave, except when the leave was for the purpose of accepting a temporary
working assignment in another office.
(Prior Code, § 11-7-8)
§ 32.058 LAYOFFS AND RESIGNATION.
   (A)   In the event it becomes necessary to layoff employees for any reason,
employees will be laid off in compliance with any applicable union contract,
based on the following criteria: the employee’s knowledge, skills, and
abilities in relation to positions available; lack of work; lack of funds; the
employee’s length of service; the employee’s work record; including
commendations, as well as disciplinary action; the employee’s attitude and
relations with other employee’s, as well as other agencies; and change in
duties of the department. The employee shall receive two weeks’ notice.
(Prior Code, § 11-15-2)
   (B)   Sick leave, vacation, and retirement fund benefits cease at midnight
on the date of termination. Life and health insurance will cease at the end of
the month of the termination. Employees may elect to continue participation in
the plan on a self-pay basis as provided by federal statutes. The employee will
be paid for each day of accrued and unused vacation time. Monies accumulated in
the employee’s retirement account may be refundable, according to IMRF Rules.
Forms required to request this refund are available from the Village Clerk’s
office.
(Prior Code, § 11-15-3)
(Ord. 2024-09, passed 11-20-2024)
§ 32.059 SPECIFIED WAGES.
   (A)   To the extent and as required by “an Act regulating wages of laborers,
mechanics, and other workers employed in any public works by state, county,
city, or any public body or any political subdivision or by anyone under
contract for public works,” approved June 26, 1941, and being the Prevailing
Wage Act, 820 ILCS 130/0.01 et seq., as amended, the general prevailing rate of
wages in this locality for laborers, mechanics, and other workers engaged in
construction of public works coming under the jurisdiction of the village is
hereby ascertained to be the same as the prevailing rate of wages for
construction work in the county area as determined by the Department of Labor
of the State as of June of the current year a copy of that determination being
attached hereto and incorporated herein by reference. As required by said Act,
any and all revisions of the prevailing rate of wages by the Department of
Labor of the State shall supersede the Department’s June determination and
apply to any and all public works construction undertaken by the village. The
definition of any terms appearing in this section which are also used in
aforesaid Act shall be the same as in said Act.
   (B)   Nothing within this section shall be construed to apply said general
prevailing rate of wages as herein ascertained to any work or employment except
public works construction of the village to the extent required by the
aforesaid Act.
   (C)   The Village Clerk shall publicly post or upkeep available for
inspection by any interested party in the main office of the village this
determination or any revisions of such prevailing rate of wage. A copy of this
determination or of the current revised determination of prevailing rate of
wages then in effect shall be attached to all contract specifications.
   (D)   The Village Clerk shall mail a copy of this determination to any
employer, and to any association of employers and to any person or association
of employees who have filed their names and addresses, requesting copies of any
determination stating the particular rates and the particular class of workers
whose wages will be affected by such rates.
   (E)   The Village Clerk shall promptly file a certified copy of this section
with both the Secretary of State Index Division and the Department of Labor of
the State.
   (F)   The Village Clerk shall cause to be published in a newspaper of
general circulation within the area a copy of this section, and such
publication shall constitute notice that the determination is effective and
that this is the determination of this public body.
(Ord. 2018-04, passed 6-4-2018)
EMPLOYEE BENEFITS
§ 32.070 INSURANCE.
   Insurance will be provided on the following basis.
   (A)   Life, medical, and dental care insurance. All full-time employees are
covered by a medical and dental plan partly funded by the village.
      (1)   All full-time employees are covered by life insurance and
accidental death and dismemberment policy. A manual is provided to employees at
the time of hiring which further explains the policy. The manual is obtained
from the Village Clerk’s office.
      (2)   The Village Clerk’s office shall be notified of a divorce or legal
separation of the covered employee and further must be notified when a child is
no longer eligible as a covered dependent of the employee.
   (B)   Legal defense and liability insurance. In any claim or action
instituted against an employee, or former employee, where such claim or action
arises out of any act or omission, made in good faith, occurring within the
scope of employment of the employee, or former employee, the village shall,
upon written request of the employee or former employee, appear and defend the
employee or former employee, against any such claim or action, including the
process of appeal. The Village Attorney shall appear for and defend the
employee. This section excludes disciplinary proceedings or criminal
proceedings.
   (C)   Other insurance types. All village employees are additionally covered
by the following:
         (1)   Social Security legislation and salary deductions shall be made
for Social Security purposes in accordance with the law;
         (2)   Workers’ Compensation Act, (820 ILCS 305/1 et seq.); any work-
related injury or illness must be reported to the employee’s supervisor within
24 hours of the injury or onset of illness; and
         (3)   Unemployment insurance, the costs of which shall be paid by the
village.
(Prior Code, § 11-8-1)
§ 32.071 TRAINING.
   (A)   For meetings and seminars, employees may be granted leave with pay to
attend meetings, seminars, and conventions of professional and technical
organizations, when such attendance would benefit the employee’s ability to
perform the job, and is approved in advance by the Board of Trustees.
   (B)   For any training programs conducted after regular working hours, such
training shall be voluntary unless arrangements for such training includes the
granting of overtime.
   (C)   All employees shall be reimbursed for mileage expenses incurred while
attending assigned schools outside the county. Upon receipt of a notice to
attend the training school, the employee will request the use of a departmental
vehicle to transport those attending to and from school. If a departmental
vehicle is not available, reimbursement shall be made for the employee’s use of
their personal vehicle. When two or more persons attend the same school at the
same time, the superintendent may require that only one person will be eligible
to receive reimbursement for travel. The rate of reimbursement shall be
established by the Board of Trustees.
(Prior Code, § 11-8-2)
§ 32.072 DEATH BENEFITS.
   (A)   Each employee shall fill out a designation of beneficiary form. Upon
the death of an employee, the designated beneficiary shall be entitled to
receive from the appropriation for personal services theretofore available for
payment of the employee’s compensation, such sums for any accrued vacation
period to which the employee was entitled to at the time of death. Such payment
shall be computed by multiplying the employee’s daily rate of pay by the number
of days of accrued vacation at the time of death.
   (B)   Upon the death of an employee, the estate shall receive any unpaid
compensation, accrued overtime, or other benefits the employee would have been
allowed had the employee survived.
   (C)   Family members of deceased employees should contact the Village
Clerk’s office for explanation of any further benefits the family members or
the estate of the deceased employee may be entitled to.
(Prior Code, § 11-8-3)
§ 32.073 TRAVEL.
   (A)   Staff vehicles are to be used only for activities directly related to
the conduct of business. Under no circumstances are the vehicles to be used for
personal activities. Reimbursement is provided for the use of employee’s
private vehicles for official business at the rate designated by the state for
actual mileage traveled. Private vehicles will only be used when department
vehicles are not available and prior approval is given by the Mayor. Use of
staff vehicles are restricted to employees who have a valid driver’s license
with current liability insurance. Employees are not permitted to use village
vehicles without the knowledge of their supervisor or superintendent. All
employees using staff or private vehicles must record mileage on the expense
log along with the destination and purpose of the trip. The log is to be
returned with the vehicle’s keys. Expense claims for private vehicle usage will
be honored only if the listed trip is initialed by the immediate supervisor.
Any malfunctions or damages must be reported to the immediate supervisor.
Travel in any vehicle will always be by the most direct route unless otherwise
approved by the Mayor or Superintendent.
   (B)   If the most economical means of travel available is by some type of
transportation other than an automobile, the mode selected shall be approved by
the employee’s supervisor and Mayor before departure. Travel by either airplane
or train shall be by coach class.
   (C)   Reimbursements for first-class accommodations may be permitted only
when coach class is not available.
   (D)   Employees who take staff vehicles home are not considered on official
business during the commute unless they must regularly perform duties during
that commute.
(Prior Code, § 11-8-4)
§ 32.074 REIMBURSEMENT OF OTHER EXPENSES.
   (A)   An employee shall be allowed reimbursement for the actual cost of
meals in accordance with these rules, but not to exceed the rates indicated in
the reimbursement schedule. It is not necessary to submit receipts when
receiving per diem. It is necessary to submit receipts when receiving
reimbursement for individual meals.
   (B)   For breakfast, an employee only will receive reimbursement if the
employee is on travel status and leaves headquarters or residence at or before
7:00 a.m.
   (C)   For lunch, travel within 50 miles of the village is not reimbursed.
   (D)   For dinner, an employee must be on travel status and arrive back at
the headquarters or residence at or after 8:00 p.m. For employees commencing
travel after the close of business but before 6:00 p.m., reimbursement for
dinner is allowed.
   (E)   (1)   Advance per diem checks must be requested a minimum of three
days in advance. A per diem allowance is available only when overnight lodging
is obtained or when the travel assignment is 18 hours or more. A per diem
allowance provided in the reimbursement schedule represents the maximum daily
amount allowable and is given in lieu of a meal allowance.
      (2)   Receipts must be submitted to support allowances other than meals
when on per diem.
   (F)   The reimbursement schedule shall be as follows:
      (1)   Automobile mileage shall be at the state rate (proof of automobile
liability insurance is required to obtain automobile mileage reimbursement);
      (2)   Per diem allowance/IRS per diem rate for various cities shall be as
published in the U.S. General Services Administration (GSA) publication (with
receipts, per them allowance is $40);
      (3)   Breakfast shall be reimbursed at 20% of IRS published rate;
      (4)   Lunch shall be reimbursed at 30% of IRS published rate; and
      (5)   Dinner shall be reimbursed at 50% of IRS published rate.
   (G)   If a conference fee includes a meal, the per diem allowance shall be
reduced by the amount of the particular meal included in the reimbursement
schedule.
   (H)   (1)   In order to be reimbursed for business expenses, the employee
shall submit an expense log. This log shall be signed by the employee
submitting the expense claim and approved by the Mayor or Finance Committee. An
expense log should be submitted to the accounts payable clerk and will be paid
on the appropriate disbursement date.
      (2)   Liable expenses include, but are not limited to, meals, conference
fees, hotel and motel accommodations, taxi fares, parking fees, and toll fees.
Personal expenses, such as personal phone calls, in-room movies and bars, or
other entertainment, will not be reimbursed. Receipts must accompany travel
requests for reimbursement.
   (I)   Non-reimbursable expenses include, but are not limited to, alcoholic
beverages, personal entertainment, valet service, magazines, and newspapers.
   (J)   Gratuities shall be reimbursed to a maximum of 15% except for those
departments, programs, or projects which are prohibited by federal or state
rules or regulations from making reimbursements for gratuities.
   (K)   Employees traveling overnight shall be reimbursed for one phone call
to their home phone number with a $5 limit for the call. When a delay occurs in
traveling, then the employee shall be reimbursed for one additional phone call
to his, her, or their home phone with a $5 limit for reimbursement.
(Prior Code, § 11-8-5)
§ 32.075 ILLINOIS MUNICIPAL RETIREMENT FUND.
   The village will participate in contributions for all eligible employees to
the State Municipal Retirement Fund. The village shall follow all guidelines of
IMRF in order to protect the benefits of the employees.
(Prior Code, § 11-8-6)
REGULATIONS AND RESTRICTIONS
§ 32.090 ACCIDENTS AND INJURIES.
   Anytime an employee is involved in an automobile accident with a village
automobile or in a personal automobile while on village business, the employee
shall notify his or her superintendent immediately with all pertinent
information including whether personal injury is involved and whether any
traffic citations were issued. All superintendents shall, within 24 hours,
notify the Village Attorney if any traffic citations were issued to a village
employee and shall provide the Village Attorney with a copy of the citations An
employee is obligated to cooperate with the village and any of the village’s
legal representatives regarding the accident and any citations that may have
been issued.
(Prior Code, § 11-9-1)
§ 32.091 APPEARANCE.
   (A)   Neatness and good taste in dress, as well as care toward personal
hygiene, are expected of all employees. For safety and hygienic purposes,
employees may be required to comply with any appropriate dress code that is set
forth by the superintendent or Board of Trustees during the performance of
their duties.
   (B)   Employees may be requested to change inappropriate dress, and work
lost while doing so will not be compensated by the department. Employees may be
evaluated on their dress and appearance. The Superintendent is the only
individual of each department who may make exceptions to the dress code.
(Prior Code, § 11-9-2)
§ 32.092 USE OF DEPARTMENT PROPERTY.
   (A)   All department property and equipment entrusted to any employee will
be used in accordance with the property’s prescribed function. All damage
through recklessness, gross negligence, intentional act, deliberate misuse, or
theft shall be replaced and paid for by the employee committing the violation.
Such replacement of property by the employee shall not be considered the
exclusive remedy against the employee, and the employee may still be subject to
discipline. All department property, personal lockers, and personal offices are
subject to search and seizure. All department property shall be inspected by
the employee’s immediate supervisor prior to issuance of the property.
   (B)   No department property shall be used for private or unauthorized
purposes. All employees are required to return all department property or
equipment in their possession upon separation, promotion, and/or transfer.
(Prior Code, § 11-9-3)
§ 32.093 TELEPHONE USAGE.
   (A)   Good telephone habits are an indication that the department is
interested in serving the public. Employees shall:
      (1)   At all times, answer promptly and courteously;
      (2)   Identify themselves by name and section;
      (3)   Be friendly and helpful;
      (4)   Write time and date of any message from the caller;
      (5)   Transfer calls tactfully;
      (6)   Give accurate information; and
      (7)   Not keep the caller waiting and hang up carefully.
   (B)   All personal telephone usage, including cellular telephones, whether
incoming or outgoing, shall be kept to a minimum. Employees shall be charged
and accountable for such usage. Employees shall also be responsible for the
care of the cellular units to avoid misplacement and theft. All pagers assigned
to the employees shall remain turned on during working hours.
   (C)   Employees shall keep incoming and outgoing personal calls to a
minimum.
(Prior Code, § 11-9-4)
§ 32.094 CORRESPONDENCE.
   No employee shall use his or her official position or engage in official
transactions or business to harass any individual, or to secure a benefit for
himself or other individuals. Courtesy should be given in all communications
and correspondence, and all employees should refrain from unnecessarily
criticizing any individuals or agencies concerning official transactions or
business.
(Prior Code, § 11-9-5)
§ 32.095 PHOTO ID.
   The Board of Trustee may issue a photo ID card for employees. All employees
who are issued a shield badge and/or photo ID are required to be in possession
of the badge and/or photo ID on and off duty. Employees shall not use their
shield or identification card for personal business or personal gain. If a
shield or identification card is lost or stolen, it must be reported in writing
to the superintendent without delay.
(Prior Code, § 11-9-7)
§ 32.096 SPEECH AND DISSEMINATION OF INFORMATION.
   (A)   Employees are encouraged to appear before civic organizations,
fraternal, organizations or any other group in an official capacity. Employees
shall notify the superintendent prior to accepting such speaking engagements.
   (B)   Employees are cautioned against making statements or giving
impressions regarding official agency policy or position without prior
expressed authority being granted. Normally, the Board of Trustees has the sole
right to adopt and interpret the policies of the organization. If in doubt, it
is always preferable to consult the superintendent before making any statements
that might possibly be misinterpreted or misconstrued by the general public or
press.
   (C)   The superintendent shall make all news releases concerning such
department.
   (D)   (1)   The village shall comply with the State Freedom of Information
Act, being 5 ILCS 140, and employees are allowed to disseminate information
pursuant to the Act. However, employees are not allowed to disclose any
information that is exempted by State Freedom of Information Act or prevented
from disclosure by any other state statutes.
      (2)   Employees who receive Freedom of Information Act requests shall
notify the Mayor, who may consult with the Village Attorney to ensure timely
compliance.
(Prior Code, § 11-9-8)
Cross-reference:
   Mandated policies, see
Chapter 33
§ 32.097 RELATIONS WITH CREDITORS.
   The village shall charge employees any authorized costs when making wage
deduction pursuant to court order or state or federal statutes.
(Prior Code, § 11-9-9)
§ 32.098 POSSESSION OF FIREARMS.
   Unless authorized by the Chief of Police, and unless authorized by the
appropriate superintendent, no employee of any department has legal authority
to carry weapons while in the performance of his or her official duties.
(Prior Code, § 11-9-10) Penalty, see §
10.999
§ 32.099 ETHICS.
   (A)   Employees shall not recommend or promote the sale of any specific
brand name product or equipment.
   (B)   (1)   Many employees in the course of their work have access to
medical information about patients, clients, employees, or other individuals.
This may be medical, legal, or job related information.
      (2)   Such information is not to be repeated or discussed outside the
department or with other personnel unless such information is a necessary part
of the employee’s assigned duty.
   (C)   Employees shall inform the superintendent or Mayor of any possible
conflict of interest situations they may have.
   (D)   Employees are prohibited from accepting gifts, gratuities, or any item
of value for work performed on behalf of the village.
(Prior Code, § 11-9-11)
Cross-reference:
   Mandated policies, see
Chapter 33
§ 32.100 OTHER EMPLOYMENT.
   (A)   Employees are prohibited from having conflicting employment while
having a full-time position. An employee may not be paid by another employer
for the same 40-hour period employee is being paid by the department. If a
full-time employee performs outside services or employment, such services or
employment shall be reported to the superintendent for prior approval, and
advance notification shall be given by the employee to the Village Clerk.
   (B)   Fees earned by an employee for serving as an instructor for a class
during other than normal working hours which is not sponsored by the village in
another village agency, shall be dealt with as follows:
      (1)   No overtime shall be earned and the fee retained; or
      (2)   Overtime shall be earned and the fee surrendered to the Village
Clerk and recorded as miscellaneous income.
   (C)   Employees who are injured while engaging in other employment shall
notify the superintendent and the Village Clerk.
(Prior Code, § 11-9-12)
§ 32.101 PHYSICAL EXAMINATIONS.
   (A)   Each applicant for employment may be required to successfully complete
a post-offer physical examination by a doctor of the employer’s choice,
including a drug screen upon the request of the village. At any time, employees
may be required to submit to a physical examination. As a condition of their
employment, the employees of a department shall authorize the release of
medical testing information including drug screens to the village for
departmental use only.
   (B)   Each employee authorized to carry and use a gun while at work for the
village, and all employees engaging in heavy manual labor as their principal
form of job activity for the village may be required to submit to an annual
physical exam and/or drug screens by a doctor of the employer’s choice.
   (C)   (1)   Drug screens can be conducted on a random basis for any security
personnel employed by the village, except those under police personnel
contract, for any employee authorized to carry and use a gun while performing
work related activities for the village and for any employee that is required
to hold other than a Class A driver’s license for work related purposes.
      (2)   For all other employees, drug screens shall be conducted upon
probable cause.
   (D)   The term DRUG SCREENS, as used throughout and disclose to the
superintendent, any drug or alcohol problem that the employee may currently
have.
(Prior Code, § 11-9-13)
§ 32.102 TRAINING COST REIMBURSEMENT.
   (A)   If an employee leaves the department’s employment before the
completion of three-years from the initial date of employment, that employee
will be liable for all costs incurred in the employee’s selection, background
investigation, equipment issue and training, prorated over a three-year period.
   (B)   Incurred training costs will be deducted from any remaining paychecks.
(Prior Code, § 11-9-14)
§ 32.103 PRESCRIPTION DRUG USE.
   Any employee who is taking prescription or over-the-counter drugs or
medication which may impact on abilities to perform work shall report the use
of the drugs or medications to the immediate supervisor, along with the name
and address of any medical doctors prescribing the medication.
(Prior Code, § 11-9-15)
§ 32.104 COMPUTER USAGE PROCEDURE.
   (A)   Routinely all personnel will have access to a computer. The following
procedures must be adhered to:
      (1)   (a)   All employees will only use the log-in ID, user ID, and
passwords assigned to them, (e.g., use of a supervisor user ID and passwords by
a line officer is prohibited unless authorized by the Administration. Use is a
privilege, not a right, which may be suspended or terminated by Mayor when, in
his or her judgment, this policy has been violated by the user); and
         (b)   No employee is authorized to share his or her password with
anyone except the supervisor assigned to overlook all passwords in the
department.
      (2)   It is not permissible to use village computers and equipment in any
inappropriate manner, such as to disgrace the department or a fellow employee.
It is forbidden to use profanity or vulgar language on any department computer
equipment;
      (3)   Only floppy disks which are requisitioned from the storerooms and
the data processing department are authorized to be used in department
computers. No outside floppy disks will be authorized to be used except with
permission from administration;
      (4)   No employee shall be allowed to do personal work at his or her
village computer. This is with or without the use of any floppy disk;
      (5)   No employee shall be allowed to copy any village or department
document to a floppy disk and use it outside the office without permission from
administration;
      (6)   No employee shall be allowed to have any unauthorized programs,
utilities, games, or files on his or her village PC; and
      (7)   Any variance from the above procedures shall have prior
administration permission.
   (B)   Information and data maintained in the electronic media on village
computer system are protected by the same laws and policies, and are subject to
the same limitations, as information and communications in other media. Said
information and data are the property of the village.
   (C)   Before storing or sending confidential or personal information, users
should understand that most materials on village system are, by definition,
public records. As such, they are subject to laws and policies that may compel
the village to disclose them. The privacy of the materials kept in electronic
data storage and electronic mail is neither a right, nor is it guaranteed.
(Prior Code, § 11-9-30)
DRUG-FREE WORKPLACE POLICY
§ 32.115 PURPOSE.
   (A)   All employees, as a condition of employment, shall comply with the
village’s Drug Free Workplace Policy that is found in this subchapter.
(Prior Code, § 11-9-20)
   (B)   (1)   Drug abuse affects all aspects of citizens’ lives; it threatens
the workplace as well as the home, the school, and the community. The village
must take a firm stance against illicit drug use. The use of drugs, which term
for the purposes of this policy shall include alcohol in the workplace, is
unacceptable since it can adversely affect health, safety, and productivity, as
well as public confidence and trust. When drug use and/or involvement
interferes with an employee’s efficient and safe performance of work
responsibilities and/or reduces the employee’s dependability and
accountability, it creates a problem for the whole organization.
      (2)   Drug abuse inflicts notable human expense. Personal tragedies,
feelings of anxiety and depression, and diminishing coping skills are reflected
on an individual level. Dysfunctional and strained relationships mark the heavy
burden felt by the families of the drug and alcohol abuser.
      (3)   The cost of drug abuse, both on a personal and organizational
level, is unacceptable. The rising incidence in substance abuse makes it
imperative that the village combat this issue by implementing a zero tolerance
policy of drug use in the workplace.
(Prior Code, § 11-9-21)
Cross-reference:
   Drug and alcohol testing policy and procedure, see §§
33.040 through
33.047
§ 32.116 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   CONTROLLED SUBSTANCE. As defined in the Illinois Controlled Substance Act,
720 ILCS 570/100 et seq., or “cannabis” as defined in the Cannabis Control Act,
720 ILCS 550/1 et seq.
   CONVICTION. A finding of guilt, including a plea of nolo contendere, or
imposition of sentence, or both, by any judicial body charged with determining
violations of the federal or state criminal drug statutes.
   CRIMINAL DRUG STATUTE. A criminal statute involving manufacture,
distribution, dispensation, use, or possession of any controlled substance.
   DRUG FREE WORKPLACE. Any place for the performance of work for or on behalf
of the village, done by an employee of the village, or an employee of a
contractor or subcontractor performing work for the village.
   EMPLOYEE. An employee of the village as well as an employee of a contractor
or subcontractor performing work for the village.
   STATE. All officers, boards, commissions, and agencies created by the
Illinois Constitution, whether in the executive, legislative, or judicial
branch; all officers, departments, boards, commissions, agencies, institutions,
authorities, universities, bodies politic and corporate of the state; or
administrative units or corporate outgrowths of the state government which are
created by or pursuant to statute.
(Prior Code, § 22-2-1) (Ord. 10-09, passed 9-20-2010; Ord. 2024-18, passed 11-
20-2024)
§ 32.117 STATEMENT.
   (A)   The unlawful manufacture, distribution, dispensation, possession, or
use of a controlled substance, including cannabis, is prohibited in the
workplace. CONTROLLED SUBSTANCE means a controlled substance as defined in the
State Controlled Substances Act, being 720 ILCS 570.100 et seq., or CANNABIS as
defined in the Cannabis Control Act, being 720 ILCS 550/1 et seq. Disciplinary
action, up to and including dismissal, can be taken against employees for drug
violations.
   (B)   All employees will, as a condition of employment:
      (1)   Agree not to manufacture, distribute, dispense, or possess
controlled substances or alcohol in the workplace;
      (2)   Notify their respective superintendent of any arrest or conviction
of any local, state, or federal criminal drug statute no later than 24 hours
after such arrest or conviction; and
      (3)   Abide by the conditions set forth in the statement outlined in §
32.118.
(Prior Code, § 11-9-22)
§ 32.118 REQUIREMENTS FOR VILLAGE.
   The village shall provide a drug free workplace by:
   (A)   Publishing a statement:
      (1)   Notifying employees that the unlawful manufacture, distribution,
dispensation, possession, or use of a controlled substance, including cannabis,
is prohibited in the workplace;
      (2)   Specifying the actions that will be taken against employees for
violations of such prohibition; and
      (3)   Notifying employee that, as a condition of employment, the employee
will:
         (a)   Abide by the terms of the statement; and
         (b)   Notify the employer of any criminal drug statute conviction for
a violation occurring in the workplace no later than five days after such
conviction.
   (B)   Establishing a drug free awareness program to be administered by a
person appointed by the Mayor to inform employees about:
      (1)   The dangers of drug abuse in the workplace;
      (2)   The village’s policy of maintaining a drug free workplace;
      (3)   Any available drug counseling, rehabilitation, and employee
assistance programs; and
      (4)   The penalties that may be imposed upon employees for drug
violations.
   (C)   A copy of the statement required by division (A) above shall be given
to each employee and posted in a prominent place in the workplace;
   (D)   If the village receives a grant from the state or contract for the
procurement of any property or services from the state, then the village shall
notify the contracting or granting agency within ten days after receiving
notice under division (A)(3)(b) above from an employee or otherwise receiving
actual notice of such conviction;
   (E)   Within 30 days from receiving notice from an employee of a conviction
of a violation of a criminal drug statute occurring in the workplace, the Mayor
shall take action against such employee as may be appropriate as determined by
the Mayor and which may include, but is not limited to, reprimand; suspension
for any length of time with or without pay; termination from employment; and/or
a requirement to satisfactorily participate in a drug abuse assistance or
rehabilitation program approved for such purposes by a federal, state, or local
health, law enforcement, or other appropriate agency;
   (F)   Assisting employees in selecting a course of action in the event drug
counseling, treatment, and rehabilitation is required and indicating that a
trained referral team is in place; and
   (G)   Making a good faith effort to continue to maintain a drug free
workplace through implementation of this section.
(Prior Code, § 22-2-2) (Ord. 10-09, passed 9-20-2010)
§ 32.119 VIOLATIONS.
   (A)   Employees are subject to discipline, including discharge for violation
of the above-policy.
   (B)   Require the satisfactory participation and completion of a state
licensed drug rehabilitation program, as sanctioned by the employer.
   (C)   The village shall notify the appropriate state agency from which grant
funds were received of the employee’s conviction within ten days after
receiving notice from an employee of any criminal drug statute conviction for a
violation in the workplace.
(Prior Code, § 11-9-23) Penalty, see §
10.999
§ 32.120 EMPLOYEE ASSISTANCE.
   A referral network to assist those who may be experiencing problems with
drugs and/or alcohol may be established for all village employees.
(Prior Code, § 11-9-24)
§ 32.121 STATUS OF EMPLOYMENT; REHABILITATION COSTS.
   (A)   There is no requirement by the employer to keep an employee on active
employment status who is receiving rehabilitative treatment if it is determined
that the employee’s current use of drugs prevents the individual from
performing work related duties or whose continuance on active status could
constitute a threat to the property and/or safety of others.
   (B)   The employee shall pay for all costs of rehabilitation. The employee
may use accumulated paid leave, and take unpaid leave pending treatment, at the
discretion of the employer, and so long as the employee advised the
superintendent of use or abuse of drugs prior to occurrence of reasonable
suspicion.
(Prior Code, § 11-9-25)
ELECTRONIC COMMUNICATIONS
§ 32.135 PURPOSE; POLICY CHANGES.
   (A)   (1)   This policy is intended to serve as a guide on the proper use of
the village electronic communication systems. This policy covers the use of all
forms of electronic communications, including, but not limited to, e-mail,
voice mail, fax machines, external bulletin boards, intranet, and the internet,
and applies to all users. Users are expected to read, understand, and follow
the provisions of this policy and will be held responsible for knowing its
contents. Use of the electronic communication system constitutes acceptance of
this policy and its requirements.
      (2)   The village provides electronic mail (e-mail) and/or internet
access to elected officials and staff who need it to perform the functions of
their position. The purpose of this document is to communicate to all personnel
their responsibility for acceptable use of the internet and e-mail (whether
sent over the internet or over the village’s own network). Policies and
procedures are also outlined for the disclosure and monitoring of the contents
of e-mail messages stored in the system when required.
      (3)   The village’s objectives for employees to use e-mail and/or the
internet include:
         (a)   Exchanging information more efficiently than by telephone or
written memorandum;
         (b)   Gathering information and performing research for departments;
and
         (c)   Reducing the handling of paper copy.
(Prior Code, § 11-9-35)
   (B)   The village reserves the right to change this policy at any time with
notice. Nothing in this policy is intended or should be construed as an
agreement and/or a contract expressed or implied. Policy changes will be
disseminated electronically or in written form within 48 hours of taking effect
after an ordinance has been adopted.
(Prior Code, § 11-9-57)
§ 32.136 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ELECTRONIC MAIL (E-MAIL). Electronic mail may include non-interactive
communication of text, data, image, or voice messages between a sender and
designated recipient(s) by systems utilizing telecommunications links. It may
also include correspondence transmitted and stored electronically using
software facilities called “mail,” “facsimile,” “messaging” systems or voice
messages transmitted and stored for later retrieval from a computer system.
   ENCRYPTION SOFTWARE. Proprietary software that changes information from its
native state to an unrecognizable coded state that can only be returned to its
native state with special software.
   FIREWALL. An electronic device used to protect private networks from
unauthorized access from users on the internet.
   INTERNET. A worldwide network of networks, connecting informational networks
communicating through a common communications language or protocol.
   INTRANET. An in-house web site that serves the users of the village.
Although INTRANET pages may link to the internet, an INTRANET is not a site
accessed by the general public.
   WORLD WIDE WEB. An internet client-server distributed information and
retrieval system based upon hypertext transfer protocol (http) that transfers
hypertext documents that can contain text, graphics, audio, video, and other
multimedia file types across a varied array of computer systems.
   USERS. Elected officials, department heads, employees, volunteers,
contractors, and consultants.
(Prior Code, § 11-9-36)
§ 32.137 OWNERSHIP.
   The electronic communication system is the property of the village. All
computer equipment, computer hardware, and computer software provided by the
village are the property of the village. All communications and information
transmitted by, received from, or stored in these systems are the property of
the village.
(Prior Code, § 11-9-37)
§ 32.138 USE OF ELECTRONIC COMMUNICATIONS.
   (A)   The village’s electronic communications systems, including e-mail and
the internet, are intended for village business use only. Personal uses of the
internet and e-mail systems are prohibited. The village reserves the right to
use filtering software to block access to internet sites that are considered
inappropriate or non-productive. The filtered sites shall be reviewed and
approved by the Mayor.
   (B)   Before using these systems, all users shall understand that any
information that is created, sent, received, accessed, or stored in these
systems shall be the property of the village and shall not be private. If a
user is permitted to use electronic communication systems, such use shall not
violate any section of this policy or interfere with user’s work performance.
   (C)   Users shall use the same care and discretion when writing e-mail and
other electronic communications as they would with any formal written
communication. Any messages or information sent by users to other individuals
via electronic communication systems, such as the internet or e-mail, are
statements identifiable and attributable to the village. Consequently, all
electronic communications sent by users shall be professional and comply with
this policy.
(Prior Code, § 11-9-38)
§ 32.139 PROHIBITED COMMUNICATIONS.
   (A)   Under no circumstances may any user operate the village’s electronic
communications systems for creating, possessing, uploading, downloading,
accessing, transmitting, or distributing material that is illegal, sexually
explicit, discriminatory, defamatory, or interferes with the productivity of
coworkers. Specifically prohibited communications include, but are not limited
to, communications that promote or transact the following: illegal activities;
outside business interests; malicious use; personal activities (including chat
rooms); jokes; political causes; football pools or other sorts of gambling;
recreational games; the creation or distribution of chain letters; list servers
for nonwork purposes; spam (mailing to a large number of people that contain
unwanted solicitations or information); sexual or any other form of harassment;
discrimination on the basis of race, creed, color, gender, religion, or
disability; or for solicitations or advertisements for non-work purposes. Users
may not engage in any use that violates copyright or trademark laws.
   (B)   Also prohibited is any activity that could negatively impact public
trust and confidence in the village or create the appearance of impropriety.
   (C)   Users are also prohibited from posting information, opinions or
comments to internet discussion groups (for example: news groups, chat, list
servers, or electronic bulletin boards). Under no circumstances may any user
represent his or her own views as those of the village.
   (D)   Users may not disclose confidential or sensitive information. Personal
information, such as the home addresses, phone numbers, and Social Security
numbers of elected officials or employees, should never be disclosed on the
internet.
(Prior Code, § 11-9-39)
§ 32.140 NO PRESUMPTION OF POLICY.
   (A)   Although users may use passwords to access some electronic
communication systems, these communications should not be considered private.
Users should always assume that any communications, whether business-related or
personal, created, sent, received, or stored on the village’s electronic
communication systems may be read or heard by someone other than the intended
recipient.
   (B)   (1)   Users should also recognize that e-mail messages deleted from
the system may still be retrieved from the computer’s back-up system when
requested by authorized personnel.
      (2)   Consequently, messages that were previously deleted may be
recreated, printed out, or forwarded to someone else without the user’s
knowledge.
(Prior Code, § 11-9-40)
§ 32.141 VILLAGE’S RIGHT TO MONITOR USE.
   (A)   Under authorization of the Mayor, the village may monitor, intercept,
access, and disclose all information created, sent, received, or stored on its
electronic communication systems at any time, with or without notice to the
user. The contents of computers, voicemail, e-mail, and other electronic
communications will be inspected when there are allegations that there have
been breaches of confidentiality, security, or violations of this Electronic
Communications Policy. These inspections will also be conducted when it is
necessary to locate substantive information that is not readily available by
less intrusive means. Before providing access to store electronic
communications, such as e-mail messages, written authorization will be required
from the Mayor.
   (B)   The contents of the computers, voicemail, e-mail, and other electronic
communications may be turned over to the appropriate authority when there are
allegations that there have been violations of law.
   (C)   In addition, the village will regularly monitor and maintain a log of
the user’s internet access, including the type of sites accessed, the name of
the server, and the time of day that access occurs. The Mayor will have access
to this log upon request. They may use this information that was obtained
through monitoring as a basis for employee discipline.
   (D)   The Mayor may authorize individuals for investigative purposes to
engage in activities otherwise prohibited by this policy.
(Prior Code, § 11-9-41)
§ 32.142 PROHIBITED ACTIVITIES.
   (A)   (1)   Users shall not download software programs of any kind. No
software is to be installed on village computers without the approval of the
Board of Trustees. Users may not upload, download, or otherwise transmit
copyrighted, trademarked, or patented material; trade secrets; or confidential,
private, or proprietary information or materials. Users may not use the
village’s electronic communication systems to gain unauthorized access to
remote computers or other systems or to damage, alter, or disrupt such
computers or systems in any way, nor may users use someone else’s code or
password or disclose anyone’s code or password, including their own.
      (2)   It is a violation of this policy for users to intentionally
intercept, eavesdrop, record, or alter another person’s internet and e-mail
messages. Users may not allow unauthorized individuals to have access to or use
the village’s electronic communication systems, or otherwise permit any use
that would jeopardize the security of the village’s electronic communication
systems. Also, users may not post an unauthorized home page or similar web
site.
   (B)   Users may not make unauthorized commitments or promises that might be
perceived as binding the village. Users must use their real names when sending
e-mail messages or other electronic communications and may not misrepresent,
obscure, or in any way attempt to subvert the information necessary to identify
the actual person responsible for the electronic communication. Sending an e-
mail message under a fictitious or false name is a violation of this policy.
Likewise, using another user’s account or login ID constitutes a violation of
this policy.
(Prior Code, § 11-9-42)
§ 32.143 PASSWORDS.
   (A)   Each user will maintain a unique password. Users must keep their
passwords confidential and must never leave their computers unattended when
logged into the system. Passwords shall be changed whenever a password may have
been compromised or revealed or when the computer security system requests a
new password.
   (B)   Directories of user e-mail addresses may not be made available for
public access. No visitors, contractors, or temporary employees may use the
village’s e-mail without prior written authorization from the Mayor.
(Prior Code, § 11-9-43)
§ 32.144 INTERNET USAGE.
   (A)   Access to the internet from any PC connected to the village’s network
is only allowed in accordance with this policy. Alternate methods of internet
access, such as using a modem to access a personal dial-up internet account, is
prohibited, as it may compromise the village’s network security exposing it to
potential harm from computer hackers.
   (B)   Sessions on the internet are logged automatically in exactly the same
way that phone numbers are logged in the phone system. Employees should not use
the internet for tasks that they would not want to be logged. Web browsers
leave “footprints” providing a trail of all site visits. Employees should not
visit any site where they would be reluctant to leave their name and work
locations.
   (C)   (1)   Employees should use appropriate judgment before filling out a
form included in a web page. The form shall pass through many interconnecting
computers and networks before reaching its destination.
      (2)   Other individuals will be able to eavesdrop on it. Personal or
valuable information on the form may not remain confidential. Under no
circumstances should employees ever put a Social Security number on the
internet.
   (D)   (1)   An internet message sent from the village’s address constitutes
a village communication; therefore, it should be composed and structured
correctly.
      (2)   Whenever possible, employees should spell check messages prior to
transmission, especially when sending to a non-village address.
   (E)   (1)   Sending e-mail from the village’s address can be likened to
sending a letter on village letterhead. Messages may be forwarded by the
recipient to others, printed in a location where others may view the message,
and/or directed to the wrong recipient.
      (2)   Also, computer forensic experts can often retrieve e-mail
previously deleted. An ill-considered remark can return to haunt the sender
later.
   (F)   Employees shall be courteous and follow generally accepted standards
of etiquette; protect others’ privacy and confidentiality; consider the
village’s needs before sending, filing, or destroying e-mail messages; and
remove personal messages, temporary records, and duplicate copies in a timely
manner.
(Prior Code, § 11-9-44)
§ 32.145 RECORDS.
   (A)   Certain significant types of e-mail messages or their attached files
may be considered records and should be retained if required by the village’s
record-retention policies. Examples of messages sent by e-mail that may
constitute records include:
      (1)   Policies and directives;
      (2)   Correspondence or memoranda related to official business;
      (3)   Work schedules and assignments;
      (4)   Agendas and minutes of meetings;
      (5)   Drafts of documents that are circulated for comment or approval;
      (6)   Any document that initiates, authorizes, or completes a business
transaction; and
      (7)   Final reports or recommendations.
(Prior Code, § 11-9-45)
   (B)   (1)   The content and maintenance of a user’s electronic mailbox are
the user’s responsibility. The content and maintenance of a user’s disk storage
area are the user’s responsibility.
      (2)   Each user should review his or her electronic records for deletion
every 30 days.
      (3)   Messages of transitory or little value that are not normally
retained in record-keeping systems should be regularly deleted. Informational
messages, such as meeting notices, reminders, informal notes, and telephone
messages, should be deleted once the administrative purpose is served.
      (4)   If it is necessary to retain any e-mail message for an extended
period, users should transfer it from the e-mail system to an appropriate
electronic or other filing system.
      (5)   With the approval of the Mayor, the Village Clerk or one of his or
her staff members designated by him or her is permitted to remove any
information retained in an e-mail system for more than 30 days.
(Prior Code, § 11-9-46)
§ 32.146 E-MAIL ADDRESSES AND ACCESS.
   (A)    During a user’s absence, the Mayor may authorize the Village Clerk to
access the user’s e-mail messages and electronic internet records without the
consent of the user when necessary to carry out normal business functions.
(Prior Code, § 11-9-47)
   (B)   The village reserves the right to keep a user’s e-mail address active
for a reasonable period of time following the user’s departure to ensure that
important business communications reach their respective department.
(Prior Code, § 11-9-53)
§ 32.147 VIRUSES AND TAMPERING.
   (A)   Any files downloaded from the internet must be scanned with virus
detection software before installation and execution. All computers designated
as having access to the internet and e-mail must have virus detection software
installed on them. Users may not deliberately disable the virus protection
capabilities of these systems. The intentional introduction of viruses,
attempts to breach system security, or other malicious tampering with any of
the village’s electronic communication systems is expressly prohibited. Users
must immediately report any viruses, tampering, or other system breaches to the
Mayor or a designated officer.
   (B)   Many viruses are transmitted through the e-mail system as attachments.
Caution should be practiced prior to the accessing of any attachments to e-mail
messages. Never access any unexpected attachments without verifying the source
and reason for it, even if you recognize the sender of the e-mail. It is common
practice for hackers to alter the source of an e-mail in an attempt to spread a
virus.
(Prior Code, § 11-9-50)
§ 32.148 DISCLAIMER OF LIABILITY FOR INTERNET USE.
   The village is not responsible for material viewed or downloaded by users
from the internet. The internet provides access to a significant amount of
information, some of which contains offensive, sexually explicit, and
inappropriate material. It is difficult to avoid contact with this material;
therefore, users of the internet do so at their own risk.
(Prior Code, § 11-9-51)
§ 32.149 DISCLAIMER NOT TO WASTE RESOURCES.
   Users must not deliberately perform actions that waste electronic
communication resources or unfairly monopolize resources to the exclusion of
other users. This includes, but is not limited to, subscribing to list servers,
mailing lists, or web sites not directly related to the user’s job
responsibilities; spending nonproductive time on the internet; and doing large
non-work related file downloads or mass mailings. Electronic communication
resources are limited and users have a duty to conserve these resources.
(Prior Code, § 11-9-52)
§ 32.150 FREEDOM OF INFORMATION ACT REQUESTS.
   The village will not accept Freedom of Information Act (F.O.I.A., being 5
ILCS 140/1.1 et seq.) requests from the public via the internet. If a citizen
e-mails a F.O.I.A. request to a user, the employee should notify the citizen
that these requests must be made in writing in compliance with the Freedom of
Information Code. (See §§
33.095 through
33.104.)
(Prior Code, § 11-9-54)
§ 32.151 CREDIT CARD USE ON THE INTERNET.
   Before making purchases on the internet, users who are authorized to use
village credit cards must ensure that they are using a secured site. The
village recommends that users do not use their credit cards over the internet
and expressly disclaims responsibility for any loss or damages that results
from credit card usage over the internet.
(Prior Code, § 11-9-55)
§ 32.152 VIOLATIONS.
   Violations of the policy codified herein may subject employees to
disciplinary action ranging from the removal of electronic communication
privileges to dismissal from employment. Village employees who observe
violations of the policy codified herein are obligated to report the violations
to the Mayor or Village Clerk.
(Prior Code, § 11-9-56) Penalty, see §
10.999
RIGHTS OF EMPLOYEES AND EMPLOYER
§ 32.165 PERSONNEL FILE.
   (A)   Employees are allowed to look at their own personnel files during
normal business hours. Persons wishing to view their own file shall file a
written request with the Mayor or the Village Clerk. A copy of the request
shall be placed in the employee’s personnel file.
   (B)   Nothing should be placed in an employee’s personnel file, nor shall
anything be removed from the file without the consent of the Mayor and Board of
Trustees. Records of prior grievances and discipline action shall be maintained
in the employee’s personnel file. The final decision to remove items lies
within the discretion of the Mayor and the Board of Trustees.
(Prior Code, § 11-10-1)
§ 32.166 REFERENCES.
   Employees or former employees have the right to obtain references or
recommendations. Such references shall provide the applicable date of hire and
the last date employed, and a general description of the applicable job duties.
Additional comments concerning the employee or former employee’s job
performance dependabilities lies within the sound discretion of the
superintendent.
(Prior Code, § 11-10-2)
§ 32.167 SAFETY.
   (A)   The superintendent shall implement any safety procedures adopted by
the village, and employees shall comply with any of the safety procedures.
   (B)   All employees are directed to report any hazardous conditions to their
supervisor immediately.
   (C)   Due to the open-office design of many department buildings, it is
impossible to provide security for personal belongings left unattended.
Employees are advised to keep their wallets, purses, and the like in their
possession at all times. The village cannot be responsible for losses due to
theft.
(Prior Code, § 11-10-3)
§ 32.168 VILLAGE’S RIGHTS.
   (A)   The employee recognizes that the village possesses the exclusive right
to operate and direct the employees of the village in all aspects, including,
but not limited to, all rights and authority granted by law.
   (B)   The employee further recognizes that this Employee Code is not a
binding contract between the village and the employee. Nothing contained in
this Employee Code shall be construed as creating an employment agreement
between the village and its employees from time to time.
(Prior Code, § 11-11-1)
§ 32.169 NEW REGULATIONS.
   The village has the right to unilaterally create new employment policies and
regulations not mentioned in this Employee Code, and to change provisions of
this Employee Code without approval or consent of the employees of the village.
(Prior Code, § 11-11-2)
§ 32.170 MANAGEMENT RESPONSIBILITIES.
   The employer has the ultimate responsibility for proper management,
including, but not limited to, responsibilities and the right for the
following:
   (A)   To maintain executive management and administrative control of the
department and its property, facilities, and staff;
   (B)   To hire all employees and to determine their qualifications and the
conditions for their continued employment or their dismissal or demotion;
   (C)   To direct, supervise, promote, suspend, discipline, terminate, assign,
and schedule employees;
   (D)   To relieve employees from duties because of a lack of work or funds,
or under conditions where continued work would be inefficient or nonproductive
or under conditions as may be deemed necessary or advisable by the department;
   (E)   To determine services to be rendered, operations to be performed,
utilization of technology, and budgetary matters;
   (F)   To determine the methods, processes, means, job classifications, and
personnel by which the operations of the department are to be conducted; and
   (G)   It is recognized that the employer normally exercises most of the
powers, rights, authorities, duties, and responsibilities through and with the
cooperation of the administrative staff.
(Prior Code, § 11-11-3)
§ 32.171 LENGTH OF SERVICE.
   (A)   (1)   Length of service is defined as the length of continuous service
of an employee since the employee’s last date of hire with the village within
the employee’s department.
      (2)   In the event an employee is transferred from or to another
department of the village, the employee’s total continuous employment with the
village will be used as the basis for vacation and sick leave only.
   (B)   An employee’s continuous service record shall be broken by voluntary
resignation or discharge. If such continuous service is broken due to
curtailment of operation, said employee shall be considered on layoff.
(Prior Code, § 11-11-4)
§ 32.172 EXEMPTIONS TO LABOR AGREEMENTS.
   All sections and divisions of this Employee Code shall not apply to the
employees governed by a collective bargaining agreement provided the subject
matter in the Collective Bargaining Agreement sections are the same.
(Prior Code, § 11-11-5)
SEXUAL MISCONDUCT POLICY
§ 32.185 STATEMENT.
   The village will not tolerate and will seek to eradicate any behavior by its
employees, volunteers, or students which constitutes sexual misconduct toward
another employee, volunteer, or student. SEXUAL MISCONDUCT means any actual,
attempted, or alleged sexual molestation, assault, abuse, sexual exploitation,
or sexual injury. SEXUAL MISCONDUCT does not include “sexual harassment.”
(Prior Code, § 11-13-1)
Cross-reference:
   Sexual harassment prevention policies, see §§
33.075 through
33.081
§ 32.186 REPORTING PROCEDURES; DESIGNATED SEXUAL ABUSE COORDINATOR.
   (A)   It is the express policy of the village to encourage victims of sexual
misconduct, and their parents or guardians in the case of minors, to come
forward with such claims. The village shall designate a Sexual Abuse
Coordinator, who hereinafter may be referred to as “Coordinator,” who shall
remain accountable for the implementation and monitoring of this policy. The
identity of the Sexual Abuse Coordinator shall remain on file with the village.
In order to conduct an immediate investigation, any incident of sexual
misconduct shall be reported as quickly as possible in confidence, as follows:
      (1)   Employees and volunteers are required to report any known or
suspected incidents of sexual misconduct. They must also report to their
supervisor or the Sexual Abuse Coordinator. If the person to whom an employee
or volunteer is directed to report is the offending person, the report should
be made to the next higher level of administration or supervision; and
      (2)   All formal complaints will be given a full impartial and timely
investigation. During such investigation, while every effort will be made to
protect the privacy rights of all parties’ confidentiality cannot be
guaranteed.
   (B)   Any village employee or volunteer who is determined, after an
investigation, to have engaged in sexual misconduct in violation of this policy
will be subject to disciplinary action up to and including discharge.
   (C)   False accusations regarding sexual misconduct will not be tolerated,
and any person knowingly making a false accusation shall likewise be subject to
disciplinary action up to and including discharge, with regard to employees or
volunteers.
   (D)   The village shall discipline any individual who retaliates against any
person who reports alleged sexual misconduct or who retaliates against any
person who testifies, assists, or participates in an investigation, a
proceeding or a hearing relating to a sexual misconduct complaint. Retaliation
includes, but is not limited to, any form of intimidation, reprisal, or
harassment.
(Prior Code, § 11-13-2)
§ 32.187 CHILD ABUSE.
   (A)   Sexual abuse of any minor is a crime.
   (B)   Any case of known or suspected child abuse of a minor must be reported
immediately in compliance with state mandatory reporting guidelines and to the
Sexual Abuse Coordinator and the Village Attorney’s office. In the event that
the Sexual Abuse Coordinator is first notified of an incident of known or
suspected child abuse, the Sexual Abuse Coordinator shall immediately notify
the child’s parent or legal guardian as the case be, and the appropriate legal
authorities as required by state or local law. The Sexual Abuse Coordinator
shall prepare a suspected child abuse standard report and immediately follow-up
to investigate the incident and to ascertain the condition of the child. The
Sexual Abuse Coordinator shall communicate any questions or concerns about any
incident with the State Attorney. Any employee or volunteer involved in a
reported incident of sexual misconduct or child abuse shall be immediately
relieved of responsibilities that involve interaction with minors or shall be
suspended, as determined by the employee’s supervisor. Reinstatement of
employees or volunteers involved in a reported incident of child abuse shall
occur only after all allegations of child abuse have been cleared by the
county.
   (C)   The Sexual Abuse Coordinator shall maintain all records and
documentation required by law or otherwise required by this code and other such
related policies of the village including all documents related to procedures
for hiring, screening, employee/volunteer code of conduct, training, sign-in/
sign-out, pick-up and release procedures, incident reporting follow-up, and
disciplinary action.
(Prior Code, § 11-13-3)   
DISCIPLINE PROCEDURES
§ 32.200 PROCEDURE, GENERALLY.
   (A)   The formal disciplinary process is a five step procedure, but
dismissal may occur at any step in the process. Superintendents may use the
discipline form attached as
Appendix B of this chapter for documentation purposes.
   (B)   Under normal circumstances, these steps are outlined in §§
32.201 through
32.207.
(Prior Code, § 11-14-1)
§ 32.201 VERBAL AND WRITTEN REPRIMAND.
   (A)   A verbal reprimand informs an employee of unsatisfactory conduct,
attitude, or performance, and acknowledges that continued such actions will
result in more severe disciplinary actions. The reprimand should be done in
private, and should be documented with the date and nature of the problem and
placed in the employee’s personnel file.
(Prior Code, § 11-14-2)
   (B)   A written reprimand informs an employee of unsatisfactory conduct,
attitude, or performance. Written reprimand is more severe than a verbal
reprimand, but serves the same purpose to acknowledge further unsatisfactory
conduct, attitude, or performance will result in more severe disciplinary
action. A copy of the written reprimand will be sent to the employee, the
superintendent, Mayor, and employee’s personnel file.
(Prior Code, § 11-14-3)
§ 32.202 PROBATION.
   (A)   Employee may be placed on probation by the superintendent and/or the
Mayor if the employee’s performance is substandard and/or the employee’s
conduct and behavior are inappropriate and not condoned by management. Employee
may be placed on probation not to exceed six months.
   (B)   At the end of three months, an informal evaluation of the employee’s
performance will be conducted.
   (C)   At the end of the probationary period, the employee’s performance will
be formally evaluated.
   (D)   Evaluations will determine if the employee should be retained. If the
employee violates the conditions of the probation, the employee may be subject
to termination. Removal from probationary status is based upon satisfactory
completion of the probationary period, recommendation from the employee’s
immediate superintendent, and approval of the Mayor.
(Prior Code, § 11-14-4)
§ 32.203 ADMINISTRATIVE LEAVE.
   An employee may be placed on administrative leave by the Mayor with or
without pay and benefits pending an investigation based on alleged violation of
the municipal policies and procedures. The administrative leave may be extended
for the period of time the investigation continues, but no longer than 30 days.
(Prior Code, § 11-14-5)
§ 32.204 SUSPENSION.
   (A)   Suspension of an employee would be at the discretion of the
superintendent. The suspension will result in a loss of salary for the period
of the suspension. Upon return to work the suspended employee will be placed on
probationary status for a period not to exceed six months. If the employee
violates the conditions of the probation, the employee may be subject to
termination.
   (B)   Removal from probationary status is based upon satisfactory completion
of a probationary period, a recommendation from the employee’s immediate
superintendent, and the approval the Mayor and Board of Trustees. The period of
suspension may be up to, but not exceeding, 30 days off without pay in one
calendar year. The suspension may include demotion, and is within the
discretion of the superintendent.
(Prior Code, § 11-14-6)
§ 32.205 DISMISSAL.
   Dismissal shall be used as a disciplinary action of last resort at the
discretion of the Mayor and the Board of Trustees. All employees are subject to
discharge by the Mayor with the advice and consent of the Board of Trustees
during any of the disciplinary steps.
(Prior Code, § 11-14-7)
§ 32.206 CODE OF CONDUCT.
   Disciplinary action may be brought against an employee for the following,
including, but not limited to:
   (A)   Violating any provisions of the Employee Code;
   (B)   Knowingly falsifying a report;
   (C)   Being insubordinate to or showing disrespect towards superiors;
   (D)   Neglecting to perform the job or performing the job inefficiently;
   (E)   Engaging in any conduct unbecoming of a village employee or that
discredits the village;
   (F)   Leaving the assigned job without permission;
   (G)   Absence from work without leave or permission;
   (H)   Willfully destroying or damaging any property of the village;
   (I)   Taking or giving bribes;
   (J)   Being under the influence of intoxicating beverages while at work;
   (K)   Using, manufacturing, distributing, dispensing, or possessing any
statutorily defined illegal drugs, narcotics, or controlled substances, or
failing to report to the employee’s superintendent any arrest or conviction for
using, manufacturing, distributing, dispensing, or possessing any statutorily
defined illegal drugs, narcotics, or controlled substance;
   (L)   Failure of any employee to notify their superintendent within five
days after an arrest or conviction of a violation of any local, state, or
federal criminal drug statute;
   (M)   Using a village vehicle without the knowledge of the immediate
supervisor;
   (N)   Improperly operating a village vehicle or permitting an unauthorized
person to operate a village vehicle;
   (O)   Excessive unexcused absence from work or tardiness;
   (P)   Possession of explosives, firearms, or other dangerous weapons on
village premises, unless otherwise permitted;
   (Q)   Using overtime for purposes other than work;
   (R)   Failure to follow any safety rules, regulations, or manuals;
   (S)   Gambling during working hours around village premises;
   (T)   Sleeping on the job;
   (U)   Being discourteous to the public;
   (V)   Engaging in or instigating or causing an interruption or
impeding   work;
   (W)   Substantial misrepresentation of facts in obtaining employment with
the village;
   (X)   Using or consuming village property for personal or private purposes,
or using village employees during working hours for such purposes;
   (Y)   Disorderly conduct during working time or on village premises,
including fighting, interfering with work of another, or threatening or abusing
any person by word or act;
   (Z)   Unauthorized use of village property, such as village-owned vehicles,
equipment, and materials;
   (AA)   Abusing of sick leave by misrepresentation of the leave request;
   (BB)   Violating of a written order of a superintendent;
   (CC)   Failing to pay legitimate debts, thus exposing the village to
harassment by creditors;
   (DD)   Using profanity on the job;
   (EE)   Releasing confidential information;
   (FF)   Using or attempting to use an official position to secure special
privileges, exemptions, or personal gain except as may be otherwise provided by
law;
   (GG)   Engaging in disreputable acts and not conducting themselves with
“good moral character;”
   (HH)   Abusing of telephone usage;
   (II)   Theft of any village or employee property;
   (JJ)   Discriminating against any person, individual, entity, co-employee,
on the basis of race, color, religion, sex, national origin, age, handicap or
disability, ancestry, marital status, sex harassment, or any other prohibited
form of discrimination under federal or state law or government contract or
grantee regulations;
   (KK)   Failing to perform essential functions of his or her position;
   (LL)   Abusing village computer equipment;
   (MM)   Being charged with a misdemeanor or felony;
   (NN)   Allowing drug and/or alcohol in or on machinery and/or vehicles; or
   (OO)   Using of synthetic drugs.
(Prior Code, § 11-14-8)
§ 32.207 POLITICAL ACTIVITIES.
   No form of discipline can occur because of any employee’s political activity
or political beliefs. This prohibition on discipline does not apply to
individuals in policy making or confidential positions or where an overriding
interest or vital importance exists which requires that an employee’s political
beliefs and activities conform to those of the superintendent or the corporate
authorities. The village also recognizes that false accusations can have
serious affects on innocent men and women. We trust that all employees will
continue to act in a responsible and professional manner to establish a
pleasant working environment free of discrimination.
(Prior Code, § 11-14-9)
APPENDIX A: EMPLOYEE NOTIFICATION OF PERSONNEL CODE, DRUG-FREE WORKPLACE
POLICY, SEXUAL MISCONDUCT POLICY, AND DISCLAIMER OF EMPLOYMENT
The Employee Code of the village is not intended to create any employment
relationship with any employees that is contractual in nature. All employees
are employed at the will of the village, and employees can be terminated at
will. All employment policies of the village are subject to change without
notice and/or approval of any employee. Any and all discipline and/or discharge
procedures contained in this Code are illustrative in nature, and only provide
examples of the manner in which employees may be disciplined or terminated. Any
and all such procedures are not meant to be the sole or exclusive way in which
discipline or discharge could occur.
By signing this disclaimer, the employee understands that the employment
relationship between the employee and the village is NOT contractual in nature;
that employment can be terminated at the will of the village, that all
employment policies are subject to change without notice and/or approval of the
employee; and that any and all discipline and/or discharge procedures contained
in the Code are merely illustrative in nature, and are not meant to be the sole
or exclusive manner in which discipline and/or discharge could occur.
I have been given a copy of the village’s Employee Code, originally adopted
_____________________, 20___.
I understand that contained without the Employee Code is the Drug Free
Workplace Policy. I have read and understood the Drug Free Workplace Policy,
and agree to abide by its terms and conditions.
Name____________________________________________
Date____________________________________________
This form is to be retained by the Village Clerk.
(Prior Code, Ch. 11, Appendix A)
APPENDIX B: DISCIPLINE FORM
Date
______________________________________________________________________________
Employee Name
____________________________________________________________________
Employee’s Job Position
_____________________________________________________________
Village Department
_________________________________________________________________
Superintendent
_____________________________________________________________________
Type of Discipline (Check One):
___________   Verbal Reprimand
___________   Written Reprimand
___________   Probation
___________   Suspension
___________   Dismissal
State the Section of the Employee Code violated:
Section ___________      Subsection ___________      Page Number ___________   
State any Code of Conduct violation, listing the Code of Conduct Subparagraph
Number
__________________________________________________________________________________
State the facts which support the
violation________________________________________________
__________________________________________________________________________________
__________________________________________________________________________________
__________________________________________________________________________________
DATE
______________________         ______________________________________________
                                       Superintendent/Mayor
DATE
______________________         ______________________________________________
                                       (Signature of Employee)
(Prior Code, Ch. 11, Appendix B)
APPENDIX C: AMERICANS WITH DISABILITIES ACT GRIEVANCE PROCEDURE
1.   All complaints regarding access or alleged discrimination should be
submitted in writing to the American Disabilities Act Coordinator for
resolution. A record of the complaint and action taken will be maintained. A
decision by the ADA Coordinator will be rendered promptly.
2.   If the complaints cannot be resolved to the satisfaction of the
complainant by the ADA Coordinator, then for building accessibility issues, the
matter shall be turned over to the Board of Trustees for consideration. For
employment and public service issues, the matter will be forwarded to the Board
of Trustees for consideration.
3.   If the complaint cannot be resolved to the complainant’s satisfaction by
the Board of Trustees, the complaint will be reviewed and decided upon by the
Mayor. The decision of the Mayor shall be considered final.
4.   A record of action taken on each request or complaint shall be maintained
as a part of the records or minutes at each level of the grievance process.
5.   The individual’s right to prompt and equitable resolution of the complaint
shall not be impaired by his or her pursuit of other remedies, such as the
filing of a complaint with the United States Department of Justice or any other
appropriate federal agency. Furthermore, the filing of a lawsuit in state or
federal district court can occur at any time. The use of this grievance
procedure is not a prerequisite to the pursuit of other remedies.
(Prior Code, Ch. 11, Appendix C)
APPENDIX D: REQUEST FOR FAMILY OR MEDICAL LEAVE
Request for Family or Medical Leave must be made, if practical, at least 30
days prior to the date the requested leave is to begin.
Name __________________________________      Date
_______________________________
Department ____________________________         Title
_______________________________
Status      [ ]       Full-Time       [ ]      Part-Time       [ ]    Temporary
Hire Date: _____________________________         Length of Service
____________________
__________________________________________________________________________________
I request Family or Medical Leave for one or more of the following reasons:
[ ]      Because of the birth of my child and in order to care for him or her*
      Expected date of birth ____________         Actual date of birth
___________________
      Leave start _____________________         Expected return date
__________________
[ ]      Because of the placement of a child with me for adoption or foster
care**
      Leave start _____________________         Expected return date
__________________
[ ]      In order to care for my spouse, child, or parent who has a serious
health condition*
      Leave start _____________________         Expected return date
__________________
[ ]      For a serious health condition that makes me unable to perform by job*
      Describe:
___________________________________________________________________
      ___________________________________________________________________________
      ___________________________________________________________________________
      Leave start _____________________         Expected return date
__________________
*      A physician’s certification will be required for leave due to a serious
health condition.
**      Certification will be required for leave due to adoption or foster
care.
[ ]      For other reasons. Describe:
____________________________________________________
      ___________________________________________________________________________
      ___________________________________________________________________________
      Leave start _____________________         Expected return date
__________________
[ ]      Requested intermittent leave schedule (if applicable; subject to
employer’s approval).
      ___________________________________________________________________________
      ___________________________________________________________________________
Have you taken a Family or Medical Leave in the past 12 months?
[ ] Yes      [ ] No         If yes, how many workdays? ___________
I understand and agree to the following provisions:
I have worked for the Village of ___________ at least one year and at least
1,250 hours in the previous 12 months.
If I fail to return to work after the leave for reasons other than the
continuation, recurrence, or onset of a serious health condition that would
entitle me to Medical Leave or other circumstances beyond my control, I may be
financially responsible for the medical insurance premiums the village paid
while I was on leave.
This leave will be unpaid, unless under the Village Policy, I would be eligible
for sick leave or have accrued vacation or comp time; or in the case of my own
disability, payment will occur under a disability program with IMRF, if I am so
covered.
I may be required to exhaust my vacation, comp time, or sick leave as part of
my 12 weeks of leave.
After 12 weeks of leave, if I do not return to work or contact my supervisor or
Mayor on the date intended, it will be considered that I abandoned my job.
Employee Signature ________________________      Date
_______________________________
Address __________________________________      Phone
______________________________
LEAVE APPROVAL
For full day leave:
Superintendent/
Mayor___________________________________________   _________________
                     Signature                           Date
For intermittent or reduced day leave:
Superintendent/
Mayor___________________________________________   _________________
                     Signature                           Date
Notes:
____________________________________________________________________________
__________________________________________________________________________________
__________________________________________________________________________________
PAYROLL INSTRUCTIONS
[ ]      With pay from __________ to _________         Employee #
_____________________
[ ]      Without pay from __________ to _________
Comments: _____________________________________________
PLEASE FORWARD COMPLETED REQUEST TO THE VILLAGE CLERK FOR FURTHER PROCESSING.
(Prior Code, Ch. 11, Appendix D)
APPENDIX E: REQUEST FOR SPECIAL LEAVE
Request for Special Leave must be made at least 30 days prior to the date the
requested leave is to begin.
Name __________________________________      Date
_______________________________
Department ____________________________         Title
_______________________________
Hire Date: _____________________________         Length of Service
____________________
All full-time and salary exempt employees who have completed one full year of
continuous service may request a special leave. Special leave will only be
granted for personal reasons, and shall be recommended by employee’s
Superintendent and approved by the corporate authorities. Special leave shall
be granted without pay. The period for special leave shall not exceed six
months. An extension may be granted up to a maximum of six months for a total
of one year. In order to continue to receive medical and insurance benefits
during a special leave, the employee shall contribute both the employee and the
employer’s share of IMRF and insurance costs.
I wish to request a Special Leave for the following reasons:
__________________________________________________________________________________
__________________________________________________________________________________
__________________________________________________________________________________
__________________________________________________________________________________
__________________________________________________________________________________
Employee Signature ________________________      Date
_______________________________
Address __________________________________      Phone
______________________________
LEAVE APPROVAL
Superintendent/
Mayor___________________________________________   _________________
                     Signature                           Date
PLEASE FORWARD COMPLETED REQUEST TO THE MUNICIPAL CLERK FOR FURTHER PROCESSING.
(Prior Code, Ch. 11, Appendix E)
CHAPTER 33: GENERAL POLICIES AND PROCEDURES
Section
Identity Theft Programs
   
33.001   Objective; scope
   
33.002   Definitions
   
33.003   Policy and regulations
   
33.004   Program management and accountability
   
33.005   Responsibility
   
33.006   Fraud classifications
Use of Social Security Numbers
   
33.020   Definitions
   
33.021   Prohibited activities
   
33.022   Public inspection and copying documents
   
33.023   Applicability
   
33.024   Compliance and conflict with other laws
   
33.025   Embedded social security numbers
   
33.026   Identity protection requirements
   
33.027   Amendment of private policy
Drug and Alcohol Testing Policy and Procedure
   
33.040   Drug- and alcohol-free workplace policy
   
33.041   Definitions
   
33.042   Prohibited actions
   
33.043   Applicability
   
33.044   Testing procedure
   
33.045   Screening and testing
   
33.046   Confidentiality of test results
   
33.047   Consequences of positive test results or refusal to cooperate
Ethics Code
   
33.060   State Officials and Employees Ethics Act
Policy Prohibiting Sexual Harassment
   
33.075   Prohibition on sexual harassment generally
   
33.076   Definition
   
33.077   Procedure for reporting an allegation of sexual harassment
   
33.078   Retaliation for reporting allegation prohibited
   
33.079   Consequences of violation
   
33.080   Consequences for knowingly making a false report
   
33.081   Employee receipt and acceptance
Freedom of Information Procedures
   
33.095   General policy; privacy protected
   
33.096   Definitions
   
33.097   Public record requests; fees
   
33.098   Time limit for compliance with request; extension
   
33.099   Unduly burdensome request
   
33.100   Certain information exempt from inspection and copying
   
33.101   Notice of denial of request; appeals
   
33.102   Granting of request; procedure for inspection
   
33.103   Dissemination of information about public bodies
   
33.104   List of categories of records
 
   
33.999   Penalty
Cross-reference:
   Drug-free workplace policy, see §§
32.115 through
32.121
IDENTITY THEFT PROGRAMS
§ 33.001 OBJECTIVE; SCOPE.
   (A)   The purpose of this Identity Theft Prevention Program (hereinafter
“the Program”) is to protect customers of the village’s utility services from
identity theft. The Program is intended to establish reasonable policies and
procedures to facilitate the detection, prevention, and mitigation of identity
theft in connection with the opening of new covered accounts and activity on
existing covered accounts.
(Prior Code, § 22-1-1)
   (B)   (1)   The Program applies to the creation, modification, and access to
identifying information of a customer of one or more of the utilities operated
by the village (water, sewer, and refuse) by any and all personnel of the
village, including management personnel.
      (2)   The Program does not replace or repeal any previously existing
policies or programs addressing some or all of the activities that are the
subject of the Program, but rather it is intended to supplement any such
existing policies and programs.
(Prior Code, § 22-1-2)
Cross-reference:
   Utilities generally, see
Chapter 50
§ 33.002 DEFINITIONS.
   (A)   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
      COVERED ACCOUNT.
         (a)   An account that the village offers or maintains, primarily for
personal, family, or household purposes, that involves or is designed to permit
multiple payments of transactions (16 C.F.R. § 681.1(b)(3)(I)).
         (b)   A utility account is a COVERED ACCOUNT. The term COVERED ACCOUNT
also includes other accounts offered or maintained by the village for which
there is a reasonably foreseeable risk to the village or its customers from
identity theft (16 C.F.R. § 681.1(b)(3)(ii)).
      IDENTITY THEFT. A fraud committed or attempted using the identifying
information of another person without authority (12 C.F.R. § 1022.3 and 16
C.F.R. §§ 681.1(b)(8).
      IDENTIFYING INFORMATION. Any name or number that may be used, alone or in
conjunction with any other information, to identify a specific person,
including any name, Social Security number, date of birth, official state or
government issued driver’s license or identification number, alien registration
number, government passport number, employer, or taxpayer identification
number. Additional examples of IDENTIFYING INFORMATION are set forth in 12
C.F.R. § 1022.3(g).
      RED FLAG. A pattern, practice, or specific activity that indicates the
possible existence of identity theft.
   (B)   Certain terms used but not otherwise defined, herein shall have the
meanings given to them in the Federal Trade Commission’s (FTC) Identity Theft
Rules (16 C.F.R. pt. 681) or the Fair Credit Reporting Act of 1970 (15 U.S.C.
§§ 1681 et seq.), as amended by the Fair and Accurate Credit Transactions Act
of 2003 into law on December 4, 2003 (Pub. L. No. 108-159).
(Prior Code, § 22-1-3)
§ 33.003 POLICY AND REGULATIONS.
   (A)   Administration of the program. Issues to be addressed in the annual
identity theft prevention report include:
      (1)   The effectiveness of the policies and procedures in addressing the
risk of identity theft in connection with the opening of new covered accounts
and activity with respect to existing covered accounts;
      (2)   Service provider arrangements;
      (3)   Significant incidents involving identity theft and management’s
response; and
      (4)   Recommendations for material changes to the Program, if needed for
improvement.
   (B)   Identity theft prevention elements; identification of relevant red
flags. The village has considered the guidelines and the illustrative examples
of possible red flags from the FTC’s identity theft rules and has reviewed the
village’s past history with instances of identity theft, if any. The village
hereby determines that the following are the relevant red flags for purposes of
thie Program given the relative size of the village and the limited nature and
scope of the services that the village provides to its citizens:
      (1)   Alerts, notifications, or other warnings received from consumer
reporting agencies or service providers, including:
         (a)   A fraud or active duty alert is included with a consumer report
or an identity verification response from a credit reporting agency;
         (b)   A consumer reporting agency provides a notice of credit freeze
in response to a request for a consumer report;
         (c)   A consumer reporting agency provides a notice of address
discrepancy, as defined in § 681.1(b) of the FTC’s identity theft rules; and
         (d)   A consumer report indicates a pattern of activity that is
inconsistent with the history and usual pattern of activity of an applicant or
customer, such as:
            1.   A recent and significant increase in the volume of inquiries;
            2.   An unusual number of recently established credit
relationships;
            3.   A material change in the use of credit, especially with
respect to recently established credit relationships; or
            4.   An account that was closed for cause or identified for abuse
of account privileges by a financial institution or creditor.
      (2)   The presentation of suspicious documents, including:
         (a)   Documents provided for identification appear to have been
altered or forged;
         (b)   The photograph or physical description on the identification is
not consistent with the appearance of the applicant or customer presenting the
identification;
         (c)   Other information on the identification is not consistent with
information provided by the person opening a new covered account or customer
presenting the identification;
         (d)   Other information on the identification is not consistent with
readily accessible information that is on file with the village, such as a
signature card or a recent check; and
         (e)   An applicant appears to have been altered or forged, or gives
the appearance of having been destroyed or reassembled.
      (3)   The presentation of suspicious personal identifying information,
such as a suspicious address change, including:
         (a)   Personal identifying information provided is inconsistent when
compared against external information sources used by the village. For example:
            1.   The address does not match any address in the consumer report
or Consumer Reporting Agencies Identity (“CRA ID”) check response; or
            2.   The Social Security number (SSN) has not been issued, or is
listed on the Social Security Administration’s death master file.
         (b)   Personal identifying information provided by the customer is not
consistent with other personal identifying information provided by the
customer. For example, there is a lack of correlation between the SSN range and
date of birth;
         (c)   Personal identifying information provided is associated with
known fraudulent activity as indicated by internal or third-party sources used
by the village. For example:
            1.   The address on an application is the same as the address
provided on a fraudulent application; or
            2.   The phone number on an application is the same as the number
provided on a fraudulent application.
         (d)   Personal identifying information provided is of a type commonly
associated with fraudulent activity as indicated by internal or third-party
sources used by the village. For example:
            1.   The billing address on an application is fictitious, a mail
drop, or a prison; or
            2.   The phone number is invalid, or is associated with a pager or
answering service.
         (e)   The SSN provided is the same as that submitted by other persons
opening an account or other customers;
         (f)   The address or telephone number provided is the same as or
similar to the account number or telephone number submitted by an unusually
large number of other persons opening accounts or other customers;
         (g)   The person opening the covered account or the customer fails to
provide all required personal identifying information on an application or in
response to notification that the application is incomplete;
         (h)   Personal identifying information provided is not consistent with
personal identifying information that is on file with the village; and
         (i)   If the village uses challenge questions, the person opening the
covered account or the customer cannot provide authenticating information
beyond that which generally would be available from a wallet or consumer
report.
      (4)   The unusual use of, or other suspicious activity related to, a
covered account, including:
         (a)   Shortly following the notice of a change of address for a
covered account, the village receives a request for the addition of authorized
users on the account;
         (b)   A new utility account is used in a manner commonly associated
with known patterns of fraud patterns. For example: the customer fails to make
the first payment or makes an initial payment but no subsequent payments;
         (c)   A covered account with a stable history shows irregularities;
         (d)   A covered account that has been inactive for a reasonably
lengthy period of time is used (taking into consideration the type of account,
the expected pattern of usage, and other relevant factors);
         (e)   Mail sent to the customer is returned repeatedly as
undeliverable although usage of utility products or services continues in
connection with the customer’s covered account;
         (f)   The village is notified that the customer is not receiving paper
account statements; and
         (g)   The village is notified of unauthorized usage of utility
products or services in connection with a customer’s covered account.
      (5)   The village is notified by a customer, a victim of identity theft,
a law enforcement authority, or any other person that it has opened a
fraudulent account for a person engaged in identity theft.
   (C)   Detection of red flags.
      (1)   (a)   The employees of the village who interact directly with
customers on a day-to-day basis shall have the initial responsibility for
monitoring the information and documentation provided by the customer and any
third-party service provider in connection with the opening of new accounts and
the modification of or access to existing accounts and the detection of any red
flags that might arise.
         (b)   Management shall see to it that all employees who might be
called upon to assist a customer with the opening of a new account or with
modifying or otherwise accessing an existing account are properly trained such
that they have a working familiarity with the relevant red flags identified in
the Program so as to be able to recognize any red flags that might surface in
connection with the transaction. An employee who is not sufficiently trained to
recognize the red flags identified in this subchapter shall not open a new
account for any customer, modify any existing account or otherwise provide any
customer with access to information in an existing account without the direct
supervision and specific approval of a management employee.
         (c)   Management employees shall be properly trained such that they
can recognize the relevant red flags identified in this subchapter and exercise
sound judgment in connection with the response to any unresolved red flags that
may present themselves in connection with the opening of a new account or with
modifying or accessing of an existing account. Management employees shall be
responsible for making the final decision on any such unresolved red flags.
      (2)   (a)   The Program Administrator shall establish from time to time a
written policy setting forth the manner in which a prospective new customer may
apply for service, the information and documentation to be provided by the
prospective customer in connection with an application for a new utility
service account, the steps to be taken by the employee assisting the customer
with the application in verifying the customer’s identity, and the manner in
which the information and documentation provided by the customer and any third-
party service provider shall be maintained.
         (b)   Such policy shall be generally consistent with the spirit of the
Customer Identification Program rules (31 C.F.R. § 1020.220) implementing § 326
(a) of the United States Patriot Act, being 31 U.S.C. § 5318(I), but need not
be as detailed. The Program Administrator shall establish from time to time a
written policy setting forth the manner in which customers with existing
accounts shall establish their identity before being allowed to make
modifications to or otherwise gain access to existing accounts.
   (D)   Response to detected red flags.
      (1)   If the responsible employees of the village as set forth in the
previous section are unable, after making a good faith effort, to form a
reasonable belief that they know the true identity of a customer attempting to
open a new account or modify or otherwise access an existing account based on
the information and documentation provided by the customer and any third-party
service provider, the village shall not open the new account or modify or
otherwise provide access to the existing account as the case may be.
Discrimination in respect to the opening of new accounts or the modification or
access to existing accounts will not be tolerated by employees of the village
and shall be grounds for immediate dismissal.
      (2)   The Program Administrator shall establish from time to time a
written policy setting forth the steps to be taken in the event of an
unresolved red flag situation. Consideration should be given to aggravating
factors that may heighten the risk of identity theft, such as a data security
incident that results in unauthorized access to a customer’s account, or a
notice that a customer has provided account information to a fraudulent
individual or website. Appropriate responses to prevent or mitigate identity
theft when a red flag is detected include:
         (a)   Monitoring a covered account for evidence of identity theft;
         (b)   Contacting the customer;
         (c)   Changing any passwords, security codes, or other security
devices that permit access to a covered account;
         (d)   Reopening a covered account with a new account number;
         (e)   Not opening a new covered account;
         (f)   Closing an existing covered account;
         (g)   Not attempting to collect on a covered account or not selling a
covered account to a debt collector;
         (h)   Notifying law enforcement; and/or
         (i)   Determining that no response is warranted under the particular
circumstances.
(Prior Code, § 22-1-4)
§ 33.004 PROGRAM MANAGEMENT AND ACCOUNTABILITY.
   (A)   Initial risk assessment; covered account. Utility accounts for
personal, family and household purposes are specifically included within the
definition of “covered account” in the FTC’s identity theft rules. Therefore,
the village determines that with respect to its residential utility accounts it
offers and/or maintains covered accounts. The village also performed an initial
risk assessment to determine whether the utility offers or maintains any other
accounts for which there are reasonably foreseeable risks to customers or the
utility from identity theft. In making this determination, the village
considered:
      (1)   The methods it uses to open its accounts;
      (2)   The methods it uses to access its accounts; and
      (3)   Its previous experience with identity theft, and it concluded that
it does not offer or maintain any such other covered accounts.
   (B)   Program updates; risk assessment. The Program, including relevant red
flags, is to be updated as often as necessary, but at least annually, to
reflect changes in risks to customers from identity theft. Factors to consider
in the Program update include:
         (1)   An assessment of the risk factors identified above;
         (2)   Any identified red flag weaknesses in associated account systems
or procedures;
         (3)   Changes in methods of identity theft;
         (4)   Changes in methods to detect, prevent, and mitigate identity
theft; and
         (5)   Changes in business arrangements, including mergers,
acquisitions, alliances, joint ventures, and service provider arrangements.
   (C)   Training and oversight. All staff and third-party service providers
performing any activity in connection with one or more covered accounts are to
be provided appropriate training and receive effective oversight to ensure that
the activity is conducted in accordance with policies and procedures designed
to detect, prevent, and mitigate the risk of identity theft.
   (D)   Other legal requirements. Awareness of the following related legal
requirements should be maintained:
      (1)   “Reporting of Suspicious Activities,” 31 U.S.C. § 5318(g);
      (2)   “Identity Theft Prevention; Fraud Alerts and Active Duty Alerts -
Limitations on Use of Information for Credit Extensions,” 15 U.S.C. § 1681c-l
(h);
      (3)   “Responsibilities of Furnishers of Information to Consumer
Reporting Agencies,” 15 U.S.C. § 1681s-2; and
      (4)   “Requirements on Use of Consumer Reports,” 15 U.S.C. § 1681m.
(Prior Code, § 22-1-5)
§ 33.005 RESPONSIBILITY.
   The initial adoption and approval of the Identity Theft Prevention Program
shall be by ordinance of the Board of Trustees. Thereafter, changes to the
Program of a day-to-day operational character and decisions relating to the
interpretation and implementation of the Program may be made by the Director of
Finance (Program Administrator). Major changes or shifts of policy positions
under the Program shall only be made by the Board of Trustees. Development,
implementation, administration, and oversight of the Program will be the
responsibility of the Program Administrator. The Program Administrator may, but
shall not be required to, appoint a committee to administer the Program. The
Program Administrator shall be the head of any such committee. The Program
Administrator will report at least annually to the Board of Trustees regarding
compliance with the Program.
(Prior Code, § 22-1-6)
§ 33.006 FRAUD CLASSIFICATIONS.
   (A)   Identity theft (fraud) Type 1: new accounts. A person may establish a
utility service using another person’s identity because:
      (1)   The perpetrator defaulted on a past utility account or other
account and so would not be eligible for service under his or her own name; or
      (2)   The perpetrator intends to establish fraudulent proof of residency
in order to commit fraud elsewhere.
Red Flag Detect whether Fraud is Being Prevent or Mitigate Detected Fraud
         Attempted or Committed
             Detect whether Fraud is Being Attempted or          Prevent or
Red Flag     Committed                                           Mitigate
                                                                 Detected Fraud
Applicant
requests
that bill be
sent to      Verify that customer is connected to billing
address      address (but be aware of the state’s Safe At Home Do not open
different    Program)                                            account
from where
service is
received
account
Account for
a
residential
address
established                                                      Do not open
under        Obtain credit report on the individual              account
business
name (to
avoid using
own bad
name)
Bill payment
made under
name other   Request proof of residence (other bills and the     Close account
than that on like)
utility
account
Credit
report
contains                                                         Notify Program
fraud                                                            Administrator;
warning,     This may be an automatic fraud detection red flag   if warranted,
credit                                                           notify law
freeze                                                           enforcement
notice or
active duty
alert
ID does not                                                      Do not open
look         Request additional ID                               account
authentic
ID
information  Request additional ID                               Do not open
does not                                                         account
match person
ID looks     Request additional ID                               Do not open
doctored                                                         account
ID picture                                                       Do not open
does not     Request additional ID                               account
match person
Other?                                                           
Other?                                                           
Other?                                                           
Using a                                                          Do not open
suspicious   Request additional ID                               account
name
 
   (B)   Identity theft (fraud) Type 2: existing accounts. A person may
continue utility service under another customer’s name after he or she moves
out because:
      (1)   The perpetrator wants to avoid paying for service; or
      (2)   The perpetrator defaulted on a past utility account or other
account and so would not be eligible for service under his or her own name.
 
Red Flag                  Detect whether Fraud is    Mitigate Detected Fraud
                          Being Committed
Bill payment made under a Call customer phone number Discontinue service; close
name other than name on   on file                    account
utility account
Non-payment of previously Call customer phone number Discontinue service; close
current account           on file                    account
Other?                                               
Other?                                               
Other?                                               
Utility service utilized
after known move-out with Call customer phone number Discontinue service; close
no change of customer     on file                    account
notice received by
utility
 
   (C)   Notification.
Alerts;                                   Unusual Use or
Notification or    Suspicious Suspicious  Suspicious Activity
Warnings from      Documents  Personal ID Related to the      Notice of Theft
Consumer Reporting            Information Covered Account
Agency
Alerts;
Notification or                Suspicious     Unusual Use or
Warnings from   Suspicious     Personal ID    Suspicious Activity  Notice of
Consumer        Documents      Information    Related to the       Theft
Reporting                                     Covered Account
Agency
                               (10) Personal
                               ID is
                               inconsistent   (19) Change of
                               with external  billing address is   (26) Utility
                               information    followed by request  is notified
                               sources:       for adding           by law
                               addresses do   additional           officials or
(1) A fraud or  (5) Documents  not match      properties to the    others that
active duty     provided for   consumer       account (or shortly  it has
alert is        ID appeared    report of      following the        opened a
included with a altered or     Social         notification of a    fraudulent
consumer report forged         Security (SS)  change of address,   account for
                               number has not the utility receives a person
                               been issued or a request for the    engaged in
                               is listed on   addition of          identity
                               the SS         authorizes users on  theft
                               Administration the account)
                               death master
                               file
                               (11) Personal
                               ID given by
                               customer is    (20) Payments are
(2) Consumer    (6) The photo  not consistent made in a manner
reporting       or physical    with other     associated with
agency provides description is personal ID    fraud (Example:
a credit freeze not consistent information    deposit or initial    
on the customer with the       (Example:      payment is made and
report          appearance of  there is lack  no payments are made
                the applicant  of correlation thereafter)
                               between the
                               SS# range and
                               DOB)
                               (12) Personal
                (7) Other      ID provided is
(3) Consumer    information    associated
reporting       given to open  with known     (21) Existing
agency provides the new        fraudulent     account with a        
a notice of     account is not activity.      stable history show
address         consistent     Using same     irregularities
discrepancy     with the ID of addresses and/
                the applicant  or phone
                               numbers
(4) A consumer  (8) Other
report          information on
indicated a     the
pattern of      identification (13) Personal  (22) An account with
actively that   is not         ID is of the   low activity
is inconsistent consistent     same type      unexpectedly jumps
with the        with readily   associated     to high consumption   
history and     accessible     with           (Example: 1,000 KWH
usual pattern   info on file   fraudulent     to 2,801 KWH)
of activity of  such as        activity
an applicant of signature or
customer such   recent check
as:
                (9) An
                application
                appears to
  (a) Recent or have been      (14) The SS#
  significant   altered or     is the same as (23) Mail sent to
 increase in   forged, or     customers      customer is           
  the number of gives the      opening other  repeatedly returned
  inquiries     appearance of  accounts
                having been
                destroyed and
                reassembled
  (b) An                       (15) The
  unusual                      address or     (24) Customer
  number of                    phone number   notifies utility
 recently                    is the same as that they are not     
  established                  a large number receiving his, her,
  credit                       of other       or their bill
  relationships                applicants
  (c) A
  material
  change in the                (16) The       (25) The utility is
  use of credit                customer fails notified of
 especially                  to provide all unauthorized charges  
  with respect                 needed         or transactions in
  to new                       personal ID    connection with a
  established                  upon request   customer’s account
  credit
  relationships
  (d) An
  account that                 (17) Personal
  was closed                   ID is
 for cause of                inconsistent                        
  identified                   with utility
  for abuse of                 records
  privileges
                               (18) For
                               institutions
                               using
                               challenge
                               questions, the
                               person
                               attempting to
                               access or open
                               the account
                              cannot provide                      
                               any
                               information
                               beyond what
                               would
                               typically be
                               found in a
                               wallet or
                               consumer
                               report
 
(Prior Code, Ch. 22) (Ord. 08-09, passed 10-20-2008)
USE OF SOCIAL SECURITY NUMBERS
§ 33.020 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   PERSON. Any individual in the employ of the village.
   POLICY or PRIVACY POLICY. This subchapter, as now or hereafter amended.
   PUBLICLY POST or PUBLICLY DISPLAY. To intentionally communicate or otherwise
intentionally make available to the general public.
   SOCIAL SECURITY NUMBER. The nine-digit number assigned to an individual by
the United States Social Security Administration for the purposes authorized or
required under the United States Social Security Act of August 14, 1935, as
amended, being 42 U.S.C. §§ 401 et seq.
(Prior Code, § 22-1-8)
§ 33.021 PROHIBITED ACTIVITIES.
   (A)   No officer or employee of the village shall do any of the following:
      (1)   Publicly post or publicly display in any manner an individual’s
Social Security number;
      (2)   Print an individual’s Social Security number on any card required
for the individual to access products or services provided by the person or
entity;
      (3)   Require an individual to transmit his or her Social Security number
over the internet, unless the connection is secure or the Social Security
number is encrypted; or
      (4)   Print an individual’s Social Security number on any materials that
are mailed to the individual, through the United States Postal Service, any
private mail service, electronic mail, or a similar method of delivery, unless
state or federal law requires the Social Security number to be on the document
to be mailed. Notwithstanding any provision in this section to the contrary,
Social Security numbers may be included in applications and forms sent by mail,
including, but not limited to, any material mailed in connection with the
administration of the State Unemployment Insurance Act, being 820 ILCS 405/100
et seq., any material mailed in connection with any tax administered by the
State Department of Revenue, and documents sent as part of an application or
enrollment process or to establish, amend, or terminate an account, contract,
or policy or to confirm the accuracy of the Social Security number. A Social
Security number that may permissibly be mailed under this section may not be
printed, in whole or in part, on a postcard or other mailer that does not
require an envelope or be visible on an envelope without the envelope having
been opened.
   (B)   Except as otherwise provided in this policy, beginning immediately on
the effective date of the village’s authorizing ordinance, no officer or
employee of the village shall do any of the following:
      (1)   Collect, use, or disclose a Social Security number from an
individual, unless:
         (a)   Required to do so under state or federal law, rules, or
regulations, or the collection, use, or disclosure of the Social Security
number is otherwise necessary for the performance of that agency’s duties and
responsibilities;
         (b)   The need and purpose for the Social Security number is
documented before collection of the Social Security number; and
         (c)   The Social Security number collected is relevant to the
documented need and purpose.
      (2)   Require an individual to use his or her Social Security number to
access an Internet website; or
      (3)   Use the Social Security number for any purpose other than the
purpose for which it was collected.
   (C)   The prohibitions in division (B) above do not apply in the following
circumstances:
      (1)   The disclosure of Social Security numbers to agents, employees,
contractors, or subcontractors of the village or disclosure to another
governmental entity or its agents, employees, contractors, or subcontractors if
disclosure is necessary in order for the entity to perform its duties and
responsibilities; and, if disclosing to a contractor or subcontractor, prior to
such disclosure, the officer or employee of the village must first receive from
the contractor or subcontractor a copy of the contractor’s or subcontractor’s
policy that sets forth how the requirements imposed under this subchapter on
the village to protect an individual’s Social Security number will be achieved;
      (2)   The disclosure of Social Security numbers pursuant to a court
order, warrant, or subpoena;
      (3)   The collection, use, or disclosure of Social Security numbers in
order to ensure the safety of village employees, persons committed to
correctional facilities, local jails, and other law enforcement facilities or
retention centers, wards of the state, and all persons working in or visiting a
village facility;
      (4)   The collection, use, or disclosure of Social Security numbers for
internal verification or administrative purposes; or
      (5)   The collection or use of Social Security numbers to investigate or
prevent fraud, to conduct background checks, to collect a debt, to obtain a
credit report from a consumer reporting agency under the federal Fair Credit
Reporting Act, being 15 U.S.C. §§ 1681 et seq., to undertake any permissible
purpose that is enumerated under the federal Gramm Leach Bliley Act, being Pub.
L. 106-102, 113 Stat. 1338, or to locate a missing person, a lost relative, or
a person who is due a benefit such as a pension benefit or an unclaimed
property benefit.
   (D)   Any standards of the village for the collection, use, or disclosure of
Social Security numbers that are stricter than the standards under this
subchapter with respect to the protection of those Social Security numbers,
then, in the event of any conflict with the provisions of this subchapter, the
stricter standards adopted by the village shall control.
(Prior Code, § 22-1-9)
§ 33.022 PUBLIC INSPECTION AND COPYING DOCUMENTS.
   (A)   Notwithstanding any other provision of this policy to the contrary,
all officers and employees of the village must comply with the provisions of
any other state law with respect to allowing the public inspection and copying
of information or documents containing all or any portion of an individual’s
Social Security number.
   (B)   All officers and employees of the village must redact Social Security
numbers from the information or documents before allowing the public inspection
or copying of the information or documents.
(Prior Code, § 22-1-10)
§ 33.023 APPLICABILITY.
   This policy does not apply to the collection, use, or disclosure of a Social
Security number as required by state or federal law, rule, or regulation. This
policy does not apply to documents that are required to be open to the public
under any state or federal law, rule, or regulation, applicable case law,
supreme court rule, or the State Constitution.
(Prior Code, § 22-1-11)
§ 33.024 COMPLIANCE AND CONFLICT WITH OTHER LAWS.
   (A)   If a federal law takes effect requiring any federal agency to
establish a national unique patient health identifier program, the village
shall follow that law.
(Prior Code, § 22-1-12)
   (B)   This subchapter does not supersede any more restrictive law, rule, or
regulation regarding the collection, use, or disclosure of Social Security
numbers.
(Prior Code, § 22-1-17)
§ 33.025 EMBEDDED SOCIAL SECURITY NUMBERS.
   Beginning immediately on the effective date of the village’s authorizing
ordinance, no officer or employee of the village may encode or embed a Social
Security number in or on a card or document, including, but not limited to,
using a bar code, chip, magnetic strip, RFID technology, or other technology,
in place of removing the Social Security number as required by this subchapter.
(Prior Code, § 22-1-13)
§ 33.026 IDENTITY PROTECTION REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   All officers, employees, and agents of the village identified as
having access to Social Security numbers in the course of performing their
duties to be trained to protect the confidentiality of all Social Security
numbers. Training shall include instructions on the proper handling of
information that contains Social Security numbers from the time of collection
through the destruction of the information.
   (B)   Only employees who are required to use or handle information or
documents that contain Social Security numbers have access to such information
or documents.
   (C)   Social Security numbers requested from an individual shall be provided
in a manner that makes the Social Security number easily redacted if required
to be released as part of a public records’ request.
   (D)   When collecting a Social Security number, or upon request by the
individual, a statement of the purpose or purposes for which the village is
collecting and using the Social Security number be provided.
   (E)   A written copy of this privacy policy, and any amendment thereto,
shall be filed with the Board of Trustees within 30 days after approval of this
subchapter or any amendment thereto.
   (F)   The village shall advise its employees of the existence of the
subchapter and make a copy of this policy available to each employee, and shall
also make the privacy policy codified within this subchapter available to any
member of the public upon request and at no charge for a single copy of this
privacy policy. If the village amends this privacy policy, then the village
shall also advise its employees of the existence of the amended private policy
and make a copy of the amended private policy available to each employee.
(Prior Code, § 22-1-14)
§ 33.027 AMENDMENT OF PRIVATE POLICY.
   (A)   The privacy policy adopted in this subchapter shall be subject to
amendment from time to time by the Board of Trustees as it shall deem necessary
in its sole discretion in order to maintain the village’s compliance with the
State Identity Protection Act, being 5 ILCS 179/1 et seq., as now or hereafter
amended.
   (B)   The policy codified within this subchapter is to comply with Public
Act 096-9874 of the state, cited as the Identity Protection Act, and codified
as Title 30, Act 5, §§ 1 et seq., as now or hereafter amended.
(Prior Code, § 22-1-16)
DRUG AND ALCOHOL TESTING POLICY AND PROCEDURE
§ 33.040 DRUG- AND ALCOHOL-FREE WORKPLACE POLICY.
   The village is committed to maintaining a drug free workplace pursuant to
the federal and state Drug Free Workplace Acts, 41 U.S.C. §§ 8101 et seq., 30
ILCS 580/1 et seq. It is the policy of the village that the public has the
reasonable right to expect persons employed by the village to be free from the
effects of alcohol and drugs. The village, as the employer, has the right to
expect its employees to report for work fit and able for duty. This policy is
intended to ensure that village employees are not impaired in their ability to
perform assigned duties in a safe, healthy, and productive manner and to
protect any such employee and the public from the risks associated with the
adverse effects of drugs and alcohol. Accordingly, the unlawful manufacture,
distribution, possession, or use of a controlled substance, including cannabis
and alcohol, is prohibited in the workplace or while acting on behalf of the
village. Employees are required to sign a release and consent/authorization
form, a copy of which is included with this policy, at the time the policy is
distributed to the employee.
(Prior Code, § 22-3-1) (Ord. 10-09, passed 9-20-2010)
Cross-reference:
   Drug-free workplace policy, see §§
32.115 through
32.121
§ 33.041 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ABUSE OF ALCOHOL or BEING UNDER THE INFLUENCE OF ALCOHOL. The consumption of
any beverage, mixture or preparation, including any medication containing
alcohol, which results in an employee being intoxicated. “Intoxicated” or a
“positive test” for alcohol shall mean a test result which shows an alcohol
concentration of 0.02 or more for all persons covered by federal DOT
regulations, and 0.08 or more for all persons not covered by federal DOT
regulations.
   ABUSE OF ANY DRUG. The use of any illegal drug, the use of any prescription
drug which has not been legally prescribed and dispensed, or the misuse of any
legally prescribed drug.
   DRUG. Any controlled substances listed in the Federal Controlled Substances
Act, 21 U.S.C. §§ 801 et seq., or the State Controlled Substances Act, 720 ILCS
570/100 et seq., and cannabis as defined in the State Cannabis Controlled Act,
720 ILCS 550 et seq.
(Prior Code, § 22-3-2) (Ord. 10-09, passed 9-20-2010)
§ 33.042 PROHIBITED ACTIONS.
   Employees shall be prohibited from:
   (A)   Manufacture, distribution, dispensation, possession, use, sale,
purchase, abuse of alcohol, or being under the influence of alcohol at any time
during the course of the employee’s workday or anywhere on or in any village-
owned property, including village buildings and village-owned vehicles;
   (B)   Manufacture, distribution, dispensation, possession, use, sale,
purchase, being under the influence, or abuse of any drug at any time and at
any place;
   (C)   Failure to immediately disclose to his or her department head or
immediate supervisor any drug or other medication-related work restrictions, or
failure to disclose the taking of any drug or medication whose container has
warnings that such drug or medication may affect any such employee’s ability to
perform his or her job, or to drive or operate machinery;
   (D)   Testing positive for any drug or for the abuse of alcohol or being
under the influence of any drug and/or alcohol during working hours;
   (E)   Failure to comply with this policy; and
   (F)   Refusal to submit to any drug or alcohol test under the policy
codified within this subchapter, which shall also include, but not be limited
to, any attempt to tamper with or substitute any sample to be used in
connection with any such test.
(Prior Code, § 22-3-3) (Ord. 10-09, passed 9-20-2010) Penalty, see §
33.999
§ 33.043 APPLICABILITY.
   (A)   The drug/alcohol testing policy and procedure is not intended to
replace the drug free workplace programs, but to define and clarify who will be
tested, when the employees will be tested, and where employees will be tested.
   (B)   The following four employee categories define under which category
each full time, part time/temporary, and volunteer employee will be tested:
      (1)   Any employee who drives a village vehicle, tractor, tractor mower,
or similar motor powered equipment that moves under its own power will be
tested under the federal DOT testing standards;
      (2)   Testing for employees of the Police Department shall be controlled
by the provisions set forth in their union contract;
      (3)   All other village employees who are not included within the two
categories listed in divisions (B)(1) or (B)(2) above will be subject to
testing to comply with the requirements necessary to establish a drug free
workplace within the village;
      (4)   Part time/temporary employees and volunteer employees of the
village will remain exempt from pre-employment and random testing as defined in
this testing program, but they can be included for testing if reasonable
suspicion should arise, or an accident should occur during the tenure of their
part time/temporary or volunteer employment. After reasonable suspicion of
abuse of drugs or alcohol has been established or an accident should occur, the
decision to request a drug and alcohol test for the employee must be deemed
necessary and reasonable by the Mayor and/or the supervisor of the employee.
(Prior Code, § 22-3-4) (Ord. 10-09, passed 9-20-2010)
§ 33.044 TESTING PROCEDURE.
   (A)   In conducting any drug testing under this policy, the village shall:
      (1)   Use only a clinical laboratory or hospital facility that is
licensed pursuant to the State Clinical Laboratory and Blood Bank Act, 210 ILCS
25/101 et seq., that has been or is capable of being accredited by the National
Institute of Drug Abuse (NIDA);
      (2)   Ensure that the laboratory or facility selected conforms to all
NIDA standards;
      (3)   Follow all federal DOT guidelines for the collection, testing, and
reporting procedures;
      (4)   In conducting any alcohol testing under this policy, the village
shall use a facility that:
         (a)   Ensures that all technicians are trained and equipment is
calibrated; and
         (b)   Conducts breath test to detect the presence of alcohol or blood
tests if circumstances require.
   (B)   The fees for drug/alcohol testing shall be paid as follows:
      (1)   Pre-employment testing will be paid by the village;
      (2)   Post accident tests shall be paid by the village;
      (3)   Reasonable suspicion testing will be paid by the village;
      (4)   Random testing will be paid by the village;
      (5)   Retesting at the request of the employee after a positive drug or
alcohol test shall be at the employee’s sole expense; and
      (6)   Drug/alcohol test for renewal of CDL driver’s license shall be paid
by the village.
(Prior Code, § 22-3-5) (Ord. 10-09, passed 9-20-2010)
§ 33.045 SCREENING AND TESTING.
   (A)   Pre-employment testing.
      (1)   All employee applicants shall be advised of the village drug/
alcohol testing requirements at the time of interview. After having
successfully completed the interview process, the selected prospective full
time employee shall then be required to successfully complete the village’s
drug screening test, as part of his or her background investigation.
      (2)   All applicants for full time employment shall sign a release and
consent/authorization form for drug/alcohol testing.
      (3)   An applicant will not be employed or considered for employment if:
         (a)   The test results confirm “positive;”
         (b)   He or she refuses to complete the test;
         (c)   He or she tampers with, or adulterates the specimen; or
         (d)   He or she fails to cooperate in the testing process (including
executing all required documentation).
   (B)   Testing based on reasonable suspicion.
      (1)   If there is a reasonable suspicion that any village employee, paid
or volunteer, has violated any of the prohibited actions covered by this
policy, such employee may be required to undergo drug and/or alcohol testing.
Reasonable suspicion exists if the facts and circumstances warrant a rational
inference that an employee has violated any of the acts prohibited by this
policy. Reasonable suspicion shall be based upon the following:
         (a)   Observable phenomena, such as direct observation of use or the
verifiable physical symptoms resulting from the abuse of drugs or being under
the influence of alcohol, which may include by way of example, but is not
limited to, a pattern of abnormal conduct or erratic behavior, a dramatic
decline in work performance, excessive sick leave usage, difficulty in walking,
slurred speech, needle marks, glazed stare, and possession of alcohol, or
unauthorized banned substance or drug paraphernalia at work; and/or
         (b)   Information provided by an identifiable, reliable, and credible
third-party that an employee has committed any of the acts prohibited by this
policy.
      (2)   In the event reasonable suspicion exists, the village shall arrange
for a drug and/or alcohol test. When testing is ordered, the employee may be
temporarily reassigned or relieved from duty and placed on leave with pay
pending the receipt of the test results by the village. The village shall also
provide the employee with written notice setting forth the objective facts and
reasonable inferences to be drawn from those facts which form the basis of the
reasonable suspicion.
      (3)   The employee will then be escorted to the testing facility or
collection facility by a designated supervisor immediately.
      (4)   After completing the test, the employee will be escorted to his or
her residence or at the option of his or her supervisor to another location to
await the test results, and the employee shall be off work with pay pending the
results of the tests. Under no circumstances shall the employee be allowed to
leave the work site or the test site driving his or her own vehicle or a
village vehicle.
      (5)   Employees who test positive for either drugs or alcohol will be
subject to disciplinary action, up to and including termination.
   (C)   Random testing. Random drug testing shall be conducted during working
hours. Employees will be selected at random for a drug test by a random
drawing/lottery. The testing times and dates are unannounced and are with
unpredictable frequency throughout the year.
      (1)   When testing is ordered, the employee will be directed to the
testing facility or collection facility within a reasonable period of time.
      (2)   After completing the test, the employee will return to work pending
the results of the test.
      (3)   Employees who test positive for drugs will be subject to
disciplinary action, up to and including termination.
   (D)   Post accident testing. Post accident drug/alcohol testing is required
immediately following any accident involving a village employee, paid or
volunteer, who operates village equipment or operates a village vehicle where
an injury to a person has occurred or where damage to equipment, or property
has occurred and that damage exceeds $100, based on actual cost or reliable
estimates of damage.
      (1)   When testing is ordered, the employee will be escorted to the
testing facility or collection facility by a designated supervisor within a
reasonable period of time following the accident.
      (2)   Employees who test positive for either drugs or alcohol will be
subject to disciplinary action, up to and including termination.
   (E)   Testing required for position required to have a CDL. In addition to
the provisions of this policy, any employee who is appointed to a position
required to have a commercial driver’s license (CDL) shall be subject to drug
and/or alcohol screening following any work related accident. Mandatory drug
screening shall also be required of all applicants chosen to be hired for
positions requiring a CDL. Those who fail the pre-employment drug screening
shall not be hired for those positions.
(Prior Code, § 22-3-6) (Ord. 10-09, passed 9-20-2010) Penalty, see §
33.999
§ 33.046 CONFIDENTIALITY OF TEST RESULTS.
   Any employee subject to a drug and/or alcohol test under this policy will be
provided a copy of all information and reports received by the village in
connection with any drug and/or alcohol test and any results thereof under this
policy. Any results of drug and alcohol test will be disclosed to any employee
tested, the applicable supervisor, Village Attorney, and those permitted by
law.
(Prior Code, § 22-3-7) (Ord. 10-09, passed 9-20-2010)
§ 33.047 CONSEQUENCES OF POSITIVE TEST RESULTS OR REFUSAL TO COOPERATE.
    Any employee who refuses to cooperate in testing or who fails a test or
violates the drug and alcohol policy shall be subject to disciplinary action,
up to and including termination.
(Prior Code, § 22-3-8) (Ord. 10-09, passed 9-20-2010) Penalty, see §
33.999
ETHICS CODE
§ 33.060 STATE OFFICIALS AND EMPLOYEES ETHICS ACT.
   (A)   The regulations of § 5-15 (5 ILCS 430/5-15) and Article 10 (5 ILCS
430/10-10 through 10-40) of the State Officials and Employees Ethics Act, 5
ILCS 430/1-1 et seq., (hereinafter referred to as “the Act” in this section)
are hereby adopted by reference and made applicable to the officers and
employees of the village to the extent required by 5 ILCS 430/70-5.
   (B)   The solicitation or acceptance of gifts prohibited to be solicited or
accepted under the Act, by any officer or any employee of the village, is
hereby prohibited.
   (C)   The offering or making of gifts prohibited to be offered or made to an
officer or employee of the village, is hereby prohibited.
   (D)   The participation in political activities prohibited under the Act, by
any officer or employee of the village, is hereby prohibited.
   (E)   For the purposes of this section, the terms OFFICER and EMPLOYEE shall
be defined as set forth in 5 ILCS 430/70-5(c).
   (F)   The penalties for violations of this section shall be the same as
those penalties set forth in 5 ILCS 430/50-5 for similar violations of the Act.
   (G)   This section does not repeal or otherwise amend or modify any existing
ordinances or policies which regulate the conduct of village officers and
employees. To the extent that any such existing ordinances or policies are less
restrictive than this section, however, the provisions of this section shall
prevail in accordance with the provisions of 5 ILCS 430/70-5(a).
   (H)   Any amendment to the Act that becomes effective after the effective
date of this section shall be incorporated into this section by reference and
shall be applicable to the solicitation, acceptance, offering and making of
gifts and to prohibited political activities. However, any amendment that makes
its provisions optional for adoption by municipalities shall not be
incorporated into this section by reference without formal action by the
corporate authorities of the village.
   (I)   If the State Supreme Court declares the Act unconstitutional in its
entirety, then this section shall be repealed as of the date that the State
Supreme Court’s decision becomes final and not subject to any further appeals
or rehearings. This section shall be deemed repealed without further action by
the Corporate Authorities of the village if the Act is found unconstitutional
by the State Supreme Court.
   (J)   If the State Supreme Court declares part of the Act unconstitutional
but upholds the constitutionality of the remainder of the Act, or does not
address the remainder of the Act, then the remainder of the Act as adopted by
this section shall remain in full force and effect; however, that part of this
section relating to the part of the Act found unconstitutional shall be deemed
repealed without further action by the corporate authorities of the village.
(Prior Code, § 22-5-1)
POLICY PROHIBITING SEXUAL HARASSMENT
§ 33.075 PROHIBITION ON SEXUAL HARASSMENT GENERALLY.
   It is unlawful to harass a person because of that person’s sex. The courts
have determined that sexual harassment is a form of discrimination under Title
VII of the United States Civil Rights Act of 1964, as amended in 1991, being 42
U.S.C. §§ 2000d et seq. All persons have a right to work in an environment free
from sexual harassment. Sexual harassment is unacceptable misconduct which
affects individuals of all genders and sexual orientations. It is a policy of
this village to prohibit harassment of any person by any municipal official,
municipal agent, municipal employee, or municipal agency or office on the basis
of sex or gender. All municipal officials, municipal agents, municipal
employees, and municipal agencies or offices are prohibited from sexually
harassing any person, regardless of any employment relationship or lack
thereof.   
(Prior Code, § 22-7-1) (Ord. 2018-01, passed 1-2-2018) Penalty, see §
33.999
§ 33.076 DEFINITION.
   (A)   SEXUAL HARASSMENT Is the policy codified within this subchapter
(hereinafter, “the policy”) adopts the definition of SEXUAL HARASSMENT as
stated in the State Human Rights Act, being 775 ILCS 5/1-101 et seq., which
currently defines sexual harassment as:
      (1)   Any unwelcome sexual advances or requests for sexual favors or any
conduct of a sexual nature when:
         (a)   Submission to such conduct is made either explicitly or
implicitly a term or condition of an individual’s employment;
         (b)   Submission to or rejection of such conduct by an individual is
used as the basis for employment decisions affecting such individual; or
         (c)   Such conduct has the purpose or effect of substantially
interfering with an individual’s work performance or creating an intimidating,
hostile, or offensive working environment.
      (2)   Conduct which may constitute SEXUAL HARASSMENT includes:
         (a)   Verbal sexual innuendoes, suggestive comments, insults, humor,
and jokes about sex, anatomy, or gender-specific traits, sexual propositions,
threats, repeated requests for dates, or statements about other employees, even
outside their presence, of a sexual nature;
         (b)   Non-verbal, suggestive or insulting sounds (whistling), leering,
obscene gestures, sexually suggestive bodily gestures, “catcalls,” “smacking”,”
or “kissing” noises;
         (c)   Visual, posters, signs, pin-ups, or slogans of a sexual nature,
or viewing pornographic material or websites;
         (d)   Physical touching, unwelcome hugging or kissing, pinching,
brushing the body, or any coerced sexual act or actual assault; and
         (e)   Textual/electronic SEXTING (electronically sending messages with
sexual content, including pictures and video), the use of sexually explicit
language, harassment, cyber stalking or threats via all forms of electronic
communication (e.g., e-mail, text/picture/video messages, intranet/on-line
postings, blogs, instant messages, and social network websites like Facebook
and Twitter).
   (B)   The most severe and overt forms of sexual harassment are easier to
determine. On the other end of the spectrum, some sexual harassment is more
subtle and depends, to some extent, on individual perception and
interpretation. The courts will assess sexual harassment by a standard of what
would offend a reasonable person.
(Prior Code, § 22-7-2) (Ord. 2018-01, passed 1-2-2018)
§ 33.077 PROCEDURE FOR REPORTING AN ALLEGATION OF SEXUAL HARASSMENT.
   (A)   An employee who either observes sexual harassment or believes himself
or herself to be the object of sexual harassment should deal with the incident
(s) as directly and firmly as possible by clearly communicating his or her
position to the offending employee, and his or her immediate supervisor. It is
not necessary for sexual harassment to be directed at the person making the
report.
   (B)   Any employee may report conduct which is believed to be sexual
harassment, including the following.
      (1)   Electronic/direct communication. If there is sexual harassing
behavior in the workplace, the harassed employee should directly and clearly
express his or her objection that the conduct is unwelcome and request that the
offending behavior stop. The initial message may be verbal. If subsequent
messages are needed, they should be put in writing in a note or a memo.
      (2)   Contact with supervisory personnel.
         (a)   At the same time direct communication is undertaken, or in the
event the employee feels threatened or intimidated by the situation, the
problem must be promptly reported to the immediate supervisor of the person
making the report, a department head, a director of human resources, an ethics
officer, the village manager or administrator, or the chief executive officer
of the village.
         (b)   The employee experiencing what he or she believes to be sexual
harassment must not assume that the employer is aware of the conduct. If there
are no witnesses and the victim fails to notify a supervisor or other
responsible officer, the village will not be presumed to have knowledge of the
harassment.
      (3)   Resolution outside the village.
         (a)   The purpose of the policy is to establish prompt, thorough and
effective procedures for responding to every report and incident so that
problems can be identified and remedied by the village. However, all municipal
employees have the right to contact the State Department of Human Rights (IDHR)
or the Equal Employment Opportunity Commission (EEOC) for information regarding
filing a formal complaint with those entities.
         (b)   An IDHR complaint must be filed within 180 days of the alleged
incident(s) unless it is a continuing offense. A complaint with the EEOC must
be filed within 300 days.
   (C)   Documentation of any incident may be submitted with any report (what
was said or done, the date, the time, and the place), including, but not
limited to, written records such as letters, notes, memos, and telephone
messages.
   (D)   (1)   All allegations, including anonymous reports, will be accepted
and investigated regardless of how the matter comes to the attention of the
village.
      (2)   However, because of the serious implications of sexual harassment
charges and the difficulties associated with their investigation and the
questions of credibility involved, the claimant’s willing cooperation is a
vital component of an effective inquiry and an appropriate outcome.
(Prior Code, § 22-7-3) (Ord. 2018-01, passed 1-2-2018)
§ 33.078 RETALIATION FOR REPORTING ALLEGATION PROHIBITED.
   (A)   No municipal official, municipal agency, municipal employee, or
municipal agency or office shall take any retaliatory action against any
municipal employee due to a municipal employee’s:
      (1)   Disclosure or threatened disclosure of any violation of this
policy;
      (2)   The provision of information related to or testimony before any
public body conducting an investigation, hearing, or inquiry into any violation
of this policy; or
      (3)   Assistance or participation in a proceeding to enforce the
provisions of this policy.
   (B)   For the purposes of the policy codified herein, RETALIATORY ACTION
means the reprimand, discharge, suspension, demotion, denial of promotion or
transfer, or change in the terms or conditions of employment of any municipal
employee that is taken in retaliation for a municipal employee’s involvement in
protected activity pursuant to this policy.
   (C)   No individual making a report will be retaliated against even if a
report made in good faith is not substantiated. In addition, any witness will
be protected from retaliation.
   (D)   Similar to the prohibition against retaliation contained herein, the
State Officials and Employees Ethics Act (5 ILCS 430/15-10) provides
whistleblower protection from retaliatory action such as reprimand, discharge,
suspension, demotion, or denial of promotion or transfer that occurs in
retaliation for an employee who does any of the following:
      (1)   Discloses or threatens to disclose to a supervisor or to a public
body an activity, policy, or practice of any officer, member, state agency, or
other state employee that the state employee reasonably believes is in
violation of a law, rule, or regulation;
      (2)   Provides information to or testifies before any public body
conducting an investigation, hearing, or inquiry into any violation of a law,
rule, or regulation by any officer, member, state agency or other state
employee; or
      (3)   Assists or participates in a proceeding to enforce the provisions
of the State Officials and Employees Ethics Act.
   (E)   Pursuant to the Whistleblower Act (740 ILCS 174/15(a)), an employer
may not retaliate against an employee who discloses information in a court, an
administrative hearing, or before a legislative commission or committee, or in
any other proceeding, where the employee has reasonable cause to believe that
the information discloses a violation of a state or federal law, rule, or
regulation. In addition, an employer may not retaliate against an employee for
disclosing information to a government or law enforcement agency, where the
employee has reasonable cause to believe that the information discloses a
violation of a state or federal law, rule, or regulation.
   (F)   According to the State Human Rights Act (775 ILCS 5/6-101), it is a
civil rights violation for a person, or for two or more people to conspire, to
retaliate against a person because he or she has opposed that which he or she
reasonably and in good faith believes to be sexual harassment in employment,
because he or she has made a charge, filed a complaint, testified, assisted, or
participated in an investigation, proceeding, or hearing under the State Human
Rights Act.
   (G)   An employee who is suddenly transferred to a lower paying job or
passed over for a promotion after filing a complaint with IDHR or EEOC, may
file a retaliation charge due within 180 days (IDHR) or 300 days (EEOC) of the
alleged retaliation.
(Prior Code, § 22-7-4) (Ord. 2018-01, passed 1-2-2018) Penalty, see §
33.999
Statutory reference:
   Related provisions, see 740 ILCS 174/15(b)
§ 33.079 CONSEQUENCES OF VIOLATION.
   (A)   In addition to any and all other discipline that may be applicable
pursuant to village policies, employment agreements, procedures, employee
handbooks, and/or collective bargaining agreement, any person who violates this
policy or the “Prohibition on Sexual Harassment” contained in 5 ILCS 430/5-65,
may be subject to a fine.
   (B)   Any discipline imposed by the village shall be separate and distinct
from any penalty imposed by an ethics commission and any fines or penalties
imposed by a court of law or a state or federal agency.
(Prior Code, § 22-7-5) (Ord. 2018-01, passed 1-2-2018) Penalty, see §
33.999
§ 33.080 CONSEQUENCES FOR KNOWINGLY MAKING A FALSE REPORT.
   (A)   A FALSE REPORT is a report of sexual harassment made by an accuser
using the sexual harassment report to accomplish some end other than stopping
sexual harassment or retaliation for reporting sexual harassment. A false
report is not a report made in good faith which cannot be proven.
   (B)   Given the seriousness of the consequences for the accused, a false or
frivolous report is a severe offense that can itself result in disciplinary
action. Any person who intentionally makes a false report alleging a violation
of any provision of this policy shall be subject to discipline or discharge
pursuant to applicable municipal policies, employment agreements, procedures,
employee handbooks, and/or collective bargaining agreements.
(Prior Code, § 22-7-6) (Ord. 2018-01, passed 1-2-2018) Penalty, see §
33.999
§ 33.081 EMPLOYEE RECEIPT AND ACCEPTANCE.
   (A)   Each employee of the village shall sign an employee receipt and
acceptance acknowledging receipt of the policy prohibiting sexual harassment,
accepting responsibility to read and know the contents of said policy, agreeing
to follow the terms of said policy, and acknowledging that failure to follow
the terms of the policy may result in disciplinary action including
termination.
   (B)   A copy of said employee receipt and acceptance shall be maintained in
the employee’s personnel file.
(Prior Code, § 22-7-7) (Ord. 2018-01, passed 1-2-2018)
FREEDOM OF INFORMATION PROCEDURES
§ 33.095 GENERAL POLICY; PRIVACY PROTECTED.
   (A)   It is declared to be the public policy of the village that all persons
are entitled to full and complete information regarding the affairs of the
village. The official acts and policies of the public officials and public
employees of the village shall be consistent with the terms of this subchapter.
(Prior Code, § 15-1-2)
   (B)   This subchapter is not intended to be used to violate individual
policy, nor for the purpose of furthering a commercial enterprise, or to
disrupt the duly undertaken work of the village.
(Prior Code, § 15-1-3)
§ 33.096 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   COPYING. The reproduction of any public record by means of any photographic,
electronic, mechanical, or other process, device, or means.
   FREEDOM OF INFORMATION ACT. The Illinois Freedom of Information Act, 5 ILCS
140/1.1 et seq.
   PERSON. Any individual, corporation, partnership, firm, organization, or
association, acting individually or as a group.
   PUBLIC RECORD. All records, reports, forms, writings, letters, memorandums,
books, papers, maps, photographs, microfilms, cards, tapes, recordings,
electronic data processing records, recorded information, and all other
documentary materials, regardless of physical form or characteristics, having
been or being prepared, used, received, possessed, or under control of the
village.
(Prior Code, § 15-1-1)
§ 33.097 PUBLIC RECORD REQUESTS; FEES.
   (A)   (1)   The village shall make available to any person for inspection or
copying all public records, as provided in the Freedom of Information Act,
being 5 ILCS 140/1.1 et seq., (FOIA).
      (2)   The times during which the village will receive written requests
for copies of its records shall be as follows: from Monday through Friday of
each week, between the hours of 8:30 a.m. and 4:30 p.m., but not on any legal
holidays.
(Prior Code, § 15-1-4)
   (B)   (1)   All requests for inspection or copying of public records shall
be in writing and shall be addressed to the FOIA Officer. The requestor shall
include the following information in any request for public records:
         (a)   The requestor’s full name, mailing address, and telephone number
at which the requestor can be reached during normal business hours;
         (b)   A description of the records sought, being as specific as
possible; and
         (c)   A statement as to whether the request is for inspection,
copying, or both.
      (2)   The FOIA Officer shall make available a form for use by requesters;
however, no request shall be denied for failure to use the form.
(Prior Code, § 15-1-5)
   (C)   (1)   The village hereby establishes and shall charge fees reasonably
calculated to reimburse its actual cost for reproducing and certifying public
records and for the use, by any person, of the equipment of the village to copy
records. Such fees exclude the costs of any search for and review of the
record, and shall not exceed the actual cost of reproduction and certification,
unless otherwise provided by state statute. The charge for copying shall be for
black and white, letter or legal sized copies, the first 50 pages are free, and
the charges for additional pages shall be $0.15 per page.
      (2)   Documents shall be furnished without charge or at a reduced charge
where the village determines that waiver or reduction of the fee is in the
public interest because furnishing information can be considered as primarily
benefitting the general public. Waiver or reduction of the fee is in the public
interest if the principal purpose of the request is to access and disseminate
information regarding the health, safety, and welfare or the legal rights of
the general public and is not for the principal purpose of personal or
commercial benefit. In setting the amount of the waiver or reduction, the
village may take into consideration the amount of materials requested and the
cost of copying them.
(Prior Code, § 15-1-6)
   (D)   (1)   The following documents shall be made available for inspection
and copying without a written request; however, the requestor shall contact the
Village Clerk or Village Deputy Clerk in advance to set a mutually convenient
time.
      (2)   These documents, if copied, shall be subject to the copying fee set
forth in division (C) above:
         (a)   Ordinances and written resolutions;
         (b)   The journal of the Board of Trustees, not including executive
session minutes; and
         (c)   Any personnel code, building code, other technical code, or any
other regulation of the village adopted by the village, whether by ordinance,
resolution, or otherwise.
(Prior Code, § 15-1-13)
§ 33.098 TIME LIMIT FOR COMPLIANCE WITH REQUEST; EXTENSION.
   (A)   The village shall either comply with or deny a request for public
records within five business days after its receipt. Denials shall be in
writing and in accordance with §
33.101.
(Prior Code, § 15-1-7)
   (B)   (1) The time limit prescribed in division (A) above may be extended in
each case for not more than five additional working days for any of the
following reasons:
         (a)   The requested records are stored in whole or in part at other
locations other than the office having charge of the requested records;
         (b)   The request requires the collection of a substantial number of
specified records;
         (c)   The request is couched in categorical terms and requires an
extensive search for the records responsive to it;
         (d)   The requested records require examination and evaluation by
personnel having the necessary competence and discretion to determine if they
are exempt from disclosure under the terms of the State Freedom of Information
Act or should be revealed only with appropriate deletions;
         (e)   The request for records cannot be complied with by the village
within the time limits prescribed by the foregoing paragraph without unduly
burdening or interfering with the village;
         (f)   The requested records have not been located in the course of
routine search and additional efforts are being made to locate them; or
         (g)   There is a need for consultation, which shall be conducted with
all practicable speed, with another public body or among two or more components
of a public body having a substantial interest in the determination or in the
subject matter of the request.
      (2)   When additional time is required for any of the above reasons, the
Village Clerk shall notify the person making the request, by letter, within the
time limits specified in this section, of the reasons for the delay and the
date by which the records will be made available or denial will be forthcoming.
In no instance may the delay in processing last longer than seven working days.
A failure to render a decision within seven working days shall be considered a
denial of the request.
(Prior Code, § 15-1-8)
§ 33.099 UNDULY BURDENSOME REQUEST.
   (A)   Requests calling for all records falling within a category shall be
complied with unless compliance with the request would be unduly burdensome for
the village, there is no method of narrowing the request, and the burden on the
village strongly outweighs the public interest in the information.
   (B)   (1)   If the village responds to a categorical request by stating that
compliance would unduly burden its operation, it shall do so in a writing
signed by the Village Clerk specifying the reasons why it would be unduly
burdensome and the extent to which compliance will so burden the operation of
the village. After receipt of this response in writing, the person making the
request shall have an opportunity to reduce the request to manageable
proportions.
      (2)   If the person making the request fails to reduce the request to
manageable proportions, the response of the village shall be treated as a
denial of the request information.
(Prior Code, § 15-1-9)
§ 33.100 CERTAIN INFORMATION EXEMPT FROM INSPECTION AND COPYING.
   Information exempted by the Freedom of Information Act, being 5 ILCS 140/
1 et seq., shall be exempt from inspection and copying. If a record contains
both exempt and nonexempt information, the exempt information shall be deleted
and the remainder of the record made available for inspection and copying.
(Prior Code, § 15-1-10)
§ 33.101 NOTICE OF DENIAL OF REQUEST; APPEALS.
   (A)   (1)   The Village Clerk, when denying a request for public record,
shall notify the requestor, by letter, of the decision to deny the information,
and the reason for the denial. Each notice of denial by the Village Clerk shall
inform the person of his or her right to appeal to the Village President in
accordance with § 15-1-10 of the Freedom of Information Act, being 5 ILCS 140/
9.
      (2)   When a request is denied on the grounds that the records are exempt
under the provisions of this subchapter, the notice of denial shall specify the
exemption claimed to authorize the denial and briefly explain how the exemption
applies to the specified records withheld.
   (B)   A requestor may appeal a denial of a request for public records to the
Village President. All appeals shall be in writing, shall be addressed to the
Village President in an envelope clearly marked “FOIA APPEAL,” and shall
include a copy of the original request, a copy of the denial or a statement
that the village failed to respond within seven working days; and a written
statement setting forth the reasons the requestor believes the appeal should be
granted.
   (C)   (1)   The Village President shall respond in writing to an appeal
within seven working days of receipt thereof. Failure to respond shall be
considered a denial of the appeal.
      (2)   If the Village President denies an appeal in whole or in part, the
requestor shall be informed of his or her rights to judicial review underthe
Freedom of Information Act.
(Prior Code, § 15-1-11)
§ 33.102 GRANTING OF REQUEST; PROCEDURE FOR INSPECTION.
   When a freedom of information request is granted, the documents will be made
available for inspection at the Village Hall during regular business hours.
Copies shall be made upon request as set forth in §
33.097(C).
(Prior Code, § 15-1-12)
§ 33.103 DISSEMINATION OF INFORMATION ABOUT PUBLIC BODIES.
   The village shall prominently display at the Village Hall, make available
for inspection and copying without charge, and shall send through, the mail if
requested, each of the following:
   (A)   A brief description of itself, which will include, but not be limited
to, a short summary of its purpose, a block diagram giving its functional
subdivisions, the total amount of its operating budget, the number and location
of all of its separate offices, the approximate number of full and part-time
employees, and the identification and membership of any board, commission,
committee, or council which operates in an advisory capacity relative to the
operation of the public body is required to report and be answerable for its
operations; and
   (B)   A brief description of the methods whereby the public may request
information and public records, a directory designating by titles and business
addresses those employees to whom requests for public records should be
directed, and any fees allowable under §
33.097(C).
(Prior Code, § 15-1-14)
§ 33.104 LIST OF CATEGORIES OF RECORDS.
   (A)   As to public records prepared or received after the effective date of
this subchapter, the Village Clerk shall maintain and make available for
inspection and copying a reasonably current list of all types or categories of
records under its control.
   (B)   The list shall be reasonably detailed in order to aid persons in
obtaining access to public records pursuant to this subchapter.
   (C)   The Village Clerk shall furnish upon request a description of the
manner in which public records stored by means of electronic data processing
may be obtained in a form comprehensible to persons lacking knowledge of
computer language or printout format.
(Prior Code, § 15-1-15)
§ 33.999 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which no
specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to §
10.999 of this code of ordinances.
   (B)   Any person who violates any portion of §§
33.001 through
33.006 or
33.020 through
33.027, as now or hereafter amended, shall be subject to a fine of not less
than $100 for the first such violation, and a fine of not less than $750 for
each violation thereafter.
(Prior Code, § 22-1-15)
   (C)   As described in §
33.079, in addition to any and all other discipline that may be applicable
pursuant to municipal policies, employment agreements, procedures, employee
handbooks and/or collective bargaining agreement, any person who violates this
policy or the “Prohibition on Sexual Harassment” contained in 5 ILCS 430/5-65
may be subject to a fine of up to $750 per offense, applicable discipline or
discharge by the village and any applicable fines and penalties established
pursuant to local ordinance, state law, or federal law. Each violation may
constitute a separate offense.
(Prior Code, § 22-7-5)
   (D)   In addition, any person who intentionally makes a false report, as
described in §
33.080, alleging a violation of any provision of the State Officials and
Employees Ethics Act, being 5 ILCS 430/1-1 et seq., to an ethics commission, an
inspector general, the State Police, a State Attorney, the Attorney General, or
any other law enforcement official is guilty of a Class A misdemeanor. An
ethics commission may levy an administrative fine of up to $750 against any
person who intentionally makes a false, frivolous, or bad faith allegation.
(Prior Code, § 22-7-6)
(Ord. 2018-01, passed 1-2-2018)
CHAPTER 34: PUBLIC SAFETY AND LAW ENFORCEMENT
Section
Civil Emergencies
   
34.001   Definitions
   
34.002   Declaration of emergency
   
34.003   Curfew
   
34.004   Authority of Mayor to issue orders
   
34.005   Effectiveness
   
34.006   Notification
Emergency Management Agency (EMA)
   
34.020   Definitions
   
34.021   Policy and procedures
   
34.022   Limitations
   
34.023   Creation and structure; compensation and oath
   
34.024   Mayor; powers and succession
   
34.025   Financing
   
34.026   Local disaster emergencies
   
34.027   Testing of disaster warning devices
   
34.028   Mutual aid arrangements between political subdivisions
   
34.029   Communications
   
34.030   Immunity
   
34.031   Professions, trades, and occupations
   
34.032   Appropriations of tax levy
   
34.033   Authority to accept services, gifts, grants, or loans
   
34.034   Order, rules, and regulations
   
34.035   Utilization of existing agency, facilities, and personnel
   
34.036   No private liability
   
34.037   Emergency termination or reduction of electrical service
Police Department
   
34.050   Department established
   
34.051   Chief of Police
   
34.052   Police officers; regulations
   
34.053   Police officers; violations
   
34.054   Mutual aid contract
   
34.055   Special police officer
   
34.056   Legal process
   
34.057   Assisting or obstructing police officers
   
34.058   Witness fees
   
34.059   Stolen property
   
34.060   Auxiliary police
   
34.061   Part-time police
 
   
34.999   Penalty
CIVIL EMERGENCIES
§ 34.001 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   CIVIL EMERGENCY. Includes:
      (1)   A riot or unlawful assembly characterized by the use of actual
force or violence or any power to execute by three or more persons acting
together without authority of law; or
      (2)   Any natural disaster or human-made calamity, including a flood,
conflagration, cyclone, tornado, earthquake, or explosion within the corporate
limits of the village resulting in the death or injury of persons or the
destruction of property to such an extent that extraordinary measures must be
taken to protect the public health, safety, and welfare.
   CURFEW. A prohibition against any person or persons walking, running,
loitering, standing, or motoring upon any alley, street, highway, public
property, or vacant premises within the corporate limits of the village
excepting officials of any governmental unit and persons officially designated
to duty with reference to the civil emergency.
(Prior Code, § 30-1-1)
§ 34.002 DECLARATION OF EMERGENCY.
   Whenever an emergency, as defined in §
34.001, exists, the Mayor shall declare the existence by means of a written
declaration, setting forth the facts which constitute the emergency.
(Prior Code, § 30-1-2)
§ 34.003 CURFEW.
   After proclamation of a civil emergency by the Mayor, he or she may order a
general curfew applicable to such geographical areas of the village or to the
village as a whole, as he or she deems advisable and applicable, during such
hours of the day or night as he or she deems necessary in the interest of the
public safety and welfare.
(Prior Code, § 30-1-3)
§ 34.004 AUTHORITY OF MAYOR TO ISSUE ORDERS.
   After the proclamation of a civil emergency, the Mayor may also, in the
interest of public safety and welfare, make any or all of the following orders:
   (A)   Order the closing of all retail liquor stores including taverns and
private clubs or portions thereof wherein the consumption of intoxicating
liquor and beer is permitted;
   (B)   Order the discontinuance of the sale of alcoholic liquor by any
wholesaler or retailer;
   (C)   Order the discontinuance of selling, distributing, or giving away of
gasoline or other flammable liquid or combustible products in any container
other than a gasoline tank properly affixed to a motor vehicle;
   (D)   Order the discontinuance of selling, distributing, dispensing, or
giving away of any firearms or ammunition of any character whatsoever; or
   (E)   Issue such other orders as are imminently necessary for the protection
of life and property.
(Prior Code, § 30-1-4)
§ 34.005 EFFECTIVENESS.
   The proclamation herein authorized shall be effective for a period of 48
hours, unless sooner terminated by a proclamation of the Mayor indicating that
the civil emergency no longer exists. The Mayor shall have the power to
reproclaim the existence of a civil emergency at the end of each 48-hour period
during the time the civil emergency exists.
(Prior Code, § 30-1-5)
§ 34.006 NOTIFICATION.
   Upon issuing the proclamation herein authorized, the Mayor shall notify the
news media situated within the village and shall cause three copies of the
proclamation declaring the existence of the emergency to be posted at the
following places within the village:
   (A)   The Village Hall;
   (B)   The Post Office; and
   (C)   The Township Hall.
(Prior Code, § 30-1-6)
EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT AGENCY (EMA)
§ 34.020 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   COORDINATOR. The staff assistant to the Mayor with the duty of carrying out
the requirements of this code.
   DISASTER. An occurrence or threat of widespread or severe damage, injury, or
loss of life or property resulting from any natural or human-made cause,
including, but not limited to, fire, flood, earthquake, wind, storm, hazardous
materials spill, or other water contamination requiring emergency action to
avert danger or damage, epidemic, air contamination, blight, extended periods
of severe and inclement weather, drought, infestation, explosion, critical
shortages of essential fuels and energy, riot, or hostile military or
paramilitary action.
   EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT. The efforts of the village to develop, plan, analyze,
conduct, implement, and maintain programs for disaster mitigation.
   EMERGENCY OPERATIONS PLAN. The written plan of the village describing the
organization, mission, and functions of the government and supporting services
for responding to and recovery from disasters.
   EMERGENCY SERVICES. The preparation for and the carrying out of such
functions, other than functions for which military forces are primarily
responsible, as may be necessary or proper to prevent, minimize, repair, and
alleviate injury and damage resulting from disasters caused by fire, flood,
earthquake, or other human-made or natural causes. These functions include,
without limitation, firefighting services, police services, emergency aviation
services, medical and health services, rescue, engineering, warning services,
communications, radiological, chemical and other special weapons defense,
evacuation of persons from stricken areas, emergency assigned functions of
plant protection, temporary restoration of public utility services, and other
functions related to civilian protection, together with all other activities
necessary or incidental to protecting life or property.
   POLITICAL SUBDIVISION. Any county, city, village, or incorporated town.
(Prior Code, § 30-3-3)
§ 34.021 POLICY AND PROCEDURES.
   (A)   Because of the possibility of the occurrence of disasters of
unprecedented size and destructiveness resulting from the explosion in this or
in a neighboring municipality of atomic or other means from without, or by
means of sabotage or other disloyal actions within, or from fire, flood,
earthquake, or other natural or human-made causes, and in order to insure that
the village will be prepared to and will adequately deal with any such
disasters, preserve the lives and property of the people of the village, and
protect the public peace, health, and safety in the event of such a disaster,
it is found and declared to be necessary:
      (1)   To create a municipal emergency management agency;
      (2)   To confer upon the Mayor the extraordinary power and authority set
forth under §§
34.001 through
34.006; and
      (3)   To provide for the rendering of mutual aid to other cities and
political subdivisions with respect to the carrying out of emergency management
operations.
   (B)   Whenever the Mayor determines after an investigation that a dangerous
situation or a potentially dangerous situation exists which could cause death
to individuals or serious injury to property or the health and welfare of
public, the Mayor may declare that a state of emergency exists. The
extraordinary powers may not be exercised until an ordinance shall have been
adopted which shall establish standards for the determination by the Mayor of
when the state of emergency exists and shall provide that the Mayor may not
exercise such extraordinary power and authority except after signing under oath
a statement finding that such standards have been met, setting forth facts to
substantiate such findings, describing the nature of the emergency and
declaring that a state of emergency exists. This statement shall be filed with
the Village Clerk of the municipality as soon as practical. A state of
emergency shall expire not later than the adjournment of the first regular
meeting of the corporate authorities after the state of emergency is declared.
A subsequent state of emergency may be declared if necessary.
   (C)   It is further declared to be the purpose of this code of ordinances
and the policy of the village that all emergency management programs of the
village be coordinated to the maximum extent with the comparable functions of
the federal and state governments, including their various departments and
agencies, of other municipalities and localities and private agencies of every
type, to the end that the most effective preparation and use may be made of the
nation’s manpower, resources, and facilities for dealing with any disaster that
may occur.
(Prior Code, § 30-3-1)
Statutory reference:
   Provisions related to this subchapter 20 ILCS 3305/1 et seq.
   Related provisions, 65 ILCS 5/11-1-6
§ 34.022 LIMITATIONS.
   Nothing in this code of ordinances shall be construed to:
   (A)   Interfere with the course or conduct of a private labor dispute,
except that actions otherwise authorized by this code of ordinances or other
laws may be taken when necessary to forestall or mitigate imminent or existing
danger to public health or safety;
   (B)   Interfere with dissemination of news or comment of public affairs; but
any communications facility or organization (including but not limited to radio
and television stations, wire services, and newspapers) may be requested to
transmit or print public service messages furnishing information or
instructions in connection with a disaster;
   (C)   Affect the jurisdiction or responsibilities of police forces, fire
fighting forces, units of the armed forces of the United States, or of any
personnel thereof, when on active duty; but state and local emergency
operations plans shall place reliance upon the forces available for performance
of functions related to disaster emergencies; or
   (D)   Limit, modify, or abridge the authority of the Mayor and the Board of
Trustees to exercise any other powers vested in them under the constitution,
statutes, or common law of this state, independent of or in conjunction with
any provisions of this code.
(Prior Code, § 30-3-2)
§ 34.023 CREATION AND STRUCTURE; COMPENSATION AND OATH.
   (A)   (1)   There is hereby created an emergency management agency and a
coordinator of the Emergency Management Agency, herein called the
“Coordinator,” who shall be the head thereof. The Coordinator shall be
appointed by the Mayor with the advice and consent of the Board of Trustees. He
or she shall serve at the pleasure of the Mayor.
      (2)   The Emergency Management Agency shall obtain, with Board of
Trustees approval, such technical, clerical, stenographic, and other
administrative personnel, and may make such expenditures within their
appropriation therefor as may be necessary to carry out the purpose of this
code of ordinances.
      (3)   (a)   The Coordinator, subject to the direction and control of the
Mayor, shall be the executive head of the Municipal Emergency Management
Agency, and shall be responsible under the direction of the Mayor for carrying
out the program for emergency management operations of the village.
         (b)   He or she shall coordinate the activities of all organizations
for emergency management operations within the village and shall maintain
liaison, and cooperate with, the civil defense and emergency management
agencies and organization of the county, other counties and municipalities, and
of the federal and state government.
         (c)   In the event of the absence, resignation, death, or inability to
serve by the Coordinator, the Mayor or any persons designated by him or her,
shall be and act as Coordinator until a new appointment is made as provided in
this code of ordinances.
      (4)   The Municipal Emergency Management Agency shall take an integral
part in the development and revision of the local emergency operations plan.
      (5)   In the development of the emergency operations plan, the Municipal
Emergency Management Agency shall interrelate with business, labor, industry,
agriculture, civic and volunteer organizations, and community leaders.
      (6)   The Municipal Emergency Management Agency shall:
         (a)   Determine the requirements of the village for food, clothing,
and other necessities in the event of an emergency;
         (b)   Develop an emergency operations plan that meets the standards
promulgated by the State Emergency Management Agency;
         (c)   Biannually review and revise the local emergency operations
plan;
         (d)   Establish a register of persons with types of training and
skills in emergency prevention, preparedness, response, and recovery;
         (e)   Establish a register of government and private response
resources available for use in a disaster;
         (f)   Prepare, for issuance by the Mayor, ordinances, proclamations,
and regulations as necessary or appropriate in coping with disasters;
         (g)   Cooperate with the federal, state, and county government and any
public or private agency or entity in achieving any purpose of this code of
ordinances and in implementing programs for disaster prevention, preparation,
response, and recovery;
         (h)   Initiate and coordinate planning for:
            1.   The establishment of an emergency operating center; and
            2.   The implementation of a 911 system.
         (i)   Do all other things necessary, incidental, or appropriate for
the implementation of this subchapter.
(Prior Code, § 30-3-4)
   (B)   (1)   The Board of Trustees, by its annual appropriations ordinance,
may provide for the payment of the salary of the Coordinator and such other
office staff and personnel as may be expressly provided for in the ordinance.
      (2)   Nothing herein contained shall prohibit any member of the agency
from receiving compensation from the State Emergency Management Agency under
any provisions of that agency.
(Prior Code, § 30-3-20)
   (C)   Each person, whether compensated or noncompensated, who is appointed
to serve in any capacity in the municipal Emergency Management Agency, shall,
before entering upon his or her duties, take an oath, in writing, before the
Coordinator of the municipal Emergency Management Agency before a person
authorized to administer oaths in the village, which oath shall be filed with
the Coordinator of the Emergency Management Agency, and which oath shall be
substantially as follows:
“I, ________________________ do solemnly swear (or affirm) that I will support
and defend and bear true faith and allegiance to the Constitution of the United
States and the Constitution of the State of Illinois, and the territory,
institutions and facilities thereof, both public and private, against all
enemies, foreign and domestic; that I take this obligation freely, without any
mental reservation or purpose of evasion; and that I will well and faithfully
discharge the duties upon which I am about to enter. And I do further swear (or
affirm) that I do not advocate, nor am I, nor have I been a member of any
political party or organization that advocates the overthrow of the government
of the United States or of this State by force or violence; and that during
such time I am affiliated with the Village, I will not advocate nor become a
member of any political party or organization that advocates the overthrow of
the government of the United States or of this State by force or violence.”
(Prior Code, § 30-3-21)
§ 34.024 MAYOR; POWERS AND SUCCESSION.
   (A)   (1)   The Mayor shall have the general direction and control of the
emergency management agency, and shall be responsible for the carrying out of
the provisions of this subchapter.
      (2)   In performing his or her duties under this code of ordinances, the
Mayor is authorized to cooperate with state and federal governments and with
other municipalities and political subdivisions in all matters pertaining to
emergency management operations defined in this subchapter.
      (3)   In performing his or her duties under this subchapter, the Mayor is
further authorized:
         (a)   To make, amend, and rescind all lawful necessary orders, rules,
and regulations of the local disaster plan to carry out the provisions of this
subchapter within the limits of the authority conferred upon him or her;
         (b)   To cause to be prepared a comprehensive plan and program for the
emergency management of the village, which plan and program shall be integrated
into and coordinated with disaster plans of the state and federal governments
and other political subdivisions, and which plan and program may include:
            1.   Prevention and minimization of injury and damage caused by
disaster;
            2.   Prompt and effective response to disaster;
            3.   Emergency relief;
            4.   Identification of areas particularly vulnerable to disasters;
            5.   Recommendations for zoning, building, and other land use
controls, safety measures for securing permanent structures, and other
preventive and preparedness measures designed to eliminate or reduce disasters
or their impact;
            6.   Assistance to local officials in designing local emergency
action plans;
            7.   Authorization and procedures for the erection or other
construction of temporary works designed to protect against or mitigate danger,
damage or loss from flood, conflagration, or other disaster;
            8.   Organization of municipal manpower and chains of command;
            9.   Coordination of local emergency management activities; and
            10.   Other necessary matters.
         (c)   In accordance with such plan and program for the emergency
management of the village, and out of funds appropriated for such purposes, to
procure and preposition supplies, medicines, materials, and equipment to
institute training programs and public information programs, and to take all
other preparatory steps, including the partial or full mobilization of
emergency management organizations in advance of actual disaster to ensure the
furnishing of adequately trained and equipped forces for disaster operations;
and
         (d)   Out of funds appropriated for such purposes, to make such
studies and surveys of the industries, resources, and facilities in the village
as may be necessary to ascertain the capabilities of the village for the
emergency management phases of preparedness, response, and recovery, and to
plan for the most efficient emergency use thereof.
      (4)   The Mayor is authorized to designate space in a municipal building,
or elsewhere for the emergency management agency as its office.
(Prior Code, § 30-3-5)
   (B)   In the event of the death, absence from the village, or other
disability of the Mayor preventing him or her from acting under this subchapter
or for any other municipal purpose, and until the office is filled in the
manner prescribed by law, the Coordinator of the Emergency Management Agency
shall succeed to the duties and responsibilities of the Mayor.
(Prior Code, § 30-3-19)
§ 34.025 FINANCING.
   (A)   It is the intent of the Board of Trustees and declared to be the
policy of the village that every effort shall be made to provide funds for
disaster emergencies.
   (B)   (1)   It is the Board of Trustees’ intent that the first recourse
shall be to funds regularly appropriated to the agency. If the Mayor finds that
the demands placed upon these funds in coping with a particular disaster are
unreasonably great, and the Governor has proclaimed the village a disaster, he
or she may make application for funds from the State Disaster Relief Fund. If
monies available from the Fund are insufficient, and if the Mayor finds that
other sources of money to cope with the disaster are not available or are
insufficient, he or she shall issue a call for an immediate session of the
Board of Trustees for the purpose of enacting ordinances as the Board of
Trustees may deem necessary to transfer and expend monies appropriated for
other purposes, or borrow monies from the United States government or other
public or private sources.
      (2)   If less than a quorum of the members of the Board of Trustees is
capable of convening in session to enact such ordinances for the transfer,
expenditure, or loan of such monies, the Mayor is authorized to carry out those
decisions until such time as a quorum of the Board of Trustees can convene.
   (C)   Nothing contained in this section shall be construed to limit the
Mayor’s authority to apply for, administer, and expend grants, gifts, or
payments in aid of disaster prevention, preparedness, response, or recovery.
(Prior Code, § 30-3-6)
§ 34.026 LOCAL DISASTER EMERGENCIES.
   (A)   A local disaster emergency may be declared only by the Mayor or Board
of Trustee. If declared by the Mayor, it shall not be continued for a period in
excess of seven days except by or with the consent of the Board of Trustees.
Any order or proclamation declaring, continuing, or terminating a local
disaster emergency shall be given prompt and general publicity, and shall be
filed promptly with the Village Clerk.
   (B)   The effect of a declaration of a local disaster emergency is to
activate any and all applicable local emergency operations plans and to
authorize the furnishing of aid and assistance thereunder.
   (C)   During a local disaster emergency, the Mayor may suspend the
provisions of any municipal ordinance prescribing procedures for the conduct of
municipal business, or the orders, rules, and regulations of any municipal
agency, if strict compliance with the provisions of any ordinance, rule, or
regulation would in any way prevent, hinder, or delay necessary action in
coping with the emergency, as authorized by the State Emergency Management
Agency Act, being 20 ILCS 3305/1 et seq.; provided that, if the Board of
Trustees meets at such time, he or she shall act subject to the directions and
restrictions imposed by that body.
(Prior Code, § 30-3-7)
§ 34.027 TESTING OF DISASTER WARNING DEVICES.
   The testing of disaster devices including outdoor warning sirens shall be
held only on the first Tuesday of each month at 10:00 a.m.
(Prior Code, § 30-3-8)
§ 34.028 MUTUAL AID ARRANGEMENTS BETWEEN POLITICAL SUBDIVISIONS.
   (A)   The Coordinator for emergency management operations may, in
collaboration with other public agencies within his or her immediate vicinity,
develop or cause to be developed mutual aid arrangements with other political
subdivisions, municipal corporations, or bodies politic within this state for
reciprocal disaster response and recovery in case a disaster is too great to be
dealt with unassisted.
   (B)   (1)   The mutual aid shall not, however, be effective unless and until
approved by each of such political subdivisions, municipal corporations, or
bodies politic as are parties thereto, in the manner provided by law, and
unless and until filed with and approved in writing by the State Director.
      (2)   Such arrangements shall be consistent with the state and local
emergency management operations plan and program, and in the event of such
disaster as described in §
34.020, it shall be the duty of each local and department for emergency
management operations to render assistance in accordance with the provisions of
such mutual aid arrangements.
(Prior Code, § 30-3-9)
§ 34.029 COMMUNICATIONS.
   The Local Emergency Management Agency shall ascertain what means exist for
rapid and efficient communications in times of disaster emergencies. The agency
shall consider the desirability of supplementing these communications resources
or of integrating them into a comprehensive system or network. In studying the
character and feasibility of any system or its several parts, the agency shall
evaluate the possibility of multipurpose use thereof for general municipal and
local governmental purposes. The agency shall make recommendations to the Mayor
as appropriate.
(Prior Code, § 30-3-10)
§ 34.030 IMMUNITY.
   (A)   Neither the village, the agency, or any member thereof or any person
acting at their direction, engaged in any emergency management operations or
disaster activities, while complying with or attempting to comply with this
subchapter or any rule or regulations promulgated pursuant to this subchapter,
is liable for the death of or any injury to persons or damage to property as a
result of such activity.
   (B)   This section does not, however, affect the right of any person to
receive benefits to which he or she would otherwise be entitled under this act
under the Workers’ Compensation Act, being 820 ILCS 305 et al., or the Workers’
Occupational Diseases Act, being 820 ILCS 310 et at., or under any pension law,
and this section does not affect the right of any such person to receive any
benefits or compensation under any Act of Congress.
(Prior Code, § 30-3-11)
§ 34.031 PROFESSIONS, TRADES, AND OCCUPATIONS.
   If such disaster as is described in §
34.020 occurs in the village and the services of persons who are competent to
practice any profession, trade, or occupation are required in the village to
cope with the disaster situation and it appears that the number of persons
licensed or registered in the village to practice such profession, trade, or
occupation may be insufficient for such purpose, then any persons who are
licensed elsewhere to practice any such profession, trade, or occupation may,
if a member of another political subdivision rendering aid in the village
pursuant to the order of the head of that political subdivision and upon the
request of the village, or if otherwise requested so to do by the Mayor or the
Coordinator of the village, during the time the disaster condition continues,
practice such profession, trade, or occupation in the village without being
licensed or registered in the village.
(Prior Code, § 30-3-12)
§ 34.032 APPROPRIATIONS OF TAX LEVY.
   (A)   The Board of Trustees may make appropriations for emergency management
operations in the manner provided by law for making appropriations for the
ordinary expenses of such political subdivision.
   (B)   The Board of Trustees may also levy for emergency management
operations a tax not to exceed 0.05% of the full, fair cash value as equalized
or assessed by the Department of Revenue on all taxable property in the village
for the current year. However, the amount collectible under such a levy shall
in no event exceed $0.25 per capita. The annual tax shall be in addition to and
in excess of the amount authorized to be levied for general corporate purposes.
(Prior Code, § 30-3-13)
§ 34.033 AUTHORITY TO ACCEPT SERVICES, GIFTS, GRANTS, OR LOANS.
   Whenever the federal or state governments, or any agency or officer thereof,
or whenever any person, firm, or corporation shall offer to the village
services, equipment, supplies, materials, or funds by way of gift or grant for
purposes of emergency management, the village, acting through the Mayor or
through its Board of Trustees, may accept such offer and upon such acceptance
the Mayor or the Board of Trustees may authorize any officer of the village to
receive such services, equipment, supplies, materials, or funds on behalf of
the village.
(Prior Code, § 30-3-14)
§ 34.034 ORDER, RULES, AND REGULATIONS.
   (A)   The Mayor shall file a copy of every rule, regulation, or order and
any amendment thereof made by him or her pursuant to the provisions of this
subchapter in the office of the Village Clerk. No such rule, regulation, or
order, or any amendment thereof, shall be effective until ten days after such
filing; provided, however, that upon the declaration of such a disaster
emergency by the Mayor as is described in §
34.026, the provision relating to the effective date of any rule, regulation,
order, or amendment issued pursuant to this subchapter and during the state of
such disaster emergency, is abrogated, and said rule, regulation, order, or
amendment shall become effective immediately upon being filed with the Village
Clerk, accompanied by a certificate stating the reason for the emergency.
   (B)   (1)   The Emergency Management Agency established pursuant to this
subchapter, and the Coordinator thereof, shall execute and enforce such orders,
rules, and regulations as may be made by the Governor under authority of the
State Emergency Management Agency Act, being 20 ILCS 3305/1 et seq.
      (2)   The local Emergency Management Agency shall have available for
inspection at its office all orders, rules, and regulations made by the
Governor, or under this authority. The State Emergency Management Agency shall
furnish such orders, rules, and regulations to the Agency.
(Prior Code, § 30-3-15)
§ 34.035 UTILIZATION OF EXISTING AGENCY, FACILITIES, AND PERSONNEL.
   In carrying out the provisions of this subchapter, the Mayor and the
Coordinator of the Emergency Management Agency are directed to utilize the
services, equipment, supplies, and facilities of existing departments, offices,
and agencies of the village to the maximum extent practicable, and the officers
and personnel of all such departments, offices, and agencies are directed, upon
request, to cooperate with and extend such services and facilities to the
Coordinator and the Emergency Management Agency.
(Prior Code, § 30-3-16)
§ 34.036 NO PRIVATE LIABILITY.
   (A)   Any person owning or controlling real estate or other premises who
voluntarily and without compensation grants a license or privilege, or
otherwise permits the designation or use of the whole or any part or parts of
such real estate or premises for the purpose of sheltering persons during an
actual or impending disaster, or a mock or practice disaster response activity
together with his or her successors in interest, if any, shall not be civilly
liable for negligently causing the death of or injury to any person on or about
such real estate or premises under such license, privilege, or other
permission, or for negligently causing loss of or damage to the property of
such person.
   (B)   Any private person, firm, or corporation, and employees and agents of
such person, firm, or corporation in the performance of a contract with, and
under the direction of, the village under the provisions of this subchapter,
shall not be civilly liable for causing death of or injury to any person or
damage to any property except in the event of willful misconduct.
   (C)   Any private person, firm, or corporation, and any employee or agency
of such person, firm, or corporation, who renders assistance or advice at the
request of the village, shall not be civilly liable for causing the death of or
injury to any person or damage to any property except in the event of willful
misconduct. The immunities provided in this division (C) shall not apply to any
private person, firm, or corporation, or to any employee or agent of such
person, firm, or corporation whose act or omission caused in whole or in part
such actual or impending disaster and who would otherwise be liable therefor.
(Prior Code, § 30-3-17)
§ 34.037 EMERGENCY TERMINATION OR REDUCTION OF ELECTRICAL SERVICE.
   When, in the judgment of the Mayor or Board of Trustees, as provided herein
in §
34.026(A), a local disaster emergency requires the termination or reduction of
electrical service, the Mayor or Board of Trustees shall forthwith declare, in
writing, the existence of the emergency condition and order the termination or
reduction.
(Prior Code, § 30-3-22)
POLICE DEPARTMENT
§ 34.050 DEPARTMENT ESTABLISHED.
   (A)   (1)   There is hereby established a department of the municipal
government of the village which shall be known as the Police Department.
      (2)   The Police Department shall consist of the Chief of Police and of
such number of captains, sergeants, and patrol officers as may be provided from
time to time by the Board of Trustees.
(Prior Code, § 30-2-1)
   (B)   The Police Department shall receive such compensation as may be
provided by village ordinance or by resolution of the Board of Trustees.
(Prior Code, § 30-2-5)
§ 34.051 CHIEF OF POLICE.
   (A)   There is hereby established the office of the Chief of Police. The
Chief of Police shall be appointed by the Mayor with the advice and consent of
the Board of Trustees.
(Prior Code, § 30-2-2)
   (B)   The Chief of Police shall keep records and make reports concerning the
activities of his or her Department as may be required. The Chief of Police
shall be responsible for the performance of the Police Department, of all its
functions, and all persons who are members of the Department shall serve
subject to the orders of the Chief of Police.
(Prior Code, § 30-2-3)
   (C)   The Chief of Police may make or prescribe such rules and regulations
for the conduct and guidance of the members of the Police Department as he or
she shall deem advisable and such rules, when approved by the Mayor, shall be
binding on such members.
(Prior Code, § 30-2-16)
   (D)   In the event a Chief of Police has not been appointed as provided in
division (A) above, the Mayor shall be acting Chief of Police.
(Prior Code, § 30-2-19)
Statutory reference:
   Related provisions, see 65 ILCS 5/11-1-2
§ 34.052 POLICE OFFICERS; REGULATIONS.
   (A)   A sufficient number of patrol officers shall be appointed by the
Mayor, by and with the advice and consent of the Board of Trustees to serve for
one year or until his or her successor is appointed and qualified. A police
officer may be appointed to office by the Mayor and Board of Trustees if he or
she meets the necessary qualifications notwithstanding the fact that the police
officer is not a resident of the village when appointed or when he or she is to
serve as such an official.
(Prior Code, § 30-2-4)
   (B)   Police officers shall devote their entire time to the performance of
the duties of the office and is hereby charged with the preservation of the
peace, order, and safety of the village and with the duty of protecting the
rights of persons and property and of enforcing all laws and also all orders of
the Board of Trustees. He or she shall take notice of all nuisances,
obstructions, and defects on the highways or other public places, and shall
cause the same to be abated or removed, or immediate notice thereof given to
the proper officer whose duty it may be to take action in relation thereto.
When requested by the Mayor, he or she shall attend, either in person or by
deputy, all meetings of the Board of Trustees, execute all its orders, and
close the Board Chamber upon the adjournment of that body. He or she shall also
execute all warrants or other legal process required to be executed by him or
her under any ordinance of the village or laws of the state.
(Prior Code, § 30-2-6)
   (C)   Every police officer shall aid the Fire Department by giving the alarm
in case of fire and in clearing the streets or grounds in the immediate
vicinity of any fire so that the firefighters shall not be hindered or
obstructed in the performance of their duties.
(Prior Code, § 30-2-11)
   (D)   All police officers, prior to entering upon any of their duties, shall
receive a course of training in the use of weapons and other police procedures
by the proper authorities as established by the State Police Academy.
(Prior Code, § 30-2-17)
§ 34.053 POLICE OFFICERS; VIOLATIONS.
   (A)    Any member of the Police Department who shall neglect or refuse to
perform any duty required of him or her by this code of ordinances or the rules
and regulations of the Police Department, or who shall be, in the discharge of
his or her official duties, guilty of any fraud, favoritism, extortion,
oppressions, or willful wrong or injustice, shall be subject to removal from
office.
(Prior Code, § 30-2-12)
   (B)   No member on an active tour of duty or while wearing the official
police officer’s badge of the village shall indulge in the use of intoxicating
liquor of any kind and intoxication at any time shall be sufficient cause for
removal.
(Prior Code, § 30-2-14)
§ 34.054 MUTUAL AID CONTRACT.
   The Police Department, with the approval of the Board of Trustees, may enter
into an agreement to provide police protection to neighboring municipalities.
(Prior Code, § 30-2-7)
§ 34.055 SPECIAL POLICE OFFICER.
   The Mayor may, on special occasions when, in his or her judgment for public
peace and order of the village, shall require, appoint, and commission any
number of special police officers as may be necessary and shall fix in order of
their appointment, the time during which each shall serve all such special
police officers, during such time, shall possess the powers and exercise the
duties of regular police patrol officers; provided that their appointment, if
for more than ten days shall be subject to the consent of the Board of Trustees
in the manner that other appointments to office by the Mayor are subject.
Auxiliary police officers shall not carry firearms, except with the permission
of the Chief of Police, and then only when in uniform and in the performance of
their duties.
(Prior Code, § 30-2-8)
§ 34.056 LEGAL PROCESS.
   All police officers shall have the power and authority to execute village
warrants or other similar legal processes outside the corporate limits of the
village and within such distance therefrom as authorized by law in all cases
when any ordinance of the Board of Trustees made pursuant to law shall
prescribe a penalty for the violation of any of its provisions by persons
residing, acting, or doing any business within the limits of the village.
(Prior Code, § 30-2-9)
§ 34.057 ASSISTING OR OBSTRUCTING POLICE OFFICERS.
   (A)   Every police officer of the village may, at any time, call upon any
able-bodied person(s) above the age of 18 years to aid him or her in the
arresting, retaking, or holding in custody of any person guilty of having
committed any unlawful act or charged therewith, or to aid such officer in
preventing the commission of any unlawful act.
(Prior Code, § 30-2-10)
   (B)   It shall be unlawful for any person in this village to resist or
obstruct any member of the Police Force in the discharge of his or her duty or
to endeavor to do so, in any manner, assist any person in the custody of any
member of the Police Department to escape or to attempt to escape from such
custody or to attempt to rescue any such person in custody.
(Prior Code, § 30-2-13)
§ 34.058 WITNESS FEES.
   Any member of the Police Department shall appear as witness whenever this is
necessary in a prosecution for a violation of an ordinance or of any state or
federal law. No such member shall retain any witness fee for service as witness
in any action or suit to which the village is a party; and fees paid for such
services shall be turned over to the Chief of Police who shall deposit the same
with the Village Treasurer.
(Prior Code, § 30-2-15)
§ 34.059 STOLEN PROPERTY.
   The Chief of Police shall be the custodian of all lost and abandoned or
stolen property in the village.
(Prior Code, § 30-2-18)
§ 34.060 AUXILIARY POLICE.
   (A)   The Mayor is hereby authorized to appoint auxiliary police officers as
employees, subject to the advice and consent of the Board of Trustees. Prior to
appointment, all proposed auxiliary police officers shall be fingerprinted and
their fingerprints shall be checked with the Federal Bureau of Identification
Washington, D.C., for any possible criminal record. No person shall be
appointed as an auxiliary police officer if he or she has been convicted of a
felony or other crime involving moral turpitude. All appointees shall be at
least 18 years of age. The appointment of any or all auxiliary police officers
may be terminated by the Mayor, subject to the advice and consent of the Board
of Trustees.
(Prior Code, § 30-2-26)
   (B)   Auxiliary police officers shall not be members of the regular Police
Department and shall be residents of the village. Identification symbols worn
by such auxiliary police officers shall be different and distinct from those
used by the regular Police Department and shall be selected and chosen by the
Chief of Police of the village. Auxiliary police officers shall, at all times,
during the performance of their duties, be subject to the direction and control
of the Chief of Police of this village.
(Prior Code, § 30-2-27)
   (C)   Auxiliary police officers shall have the following powers and duties,
when properly assigned and on duty:
      (1)   To aid or direct traffic in the village;
      (2)   To aid in control of natural or human-made disasters;
      (3)   To aid in case of civil disorder;
      (4)   To perform normal and regular police duties when assigned by the
Chief of Police on occasions when it is impractical for members of the regular
Police Department to perform normal and regular duties;
      (5)   To arrest or cause to be arrested, with or without process, all
persons who break the peace or are found violating any municipal ordinance or
any criminal law of the state;
      (6)   To commit arrested persons for examination;
      (7)   If necessary, to detain arrested persons in custody overnight or
Sunday in any safe place, or until they can be brought before the proper
magistrate;
      (8)   To exercise all other powers as conservators of the peace that the
corporate authorities may prescribe; and
      (9)   To serve and execute all warrants for the violation of municipal
ordinances or the state criminal law within the corporate limits of the
village, and also on any property owned and controlled by the village beyond
its corporate limits and for this purpose, to have all the common law and
statutory power of sheriffs.
(Prior Code, § 30-2-28)
   (D)   Auxiliary police officers shall not carry firearms, except with the
permission of the Chief of Police of the village, and then only when in uniform
and in the performance of their duties.
(Prior Code, § 30-2-29)
   (E)   (1)   Prior to entering upon any of their duties, auxiliary police
officers shall receive a course of training in the use of weapons and other
police procedure by the Chief of Police of the village, or through a course of
training designated by him or her.
      (2)   Such course of training shall be not less than 40 hours in
duration. Upon completion of the course of training, the Chief of Police shall
file a certificate attesting to the auxiliary police officer’s completion of
the course with the Village Clerk.
(Prior Code, § 30-2-30)
   (F)   Auxiliary police officers shall receive compensation as provided by
the Board of Trustees.
(Prior Code, § 30-2-31)
§ 34.061 PART-TIME POLICE.
   (A)   The village may employ part-time police officers from time to time as
they deem necessary.
(Prior Code, § 30-2-35)
   (B)   A part-time police officer shall have all the responsibilities of a
full-time police officer and such specific duties as delineated in the general
orders of the Police Department, but the number of hours a part-time officer
may work within a calendar year is restricted. Part-time police officers shall
not be assigned to supervise or direct full-time police officers. Part-time
police officers shall be trained in accordance with the State Police Training
Act (50 ILCS 705/1 et seq.) and the rules and requirements of the Illinois Law
Enforcement Training and Standards Board (ILETSB).
(Prior Code, § 30-2-36)
   (C)   All persons employed as a part-time police officer must meet the
following standards:
      (1)   Be of good moral character of temperate habits, of sound health,
and physically and mentally able to perform assigned duties;
      (2)   Be at least 21 years of age prior to the completion of the part-
time academy;
      (3)   Pass a medical examination;
      (4)   Possess a high school diploma or GED certificate;
      (5)   Possess a valid State of Illinois driver’s license;
      (6)   Possess no prior felony convictions; and
      (7)   Any individual who has served in the United States military must
have been honorably discharged.
(Prior Code, § 30-2-37)
   (D)   Part-time officers shall be under the disciplinary jurisdiction of the
Chief of Police. Part-time police officers serve at the discretion of the
village authorities, shall not have any property rights in said employment, and
may be removed by the village authorities at any time. Part-time police
officers shall comply with all applicable rules and general orders issued by
the Police Department.
(Prior Code, § 30-2-38)
§ 34.999 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which no
specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to §
10.999 of this code of ordinances.
   (B)   Any person convicted of violating §§
34.020 through
34.037 or any order thereunder shall be punished by a fine of not exceeding
$500.
(Prior Code, § 30-3-23)
CHAPTER 35: FINANCE AND REVENUE
Section
Interested Parties Registry
   
35.001   Definitions
   
35.002   Establishment of registry
   
35.003   Maintenance of registry
   
35.004   Registration by residents
   
35.005   Registration by organizations
   
35.006   Determination of eligibility
   
35.007   Renewal and termination
   
35.008   Amendment to registration
   
35.009   Registries available for public inspection
   
35.010   Notices to be sent to interested parties
   
35.011   Non-interference
   
35.012   Amendment of registration rules
Taxpayers’ Rights Code
   
35.025   Title
   
35.026   Scope
   
35.027   Definitions
   
35.028   Notices
   
35.029   Payment; late payments
   
35.030   Certain credits and refunds
   
35.031   Audit procedure
   
35.032   Appeal
   
35.033   Hearing
   
35.034   Interest and penalties
   
35.035   Abatement
   
35.036   Installment contracts
   
35.037   Statute of limitations
   
35.038   Voluntary disclosure
   
35.039   Publication of tax ordinances
   
35.040   Internal review procedure
   
35.041   Application
Taxation Generally
   
35.055   Liability
   
35.056   Specific tax rates
Gas Tax
   
35.070   Imposition
   
35.071   Exemption
   
35.072   Extent on taxation
   
35.073   Public bodies exempt from tax
   
35.074   Definitions
   
35.075   Returns submitted by Village Treasurer
   
35.076   Overpayment credit
   
35.077   Recovery of tax
   
35.078   Effective date
Utility Tax
   
35.090   Imposition
   
35.091   Exceptions
   
35.092   Additional taxes
   
35.093   Collection
   
35.094   Reports to village
   
35.095   Credit for over-payment
Hotel or Motel Room Tax
   
35.110   Definitions
   
35.111   Imposition
   
35.112   Books and records
   
35.113   Transmittal of tax revenue
   
35.114   Collection
   
35.115   Proceeds of tax and fines
Simplified Telecommunications Tax
   
35.130   Definitions
   
35.131   Imposition
   
35.132   Collection of tax by retailers
   
35.133   Returners to department
   
35.134   Resellers
   
35.135   Effective date
Cannabis Retailers’ Occupation Tax
   
35.150   Imposition; rate
   
35.151   Collection of tax by retailers
   
35.152   Effective date
Investment Policy
   
35.165   Scope; adoption and modification
   
35.166   Prudence
   
35.167   Objective
   
35.168   Delegation of authority
   
35.169   Ethics and conflicts of interest
   
35.170   Authorized financial dealers and institutions
   
35.171   Authorized and suitable investments
   
35.172   Collaterization
   
35.173   Safekeeping and custody
   
35.174   Diversification
   
35.175   Maximum maturities
   
35.176   Internal control
   
35.177   Performance standards
   
35.178   Reporting
 
   
35.999   Penalty
INTERESTED PARTIES REGISTRY
§ 35.001 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ACT. The Tax Increment Allocation Redevelopment Act, 65 ILCS 5/11-74.4-1 et
seq., as amended from time to time.
   CORPORATE AUTHORITIES. The President and Board of Trustees then holding
office.
   DEPARTMENT. Any department, division, agency, bureau, or administrative
subdivision of the village.
   INTERESTED PARTY(S). Includes:
      (1)   Any organization(s) active within the village;
      (2)   Any resident(s) of the village; and
      (3)   Any other entity or person otherwise entitled under the Act to
register, in a specific registry who has been registered in such registry and
whose registration has not been terminated in accordance with the registration
rules codified within this subchapter.
   MUNICIPALITY. The Village of Marissa.
   ORGANIZATION ACTIVE WITHIN THE MUNICIPALITY/VILLAGE. Any of the following:
      (1)   Any organization which has its headquarters, principal office, or
place of business within the limits of the village;
      (2)   Any organization which has its headquarters, principal office, or
place of business within five miles of the village’s borders;
      (3)   The term ORGANIZATION ACTIVE WITHIN THE MUNICIPALITY/VILLAGE shall
specifically exclude international, national, statewide, and other
organizations unless such organizations have a local office within the
territory of the village. The term ORGANIZATION ACTIVE WITHIN THE MUNICIPALITY/
VILLAGE shall specifically exclude other non-international, non-national, and
non-statewide and other organizations not meeting the definition above in
divisions (1) or (2) of this definition above;
      (4)   The term ACTIVE shall mean an organization that has no less than
25% of its membership as residents of the village. For the purposes of this
definition, resident encompasses both individuals and businesses. Thus, an
individual not residing within the village, but who is an owner, shareholder,
employer, or employee of a business situated within the borders of the village,
is deemed a resident of the village; and
      (5)   (a)   An international, national, statewide, or other organization
not meeting the requirements of the definition of ORGANIZATION ACTIVE WITHIN
THE MUNICIPALITY/VILLAGE under divisions (1) and (2) of this definition above
may petition the Village President for an exemption to the definition of the
term ORGANIZATION ACTIVE WITHIN THE MUNICIPALITY/VILLAGE. Upon receipt of such
petition, the Village President shall review the petition and make a
determination, within 60 days of receipt, to grant or deny the petition.
         (b)   If the Village President denies an organization’s petition for
exemption, the organization shall then request a hearing before the corporate
authorities; provided the organization makes a written request within ten
calendar days of the date on which the Village President issued his or her
determination to deny the petition. Upon receipt of the request for a hearing,
the corporate authorities, within a reasonable period of time, shall set a date
for the hearing; provided, however, that the petitioning organization shall
have no less than ten days prior written notice of the time and place of the
hearing. Formal rules of evidence shall not apply and the petitioning
organization may be represented by an attorney if it so desires.
         (c)   The corporate authorities shall conduct the hearing and permit
the petitioning organization to present any and all reasons it should be
allowed to register as an interested party. The corporate authorities shall
issue a determination on the organization’s petition within 30 days after
conclusion of the hearing.
         (d)   In the event that the corporate authorities shall grant the
petition for exemption, the organization shall comply with the other
requirements of the ordinance and submit the requisite interested party
registry from within ten days of the date of the decision granting the
exemption. Any decision of the corporate authorities shall not affect any
rights of the organization under the Freedom of Information Act, being 5 ILCS
140/1 et seq.
   REDEVELOPMENT PROJECT AREA. A redevelopment project area that is:
      (1)   Intended to qualify (or that has subsequently qualified) as a
REDEVELOPMENT PROJECT AREA under the Act; and
      (2)   Is subject to the “interested parties” registry requirements of the
Act.
   REGISTRATION FORM. The form appended to the registration rules codified
herein or such revised form as may be approved by the Department consistent
with the requirements of the Act.
   REGISTRY or REGISTRIES. Each interested parties registry, and all such
registries, collectively, established by the village pursuant to § 11-74.4-4.2
of the Act for a redevelopment project area.
   VILLAGE. The Village of Marissa, a municipal corporation and political
subdivision of the State of Illinois.
   VILLAGE CLERK. The Village Clerk for the Village of Marissa and the office
of the Village Clerk.
(Prior Code, § 13-1-1) (Ord. 06-05, passed 4-17-2006)
§ 35.002 ESTABLISHMENT OF REGISTRY.
   The village shall establish a separate interested parties registry for each
redevelopment project area, whether existing as of the date of the adoption of
these rules or hereafter established.
(Prior Code, § 13-1-2) (Ord. 06-05, passed 4-17-2006)
Statutory reference:
   Related provisions, see 65 ILCS 5/11-74.4-1 et seq.
§ 35.003 MAINTENANCE OF REGISTRY.
   (A)   The registries shall be maintained by the Village Clerk, which has a
principal business office located at 111 North Main Street, Marissa, Illinois
62257, or his or her designee.
   (B)   In the event the village determines that a department other than the
Village Clerk should maintain the registries, the village may transfer the
responsibility for maintaining the registries to such other department;
provided that the village:
      (1)   Gives prior written notice to all interested parties not less than
30 days prior to such transfer; and
      (2)   Publishes notice of such transfer at least twice, the first
publication to be not more than 30 days, nor less than ten days, prior to such
transfer, in a newspaper of general circulation in the village.
(Prior Code, § 13-1-3) (Ord. 06-05, passed 4-17-2006; Ord. 2024-12, passed 11-
20-2024)
§ 35.004 REGISTRATION BY RESIDENTS.
   An individual seeking to register as an interested person with respect to a
redevelopment project area must complete and submit a registration form to the
Village Clerk. Such individual must also submit a copy of a current driver’s
license, lease, utility bill, financial statement, or such other evidence as
may be acceptable to the Village Clerk to establish the individual’s current
village residency.
(Prior Code, § 13-1-4) (Ord. 06-05, passed 4-17-2006)
§ 35.005 REGISTRATION BY ORGANIZATIONS.
   An organization seeking to register as an interested party with respect to a
redevelopment project area must complete and submit an application to the
Village Clerk on a form provided by the Village Clerk’s office. Such
organization must also submit a copy of a one-page statement describing the
organization’s current operations in the village.
(Prior Code, § 13-1-5) (Ord. 06-05, passed 4-17-2006)
§ 35.006 DETERMINATION OF ELIGIBILITY.
   (A)   All individuals and organizations whose registration form and
supporting documentation complies with these registration rules shall be
registered in the applicable registry within ten business days of the Village
Clerk’s receipt of all such documents.
   (B)   If the Village Clerk shall provide written notice to the registrant
confirming such registration. Upon registration, interested parties shall be
entitled to receive all notices and documents required to be delivered under
these rules or as otherwise required under the Act with respect to the
applicable redevelopment project area. If the Village Clerk determines that a
registrant’s registration form and/or supporting documentation is incomplete or
does not comply with these registration rules, the Village Clerk shall give
written notice to the registrant specifying the defect(s). The registrant shall
be entitled to correct any defects and resubmit a new registration form and
supporting documentation.
(Prior Code, § 13-1-6) (Ord. 06-05, passed 4-17-2006)
§ 35.007 RENEWAL AND TERMINATION.
   (A)   (1)   An interested party’s registration shall remain effective for a
period of three years. At any time after such three-year period, the Village
Clerk may provide written notice by regular mail to the interested person
stating that such registration shall terminate unless the interested person
renews such registration within 30 days of the Village Clerk’s mailing of
written notice.
      (2)   To renew such registration, the interested person shall, within
such 30-day period, complete and submit the same registration form and
supporting documentation then required of initial registrants in order to
permit the Village Clerk to confirm such person’s residency or such
organization’s operations in the village.
   (B)   The registration of all individuals and organizations whose
registration form and supporting documentation is submitted in a timely manner
and complies with these regulation rules shall be renewed for an additional
consecutive three year period. If the Village Clerk determines that a
registrant’s renewal registration form and/or supporting documentation is
incomplete or does not comply with these registration rules, the Village Clerk
shall give written notice to the registrant at the address specified in the
renewal registration form submitted by such registrant, specifying the defect
(s).
   (C)   The registrant shall be entitled to correct any defects and resubmit a
new registration form and supporting documentation within 30 days of receipt of
the Village Clerk’s notice. If all defects are not corrected within 30 days of
the interested person’s receipt of the Village Clerk’s notice, the interested
person’s registration shall be terminated. Any interested person whose
registration is terminated shall be entitled to register again as if a first-
time registrant.
(Prior Code, § 13-1-7) (Ord. 06-05, passed 4-17-2006)
§ 35.008 AMENDMENT TO REGISTRATION.
   (A)   An interested party may amend its registration by giving written
notice to the Village Clerk by certified mail of any of the following:
      (1)   A change in address for notice purposes;
      (2)   In the case of organizations, a change in the name of the contact
person; and
      (3)   A termination of registration.
   (B)   Upon receipt of such notice, the Village Clerk shall revise the
applicable registry accordingly.
(Prior Code, § 13-1-8) (Ord. 06-05, passed 4-17-2006)
§ 35.009 REGISTRIES AVAILABLE FOR PUBLIC INSPECTION.
   (A)   Each registry shall be available for public inspection during normal
village business hours.
   (B)   The registry shall include the name, address, and telephone number of
each interested person and for organizations, the name and phone number of a
designated contact person.
(Prior Code, § 13-1-9) (Ord. 06-05, passed 4-17-2006)
§ 35.010 NOTICES TO BE SENT TO INTERESTED PARTIES.
   Interested parties shall be sent the following notices and any other notices
required under the Act with respect to the applicable redevelopment project
area:
   (A)   Pursuant to § 74.4-5(a) of the Act, notice of the availability of a
proposed redevelopment plan and eligibility report, including how to obtain
this information; such notice shall be sent by mail within a reasonable period
of time after the adoption of the ordinance fixing the public hearing for the
proposed redevelopment plan;
   (B)   Pursuant to § 74.4-5(a) of the Act, notice of changes to a proposed
redevelopment plans that do not:
      (1)   Add additional parcels of property to the proposed redevelopment
project area;
      (2)   Substantially affect the general land uses proposed in the
redevelopment plan;
      (3)   Substantially change the nature of or extend the life of the
redevelopment plan; or
      (4)   Increase the number of low or very low income households to be
displaced from the redevelopment project area; provided that measured from the
time of creation of the redevelopment project area the total displacement of
households will exceed ten; such notice shall be sent by mail not later than
ten days following the village’s adoption by ordinance of such changes.
   (C)   Pursuant to § 74.4-5(c) of the Act, notice of amendments to previously
approved redevelopment plan that does not:
      (1)   Add additional parcels of property to the redevelopment project
area;
      (2)   Substantially affect the general land uses in the redevelopment
plan;
      (3)   Substantially change the nature of the redevelopment project;
      (4)   Increase the total estimated redevelopment project costs set out in
the redevelopment plan by more than 5% after adjustment for inflation from the
date the plan was adopted;
      (5)   Add additional redevelopment project costs to the itemized list of
redevelopment project costs set out in the redevelopment plan; or
      (6)   Increase the number of low or very low income households to be
displaced from the redevelopment project area; provided that measured from the
time of creation of the redevelopment project area the total displacement of
households will exceed ten. Such notice shall be sent by mail not later than
ten days following the village’s adoption by ordinance of such amendment.
   (D)   (1)   Pursuant to § 74.4-5(d)(9) of the Act for redevelopment plans or
projects that would result in the displacement of residents from ten or more
inhabited residential units or that contain 75 or more inhabited residential
units, notice of the availability of the certified audit report described by §
74.4-5(d)(9), including how to obtain the certified audit report.
      (2)   Such notice shall be sent by mail within a reasonable period of
time after completion of the certified audit report; and
   (E)   Pursuant to § 74.4-6(e) of the Act, notice of the preliminary public
meeting required under the Act for a proposed redevelopment project area that
will result in the displacement of ten or more inhabited residential units or
which will contain 75 or more inhabited residential units. Such notice shall be
sent by certified mail not less than 15 days before the date of such
preliminary public meeting.
(Prior Code, § 13-1-10) (Ord. 06-05, passed 4-17-2006)
§ 35.011 NON-INTERFERENCE.
   The registration rules codified in this subchapter shall not be used to
prohibit or otherwise interfere with the eligible organizations and individuals
to register for receipt of information to which they are entitled under the
Act.
(Prior Code, § 13-1-11) (Ord. 06-05, passed 4-17-2006)
§ 35.012 AMENDMENT OF REGISTRATION RULES.
   The registration rules codified in this subchapter may be amended by the
Village Clerk, subject to and consistent with the requirements of the Act.
(Prior Code, § 13-1-12) (Ord. 06-05, passed 4-17-2006)
TAXPAYERS’ RIGHTS CODE
§ 35.025 TITLE.
   This subchapter shall be known as, and may be cited as “the Locally Imposed
and Administered Tax Rights and Responsibility Code.”
(Prior Code, § 36-1-1)
Statutory reference:
   Related provisions, see 50 ILCS 45/1 et seq.
§ 35.026 SCOPE.
   The provisions of this code shall apply to the village’s procedures in
connection with all of the village’s locally imposed and administered taxes.
(Prior Code, § 36-1-2)
§ 35.027 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ACT. The Local Government Taxpayers’ Bill of Rights Act, being 50 ILCS 45/
1 et seq.
   CORPORATE AUTHORITIES. The Mayor and Board of Trustees.
   LOCALLY IMPOSED AND ADMINISTERED TAX or TAX. Each tax imposed by the village
that is collected or administered by the village not an agency or department of
the state. It does not include any taxes imposed upon real property under the
Property Tax Code or fees collected by the village other than infrastructure
maintenance fees.
   LOCAL TAX ADMINISTRATOR.
      (1)   The Village Treasurer is charged with the administration and
collection of the locally imposed and administered taxes, including staff,
employees, or agents to the extent they are authorized by the LOCAL TAX
ADMINISTRATOR to act in the LOCAL TAX ADMINISTRATOR’S stead.
      (2)   The LOCAL TAX ADMINISTRATOR shall have the authority to implement
the terms of this subchapter to give full effect to this subchapter. The
exercise of such authority by the LOCAL TAX ADMINISTRATOR shall not be
inconsistent with this subchapter and the Act.
   NOTICE. Each audit notice, collection notice, or other similar notice or
communication in connection with each of the village’s locally imposed and
administered taxes.
   TAX ORDINANCE. Each ordinance adopted by the village that imposes any
locally imposed and administered tax.
   TAXPAYER. Any person required to pay any locally imposed and administered
tax and generally includes the person upon whom the legal incidence of such tax
is placed and with respect to consumer taxes includes the business or entity
required to collect and pay the locally imposed and administered tax to the
village.
   VILLAGE. The Village of Marissa, Illinois.
(Prior Code, § 36-1-3)
§ 35.028 NOTICES.
   (A)   Unless otherwise provided, whenever notice is required to be given,
the notice is to be in writing, mailed not less than seven calendar days prior
to the day fixed for any applicable hearing, audit, or other scheduled act of
the Local Tax Administrator.
   (B)   The notice shall be sent by the Local Tax Administrator as follows:
      (1)   First-class or express mail, or overnight mail, addressed to the
persons concerned at the persons last known address; or
      (2)   Personal service or delivery.
(Prior Code, § 36-1-4)
§ 35.029 PAYMENT; LATE PAYMENTS.
   (A)   Any notice, payment, remittance or other filing required to be made to
the village pursuant to any tax ordinance shall be considered late unless it
is:
      (1)   Physically received by the village on or before the due date; or
      (2)   Received in an envelope or other container displaying a valid,
legible United States postmark dated on or before the due date, properly
addressed to the village, with adequate postage prepaid.
(Prior Code, § 36-1-5)
   (B)   Any payment or remittance received for a tax period shall be applied
in the following order:
      (1)   First to the tax due for the applicable period;
      (2)   Second to the interest due for the applicable period; and
      (3)   Third to the penalty for the applicable period.
(Prior Code, § 36-1-6)
§ 35.030 CERTAIN CREDITS AND REFUNDS.
   (A)   The village shall not refund or credit any taxes voluntarily paid
without written protest at the time of payment in the event that a locally
imposed and administered tax is declared invalidly enacted or unconstitutional
by a court of competent jurisdiction. However, a taxpayer shall not be deemed
to have paid the tax voluntarily if the taxpayer lacked knowledge of the facts
upon which to protest the taxes at the time of payment or if the taxpayer paid
the taxes under duress.
   (B)   The statute of limitations on a claim for credit or refund shall be
four or less years after the end of the calendar year in which payment in error
was made. The village shall not grant a credit or refund of locally imposed and
administered taxes, interest, or penalties to a person who has not paid the
amounts directly to the village.
   (C)   The procedure for claiming a credit or refund of locally imposed and
administered taxes, interest or penalties paid in error shall be as follows:
      (1)   The taxpayer shall submit to the Local Tax Administrator in writing
a claim for credit or refund together with a statement specifying:
         (a)   The name of the locally imposed and administered tax subject to
the claim;
         (b)   The tax period for the locally imposed and administered tax
subject to the claim;
         (c)   The date of the tax payment subject to the claim and the
cancelled check or receipt for the payment;
         (d)   The taxpayer’s recalculation, accompanied by an amended or
revised tax return, in connection with the claim; and
         (e)   A request for either a refund or a credit in connection with the
claim to be applied to the amount of tax, interest, and penalties overpaid,
and, as applicable, related interest on the amount overpaid; provided, however,
that there shall be no refund and only a credit given in the event the taxpayer
owes any monies to the village.
      (2)   Within ten days of the receipt by the Local Tax Administrator of
any claim for a refund or credit, the Local Tax Administrator shall either:
         (a)   Grant the claim; or
         (b)   Deny the claim, in whole or in part, together with a statement
as to the reason for the denial or the partial grant and denial.
      (3)   In the event the Local Tax Administrator grants, in whole or in
part, a claim for refund or credit, the amount of the grant for refund or
credit shall bear interest at the rate of 6% per annum, based on a year of 365
days and the number of days elapsed, from the date of the overpayment to the
date of mailing of a refund check or the grant of a credit.
(Prior Code, § 36-1-7)
§ 35.031 AUDIT PROCEDURE.
   Any request for proposed audit pursuant to any local administered tax shall
comply with the notice requirements of this subchapter.
   (A)   Each notice of audit shall contain the following information:
      (1)   The tax;
      (2)   The time period of the audit; and
      (3)   A brief description of the books and records to be made available
for the auditor.
   (B)   Any audit shall be conducted during normal business hours and if the
date and time selected by the Local Tax Administrator is not agreeable to the
taxpayer, another date and time may be requested by the taxpayer within 30 days
after the originally designated audit and during normal business hours.
   (C)   The taxpayer may request an extension of time to have an audit
conducted. The audit shall be conducted not less than seven days nor more than
30 days from the date the notice is given, unless the taxpayer and the Local
Tax Administrator agreed to some other convenient time. In the event taxpayer
is unable to comply with the audit on the date in question, the taxpayer may
request another date within the 30 days, approved in writing, that is
convenient to the taxpayer and the Local Tax Administrator.
   (D)   Every taxpayer shall keep accurate books and records of the taxpayer’s
business or activities, including original source documents and books of entry
denoting the transactions which had given rise or may have given rise to any
tax liability, exemption, or deduction. All books shall be kept in the English
Language and shall be subject to and available for inspection by the village.
   (E)   It is the duty and responsibility of every taxpayer to make available
its books and records for inspection by the village. If the taxpayer or tax
collector fails to provide the documents necessary for audit within the time
provided, the Local Tax Administrator may issue a tax determination and
assessment based on the Local Tax Administrator’s determination of the best
estimate of the taxpayer’s tax liability.
   (F)   If an audit determines there has been an overpayment of a locally
imposed and administered tax as a result of the audit, written notice of the
amount of overpayment shall be given to the taxpayer within 30 days of the
village’s determination of the amount of overpayment.
   (G)   In the event a tax payment was submitted to the incorrect local
governmental entity, the Local Tax Administrator shall notify the local
governmental entity imposing such tax.
(Prior Code, § 36-1-8)
§ 35.032 APPEAL.
   (A)   The Local Tax Administrator shall send written notice to a taxpayer
upon the Local Tax Administrator’s issuance of a protestable notice of tax due,
a bill, a claim denial, or a notice of claim reduction regarding any tax. The
notice shall include the following information:
      (1)   The reason for the assessment;
      (2)   The amount of the tax liability proposed;
      (3)   The procedure for appealing the assessment; and
      (4)   The obligations of the village during the audit, appeal, refund,
and collection process.
   (B)   A taxpayer who receives written notice from the Local Tax
Administrator of a determination of tax due or assessment may file with the
Local Tax Administrator a written protest and petition for hearing, setting
forth the basis of the taxpayer’s request for a hearing. The written protest
and petition for hearing must be filed with the Local Tax Administrator within
45 days of receipt of the written notice of the tax determination and
assessment.
   (C)   If a timely written notice and petition for hearing is filed, the
Local Tax Administrator shall fix the time and place for hearing and shall give
written notice to the taxpayer. The hearing shall be scheduled for a date
within 14 days of receipt of the written protest and petition for hearing,
unless the taxpayer requests a later date convenient to all parties.
   (D)   If a written protest and petition for hearing is not filed within the
45-day period, the tax determination, audit, or assessment shall become a final
bill due and owing without further notice.
   (E)   Upon the showing of reasonable cause by the taxpayer and the full
payment of the contested tax liability along with interest accrued as of the
due date of the tax, the Local Tax Administrator may reopen or extend the time
for filing a written protest and petition for hearing. In no event shall the
time for filing a written protest and petition for hearing be reopened or
extended for more than 90 days after the expiration of the 45-day period.
(Prior Code, § 36-1-9)
§ 35.033 HEARING.
   (A)   Whenever a taxpayer or a tax collector has filed a timely written
protest and petition for hearing under §
35.033, the Local Tax Administrator shall conduct a hearing regarding any
appeal.
   (B)   No continuances shall be granted except in cases where a continuance
is absolutely necessary to protect the rights of the taxpayer. Lack of
preparation shall not be grounds for a continuance. Any continuance granted
shall not exceed 14 days.
   (C)   At the hearing the Local Tax Administrator shall preside and shall
hear testimony and accept any evidence relevant to the tax determination,
audit, or assessment. The strict rules of evidence applicable to judicial
proceedings shall not apply.
   (D)   At the conclusion of the hearing, the Local Tax Administrator shall
make a written determination on the basis of the evidence presented at the
hearing. The taxpayer or tax collector shall be provided with a copy of the
written decision.
(Prior Code, § 36-1-10)
§ 35.034 INTEREST AND PENALTIES.
   In the event a determination has been made that a tax is due and owing,
through audit, assessment, or other bill sent, the tax must be paid within the
time frame otherwise indicated.
   (A)   Interest. The village hereby provides for the amount of interest to be
assessed on a late payment, underpayment, or nonpayment of the tax to be 6% per
annum, based on a year of 365 days and the number of days elapsed.
   (B)   Late filing and payment penalties. If a tax return is not filed within
the time and manner provided by the controlling tax ordinance, a late filing
penalty, of 5% of the amount of tax required to be shown as due on a return
shall be imposed; and a late payment penalty of 5% of the tax due shall be
imposed. If no return is filed within the time or manner provided by the
controlling tax ordinance and prior to the village issuing a notice of tax
delinquency or notice of tax liability, then a failure to file penalty shall be
assessed equal to 25% of the total tax due for the applicable reporting period
for which the return was required to be filed. A late filing or payment penalty
shall not apply if a failure to file penalty is imposed by the controlling
ordinance.
(Prior Code, § 36-1-11)
§ 35.035 ABATEMENT.
   The Local Tax Administrator shall have the authority to waive or abate any
late filing penalty, late payment penalty or failure to file penalty if the
Local Tax Administrator shall determine reasonable cause exists for delay or
failure to make a filing.
(Prior Code, § 36-1-12)
§ 35.036 INSTALLMENT CONTRACTS.
   The village may enter into an installment contract with the taxpayer for the
payment of taxes under the controlling tax ordinance. The Local Tax
Administrator may not cancel any installment contract so entered unless the
taxpayer fails to pay any amount due and owing. Upon written notice by the
Local Tax Administrator that the payment is 30 days delinquent, the taxpayer
shall have 14 working days to cure any delinquency. If the taxpayer fails to
cure the delinquency within the 14-day period or fails to demonstrate good
faith in restructuring the installment contract with the Local Tax
Administrator, the installment contract shall be canceled without further
notice to the taxpayer.
(Prior Code, § 36-1-13)
§ 35.037 STATUTE OF LIMITATIONS.
   The village, through the Local Tax Administrator, shall review all tax
returns in a prompt and timely manner and inform taxpayers of any amounts due
and owing. The taxpayer shall have 45 days after receiving notice of the
reviewed tax returns to make any request for refund or provide any tax still
due and owing.
   (A)   No determination of tax due and owing may be issued more than four
years maximum after the end of the calendar year for which the return for the
applicable period was filed or for the calendar year in which the return for
the applicable period was due, whichever occurs later.
   (B)   If any tax return is not filed or if during any four-year period for
which a notice of tax determination or assessment may be issued by the village,
the tax paid was less than 75% of the tax due, the statute of limitations shall
be six years maximum after the end of the calendar year in which return for the
applicable period was due or end of the calendar year in which the return for
the applicable period was filed.
   (C)   No statute of limitations shall not apply if a fraudulent tax return
was filed by the taxpayer.
(Prior Code, § 36-1-14)
§ 35.038 VOLUNTARY DISCLOSURE.
   (A)   For any locally imposed and administered tax for which a taxpayer has
not received a written notice of an audit, investigation, or assessment from
the Local Tax Administrator, a taxpayer is entitled to file an application with
the Local Tax Administrator for a voluntary disclosure of the tax due. A
taxpayer filing a voluntary disclosure application must agree to pay the amount
of tax due, along with interest of 1% per month, for all periods prior to the
filing of the application, but not more than four years before the date of
filing the application. A taxpayer filing a valid voluntary disclosure
application may not be liable for any additional tax, interest, or penalty for
any period before the date the application was filed.
   (B)   (1)   However, if the taxpayer incorrectly determined and underpaid
the amount of tax due, the taxpayer is liable for the underpaid tax along with
applicable interest on the underpaid tax, unless the underpayment was the
result of fraud on the part of the taxpayer, in which case the application
shall be deemed invalid and void.
      (2)   The payment of tax and interest must be made by no later than 90
days after the filing of the voluntary disclosure application or the date
agreed to by the Local Tax Administrator.
   (C)   However, any additional amounts owed as a result of an underpayment of
tax and interest previously paid under this section must be paid within 90 days
after a final determination and the exhaustion of all appeals of the additional
amount owed or the date agreed to by the Local Tax Administrator, whichever is
longer.
(Prior Code, § 36-1-15)
§ 35.039 PUBLICATION OF TAX ORDINANCES.
    (A)   Any locally administered tax ordinance shall be published via normal
or standard publishing requirements.
   (B)   The posting of a tax ordinance on the Internet shall satisfy the
publication requirements. Copies of all tax ordinances shall be made available
to the public upon request at the Village Clerk’s office.
(Prior Code, § 36-1-16)
§ 35.040 INTERNAL REVIEW PROCEDURE.
   (A)   The Local Tax Administrator shall establish an internal review
procedure regarding any liens filed against any taxpayers for unpaid taxes.
Upon a determination by the Local Tax Administrator that the lien is valid, the
lien shall remain in full force and effect.
   (B)   If the lien is determined to be improper, the Local Tax Administrator
shall:
      (1)   Timely remove the lien at the village’s expense;
      (2)   Correct the taxpayer’s credit record; and
      (3)   Correct any public disclosure of the improperly imposed lien.
(Prior Code, § 36-1-17)
§ 35.041 APPLICATION.
   This subchapter shall be liberally construed and administered to supplement
all of the village’s tax ordinances. To the extent that any tax ordinance is in
conflict with or inconsistent with this subchapter, this subchapter shall be
controlling.
(Prior Code, § 36-1-18)
TAXATION GENERALLY
§ 35.055 LIABILITY.
   The Board of Trustees may levy a tax upon all taxable property in the
village at whatever rate is necessary to purchase general liability insurance
for the village.
(Prior Code, § 36-2-5)
§ 35.056 SPECIFIC TAX RATES.
   (A)   The maximum rate for general corporate purposes of the village be and
the same is hereby established at a rate of 0.25%.
(Prior Code, § 36-2-1)
   (B)   The maximum rate for police protection purposes of the village be and
the same is hereby established at a rate of 0.075%.
(Prior Code, § 36-2-2)
   (C)   The Board of Trustees may levy a municipal auditing tax upon all
taxable property in the village which will produce an amount which will equal
the cost of all auditing for the village.
(Prior Code, § 36-2-3)
   (D)   The Board of Trustees may levy a tax upon all taxable property in the
village at whatever rate is necessary to participate in the federal Social
Security system.
(Prior Code, § 36-2-4)
   (E)   The maximum tax for library purposes, be and the same is hereby
established at a rate of 0.15%.
(Prior Code, § 36-2-6)
   (F)   The maximum tax for garbage collection purposes, be and the same is
hereby established at a rate of 0.20%.
(Prior Code, § 36-2-7)
   (G)   The maximum tax for worker’s compensation and occupational diseases
claims purposes, be and the same is hereby established at a rate to pay for
legal services, purchase insurance, purchase claim services, pay for judgments,
and settlements.
(Prior Code, § 36-2-8)
   (H)   The maximum tax for public park purposes, be and the same is hereby
established at a rate of 0.075%.
(Prior Code, § 36-2-9)
   (I)   The maximum tax for street and bridge purposes, be and the same is
hereby established at a rate of 0.06%.
(Prior Code, § 36-2-10)
Statutory reference:
   Provisions related to division (A), see 65 ILCS 5/8-3-1
   Provisions related to division (B), see 65 ILCS 5/11-1-3
   Provisions related to division (C), see 65 ILCS 5/8-8-8
   Provisions related to division (D), see 40 ILCS 5/21-101 et seq.
   Provisions related to division (E), see 75 ILCS 5/3-1 and 5/3-4
   Provisions related to division (F), see 65 ILCS 5/11-19-4
   Provisions related to division (G), see 745 ILCS 10/9-107
   Provisions related to division (H), see 65 ILCS 5/11-98-1
   Provisions related to division (I), see 65 ILCS 5/11-81-1 and 5/11-81-2
GAS TAX
§ 35.070 IMPOSITION.
   Persons engaged in the business of distributing, supplying, furnishing, or
selling natural gas for use or consumption, and not for resale, within the
corporate limits of the village shall be taxed at a rate of 5% of the gross
receipts therefrom.
(Prior Code, § 36-3-1) (Ord. 94-2, passed 3-7-1994)
Statutory reference:
   Related provisions, see 65 ILCS 5/8-11-2
§ 35.071 EXEMPTION.
   (A)   No tax is imposed by this subchapter with respect to any transaction
in interstate commerce or otherwise to the extent to which such business may
not, under the constitution of this state or any political subdivision thereof.
   (B)   Nor shall any person(s) engaged in the business of distributing,
supplying, furnishing, or selling gas be subject to taxation under the
provisions of this subchapter for such transactions as are or may become
subject to taxation under the provisions of the Municipal Retailers’ Occupation
Tax Act, authorized by 65 ILCS 5/8-11-1.
(Prior Code, § 36-3-2) (Ord. 94-2, passed 3-7-1994)
§ 35.072 EXTENT ON TAXATION.
   Such tax shall be in addition to the payment of money, or value of products
or services furnished to the village by the taxpayer (utility company) as
compensation for the use of its streets, alleys, or other public places, or
installation and maintenance therein, thereon, or thereunder of poles, wires,
pipes, or other equipment used in the operation of the taxpayer’s (utility
company’s) business.
(Prior Code, § 36-3-3) (Ord. 94-2, passed 3-7-1994)
§ 35.073 PUBLIC BODIES EXEMPT FROM TAX.
   (A)   Public bodies shall be exempt from any tax imposed by this subchapter.
   (B)   Taxpayers (utility companies) shall not be taxes for that portion of
their gross receipts which are derived from services provided to such public
bodies; consequently, public bodies shall not be charged on their utility bills
by taxpayers (utility companies) for any tax imposed by this subchapter.
(Prior Code, § 36-3-4) (Ord. 94-2, passed 3-7-1994)
§ 35.074 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   (A)   Gross receipts means the consideration received for the distributing,
supplying, furnishing, or selling gas for use or compensation and not for
resale, except for that consideration received from the village; and for all
services rendered in connection therewith valued in money, whether received in
money or otherwise, including cash, credit, services, and property of every
kind and material and for all services rendered therewith, and shall be
determined without any deduction on account of the cost of the service,
product, or commodity supplied, the cost of materials used, labor or service
cost, or any other expenses whatsoever. Gross receipts does not mean
consideration received from public bodies for gas as provided for by this
section (exempting public bodies from taxation).
   (B)   Person as used in this section means any natural individual, firm,
trust, estate, partnership, association, joint stock company, joint adventure,
corporation, municipal corporation, or political subdivision of this state, or
a receiver, trustee, conservator, or other representative appointed by order of
any court.
   (C)   Public body as used in this subchapter, generally means, but is not
limited to, villages, townships, township districts, fire protection districts,
school districts, or any other public entity as provided for by the Village
President and the Board of Trustees.
(Prior Code, § 36-3-5) (Ord. 94-2, passed 3-7-1994)
§ 35.075 RETURNS SUBMITTED BY VILLAGE TREASURER.
   (A)   On or before April 30, 1994, each taxpayer (utility company) shall
make a return to the Village Treasurer for the previous three months, stating:
      (1)   His or her name;
      (2)   His or her principal place of business;
      (3)   His or her gross receipts during those months upon the basis of
which the tax is imposed;
      (4)   The amount of receipts from public bodies which are exempt from
taxation by this subchapter;
      (5)   Amount of tax; and
      (6)   Such other reasonable and related information as the corporate
authorities may require.
   (B)   On or after the last day of each month, the taxpayer shall pay to the
Village Treasurer the amount of the tax herein imposed; provided that in
connection with any return, the taxpayer (utility company) may, if he or she so
elects, report and pay an amount based upon his or her total billings of
business, subject to the tax during the period of which the return is made
(exclusive of any amounts previously billed) with prompt adjustments of later
payments based upon any difference between such billings and the taxable gross
receipts.
(Prior Code, § 36-3-6) (Ord. 94-2, passed 3-7-1994)
§ 35.076 OVERPAYMENT CREDIT.
   If it shall appear that an amount of tax has been paid which was not due
under the provisions of this subchapter, whether as the result of a mistake or
error of fact or an error of law, then such amount shall be credited against
any tax due, or to become due, under this subchapter from the taxpayer who made
the erroneous payment; provided that no amounts erroneously paid more than
three years prior to the filing of a claim therefor shall be so credited.
(Prior Code, § 36-3-7) (Ord. 94-2, passed 3-7-1994)
§ 35.077 RECOVERY OF TAX.
   No action to recover any amount of tax under the provisions of this
subchapter shall be commenced more than three years after the due date of such
amount.
(Prior Code, § 36-3-8) (Ord. 94-2, passed 3-7-1994)
§ 35.078 EFFECTIVE DATE.
   This subchapter shall take effect after its passage and publication by
posting and newspaper and the tax provided for herein shall be based on the
gross receipts, as herein defined, actually paid to the taxpayer (utility
company) for services billed on all billings rendered on and after October 1,
1993.
(Prior Code, § 36-3-9) (Ord. 94-2, passed 3-7-1994)
UTILITY TAX
§ 35.090 IMPOSITION.
   A tax is imposed on all persons engaged in the following occupations or
privileges.
   (A)   The privilege of using or consuming electricity acquired in a purchase
at retail and used or consumed within the corporate limits of the village at
the following rates, calculated on a monthly basis for each purchaser:
Electricity Consumption (KWH) Rates (per KWH)
Electricity Consumption (KWH) Rates (per KWH)
First 2,000                   $0.61
Next 48,000                   $0.40
Next 50,000                   $0.36
Next 400,000                  $0.35
Next 500,000                  $0.34
Next 2,000,000                $0.32
Next 2,000,000                $0.315
Next 5,000,000                $0.310
Next 10,000,000               $0.305
Over 20,000,000               $0.30
 
   (B)   The rates set forth above became effective on April 1, 2019.
(Prior Code, § 36-4-1) (Ord. 2019-02, passed 2-4-2019)
§ 35.091 EXCEPTIONS.
    (A)   None of the taxes authorized by this subchapter may be imposed with
respect to any transaction in interstate commerce or otherwise to the extent to
which the business or privilege may not, under the Constitution and statutes of
the United States, be made the subject of taxation by this state or any
political subdivision thereof; nor shall any persons engaged in the business of
distributing, supplying, furnishing, or selling or transmitting gas, water, or
electricity, or engaged in the business of transmitting messages, or using or
consuming electricity acquired in a purchase at retail, be subject to taxation
under the provisions of this subchapter for those transactions that are or may
become subject to taxation under the provisions of the Municipal Retailers’
Occupation Tax Act authorized by 65 ILCS 5/8-11-1; nor shall any tax authorized
by this subchapter be imposed upon any person engaged in a business or on any
privilege unless the tax is imposed in like manner and at the same rate upon
all persons engaged in businesses of the same class in the village, whether
privately or municipally owned or operated, or exercising the same privilege
within the village.
   (B)   All accounts for village are exempt from tax imposed in §
35.090.
(Prior Code, § 36-4-2) (Ord. 2019-02, passed 2-4-2019)
§ 35.092 ADDITIONAL TAXES.
   Such tax shall be in addition to other taxes levied upon the taxpayer or its
business.
(Prior Code, § 36-4-3) (Ord. 2019-02, passed 2-4-2019)
§ 35.093 COLLECTION.
   (A)   The tax authorized by this subchapter shall be collected from the
purchaser by the person maintaining a place of business in this state who
delivers the electricity to the purchaser. This tax shall constitute a debt of
the purchaser to the person who delivers the electricity to the purchaser and
if unpaid, is recoverable in the same manner as the original charge for
delivering the electricity. Any tax required to be collected pursuant to this
subchapter and any such tax collected by a person delivering electricity shall
constitute a debt owed to the village by such person delivering the
electricity.
   (B)   Persons delivering electricity shall collect the tax from the
purchaser by adding such tax to the gross charge for delivering the
electricity. Persons delivering electricity shall also be authorized to add to
such gross charge an amount equal to 3% of the tax to reimburse the person
delivering electricity for the expense incurred in keeping records, billing
customers, preparing and filing returns, remitting the tax and supplying data
to the village upon request. If the person delivering electricity fails to
collect the tax from the purchaser, then the purchaser shall be required to pay
the tax directly to the village in the manner prescribed by the village.
Persons delivering electricity who file returns pursuant to this division
shall, at this time of filing such return, pay the village the amount of the
tax collected pursuant to this subchapter.
(Prior Code, § 36-4-4) (Ord. 2019-02, passed 2-4-2019)
§ 35.094 REPORTS TO VILLAGE.
   (A)   On or before the last day of each month, each taxpayer shall make a
return to the village for the preceding month stating:
      (1)   His or her name;
      (2)   His or her principal place of business;
      (3)   His or her gross receipts and/or kilowatt-hour usage during the
month upon the basis of which the tax is imposed;
      (4)   Amount of tax; and
      (5)   Such other reasonable and related information as the corporate
authorities may require.
   (B)   The taxpayer making the return herein provided for shall, at the time
of making such return, pay to the village, the amount of tax herein imposed;
provided that in connection with any return, the taxpayer may, if he or she so
elects, report and pay an amount based upon his or her total billings of
business subject to the tax during the period for which the return is made
(exclusive of any amounts previously billed) with prompt adjustments of later
payments based upon any differences between such billings, and the taxable
gross receipts.
(Prior Code, § 36-4-5) (Ord. 2019-02, passed 2-4-2019)
§ 35.095 CREDIT FOR OVER-PAYMENT.
   (A)   If it shall appear that an amount of tax has been paid which was not
due under the provisions of this subchapter, whether as the result of a mistake
of fact or an error of law, then such amount shall be credited against any tax
due, or to become due, under this subchapter from the taxpayer who made the
erroneous payment; provided that no amounts erroneously paid more than three
years prior to the filing of a claim therefor shall be so credited.
   (B)   No action to recover any amount of tax due under the provisions of
this subchapter shall be commenced more than three years after the due date of
such amount.
(Prior Code, § 36-4-6) (Ord. 2019-02, passed 2-4-2019)
HOTEL OR MOTEL ROOM TAX
§ 35.110 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   HOTEL ROOM or MOTEL ROOM. A room within a structure offered for rental on a
daily basis and containing facilities for sleeping. One room offered for rental
with or without an adjoining bath shall be considered as a single HOTEL OR
MOTEL ROOM. The number of HOTEL OR MOTEL ROOMS within a suite shall be computed
on the basis of those rooms utilized for the purpose of sleeping.
   OWNER. Any person having an ownership interest in or conducting the
operation of a hotel or motel room or receiving the consideration for the
rental of such hotel or motel room.
   PERSON. Any natural person, trustee, court appointed represented, syndicate,
association, partnership, firm, club, company, corporation, municipal
corporation, district, or other political subdivision, contractor, supplier,
vendor, vendee, operator, user, or owners or any officers, agents, employees,
or other representative, acting either for himself or herself or for any other
person in any capacity, or any other entity recognized by law as the subject of
rights and duties. The masculine, feminine, singular, or plural is included in
any circumstances.
(Prior Code, § 36-5-1) (Ord. 04-10, passed 7-19-2004)
§ 35.111 IMPOSITION.
   (A)   There is hereby levied and imposed a tax of 3.5% of the rent charged
for the privilege and use of renting a hotel or motel room within the village
for each 24-hour period or any portion thereof for which a daily room charge is
made; provided, however, that the tax shall not be levied and imposed upon any
person who rents a hotel or motel room for more than 30 consecutive days or to
a person who works and lives in the same hotel or motel.
   (B)   The ultimate incidence of and liability for payment of said tax is to
be borne by the person who seeks the privilege of occupying the hotel or motel
room, said person hereinafter referred to as “renter.”
   (C)   The tax herein shall be paid in addition to any and all other taxes
and charges. It shall be the duty of the owner of every hotel or motel to
secure said tax from the renter of the motel or hotel room and to pay over to
the Village Treasurer or any authorized representative of the village said tax
under procedures prescribed by the Village Treasurer, or as otherwise provided
in this subchapter.
   (D)   Every person required to collect the tax levied by this subchapter
shall secure said tax from the renter at the time he or she collects the rental
payment for the hotel or motel room. Upon the invoice receipt or other
statement or memorandum of the rent given to the renter at the time of payment
the amount due under the tax provided in this subchapter shall be stated
separately on said documents.
(Prior Code, § 36-5-2) (Ord. 04-10, passed 7-19-2004)
§ 35.112 BOOKS AND RECORDS.
   (A)   The Village Treasurer or authorized representative, may enter the
premises of any hotel or motel for inspection and examination of records in
order to effectuate the proper administration of this subchapter, and to assure
the enforcement of the collection of the tax imposed. It shall be unlawful for
any person to prevent, hinder, or interfere with the Village Treasurer or
authorized deputy or representative in the discharge of their duties in the
performance of this subchapter.
   (B)   It shall be the duty of every owner to keep accurate and complete
books and records to which the Village Treasurer, or authorized representative,
shall at all times have full access, which records shall include a daily sheet
showing:
      (1)   The number of hotel or motel rooms rented during the 24-hour
period, including multiple rentals of the same hotel or motel room where such
shall occur; and
      (2)   The actual hotel or motel tax receipts collected for the date in
question.
(Prior Code, § 36-5-3) (Ord. 04-10, passed 7-19-2004)
§ 35.113 TRANSMITTAL OF TAX REVENUE.
   (A)   Commencing on January 1, 2005, the owner or owners of each hotel or
motel within the village shall file tax returns showing tax receipts received
with respect to each hotel and motel room and the returns to be filed on a
quarter-annual basis, with the return for January, February, and March of a
given year being due by April 30 of such year; with the return for April, May,
and June of a given year being due by July 31 of such year; with the return for
July, August, and September of a given year being due by October 31 of such
year; and with the return for October, November, and December of a given year
being due by January 31 of the following year.
   (B)   Commencing on September 1, 2004, the tax return and payment for such
period shall be due on or before October 31, 2004. Thereafter reporting periods
and taxes shall be paid in accordance with the provisions of this subchapter.
At the time of filing said tax returns, the owner shall pay to the Village
Treasurer all taxes due for the period to which the tax return applies.
   (C)   If for any reason any tax is not paid when due, a penalty at the rate
of 1.5% per 30-day period, or portion thereof, from the date of delinquency
shall be added and collected.
(Prior Code, § 36-5-4) (Ord. 04-10, passed 7-19-2004)
§ 35.114 COLLECTION.
    Whenever any person shall fail to pay any tax as herein provided, the
Corporation Counsel shall, upon the request of the Board of Trustees, bring or
cause to be brought an action to enforce the payment of said tax on behalf of
the village in any court of competent jurisdiction.
(Prior Code, § 36-5-5) (Ord. 04-10, passed 7-19-2004)
§ 35.115 PROCEEDS OF TAX AND FINES.
   (A)   All proceeds resulting from the imposition of the tax under this
subchapter, including penalties, shall be applied as follows:
      (1)   Five percent of the gross tax revenue collected each year shall be
appropriated for and directed to the office of the Commissioner of Accounts and
Finances to defray the costs of administering and processing the imposition,
application, and collection of the tax; and
      (2)   All the rest, residue, and remainder of the Tax Revenue collected
each year, including that portion remaining in the Village Hotel-Motel Use Tax
Fund, shall be paid into the treasury of the village into a special fund to be
used and applied for the promotion and development of tourism and conventions
in the village.
   (B)   There shall be a village commission established entitled the “Tourism
and Convention Board.” The primary responsibility of the Tourism and Convention
Board is to convene as often as necessary and make recommendations to the Board
of Trustees as to the orderly disbursements of funds collected. The Tourism and
Convention Board will include the Mayor, Finance Commissioner, President of the
Village Chamber of Commerce, one representative from each motel containing more
than 80 rooms and one at large member representing the remaining smaller
motels.
(Prior Code, § 36-5-6) (Ord. 04-10, passed 7-19-2004)
SIMPLIFIED TELECOMMUNICATIONS TAX
§ 35.130 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   AMOUNT PAID. The amount charged to the taxpayer’s service address in this
village regardless of where such amount is billed or paid.
   DEPARTMENT. The Illinois Department of Revenue.
   GROSS CHARGE. The amount paid for the act or privilege of originating or
receiving telecommunications in the village and for all services and equipment
provided in connection therewith by a retailer, valued in money whether paid in
money or otherwise, including cash, credits, services, and property of every
kind or nature, and shall be determined without any deduction on account of the
cost of such telecommunications, the cost of the materials used, labor or
service costs, or any other expense whatsoever. In case credit is extended, the
amount thereof shall be included only as and when paid.
      (1)   GROSS CHARGES for private line service shall include charges
imposed at each channel termination point within the municipality and charges
for that portion of the inter-office channels provided within the village.
      (2)   Charges for that portion of the inter-office channel connecting two
or more channel termination points, one or more of which is located within the
jurisdictional boundary of the village, shall be determined by the retailer by
multiplying an amount equal to the total charge for the inter-office channel by
a fraction, the numerator of which is the number of channel termination points
that are located within the jurisdictional boundary of the village and the
denominator of which is the total number of channel termination points
connected by the inter-office channel.
      (3)   However, GROSS CHARGE shall not include any of the following:
         (a)   Any amounts added to a purchaser’s bill because of a charge made
pursuant to:
            1.   The tax imposed by this subchapter;
            2.   The tax imposed by the Telecommunications Excise Tax Act,
being 35 ILCS 630/1 et seq.;
            3.   The tax imposed by § 4251 of the Internal Revenue Code, being
25 U.S.C. § 4251;
            4.   Emergency 911 surcharges; or
            5.   Charges added to customers’ bills pursuant to the provisions
of §§ 9-221 or 9-222 of the Public Utilities Act, being 220 ILCS 5/9-221 or 5/
9-222, as amended, or any similar charges added to customers’ bills by
retailers who are not subject to rate regulation by the State Commerce
Commission for the purpose of recovering any of the tax liabilities or other
amounts specified in those provisions of the Public Utilities Act.
         (b)   Charges for a sent collect telecommunication received outside of
such municipality;
         (c)   Charges for leased time on equipment or charges for the storage
of data or information for subsequent retrieval or the processing of data or
information intended to change its form or content. Such equipment includes,
but is not limited to, the use of calculators, computers, data processing
equipment, tabulating equipment, or accounting equipment and also includes the
usage of computers under a time-sharing agreement;
         (d)   Charges for customer equipment, including such equipment that is
leased or rented by the customer from any source, wherein such charges are
desegregated and separately identified from other charges;
         (e)   Charges to business enterprises certified as exempt under § 9-
222.1 of the Public Utilities Act, being 220 ILCS 5/9-222.1, to the extent of
such exemption and during the period of time specified by the Department of
Commerce and Economic Opportunity;
         (f)   Charges for telecommunications and all services and equipment
provided in connection therewith between a parent corporation and its wholly
owned subsidiaries or between wholly owned subsidiaries when the tax imposed
under this subchapter has already been paid to a retailer and only to the
extent that the charges between the parent corporation and wholly owned
subsidiaries or between wholly owned subsidiaries represent expense allocation
between the corporations and not the generation of profit for the corporation
rendering such service;
         (g)   Bad debts (BAD DEBT means any portion of a debt that is related
to a sale at retail for which GROSS CHARGES are not otherwise deductible or
excludable that has become worthless or uncollectible, as determined under
applicable federal income tax standards; if the portion of the debt deemed to
be bad is subsequently paid, the retailer shall report and pay the tax on that
portion during the reporting period in which the payment is made);
         (h)   Charges paid by inserting coins in coin-operated
telecommunication devices;
         (i)   Amounts paid by telecommunications retailers under the
Telecommunications Infrastructure Maintenance Fee Act, being 35 ILCS 635/1; and
         (j)   Charges for nontaxable services or telecommunications if:
            1.   Those charges are aggregated with other charges for
telecommunications that are taxable;
            2.   Those charges are not separately stated on the customer bill
or invoice; and
            3.   The retailer can reasonable identify the nontaxable charges on
the retailer’s books and records kept in the regular’ course of business. If
the nontaxable charges cannot reasonably be identified, the GROSS CHARGE from
the sale of both taxable and nontaxable services of telecommunications billed
on a combined basis shall be attributed to the taxable services or
telecommunications. The burden of proving nontaxable charges shall be on the
retailer of the telecommunications.
   INTERSTATE TELECOMMUNICATIONS. All telecommunications that either originate
or terminate outside this state.
   INTRASTATE TELECOMMUNICATIONS. All telecommunications that originate and
terminate within this state.
   PERSON. Any natural individual, firm, trust, estate, partnership,
association joint stock company joint venture, corporation, limited liability
company, or a receiver, trustee, guardian, or other representative appointed by
order of any court, the federal and state governments, including state
universities created by statute, or any city, town, county, or other political
subdivision of this state.
   PURCHASE AT RETAIL. The acquisition, consumption, or use of
telecommunications through a sale at retail.
   RETAILER.
      (1)   Includes every person engaged in the business of making sales at
retail as defined in this section. The Department may, in its discretion, upon
application, authorize the collection of the tax hereby imposed by any retailer
not maintaining a place of business within this state, who, to the satisfaction
of the Department, furnishes adequate security to ensure collection and payment
of the tax. Such RETAILER shall be issued, without charge, a permit to collect
such tax.
      (2)   When so authorized, it shall be the duty of such RETAILER to
collect the tax upon all of the gross charges for telecommunications in this
state in the same manner and subject to the same requirements as a retailer
maintaining a place of business within this state.
      (3)   The permit may be revoked by the Department at its discretion.
   RETAILER MAINTAINING A PLACE OF BUSINESS IN THIS STATE. Includes any
retailer having or maintaining within this state, directly or by a subsidiary,
an office, distribution facilities, transmission facilities, sales office,
warehouse, or other place of business, or any agent or other representative
operating within this state under the authority of the retailer or its
subsidiary, irrespective of whether such place of business or agent or other
representative is located here permanently or temporarily, or whether such
retailer or subsidiary is licensed to do business in the state; or any like
term.
   SALE AT RETAIL. The transmitting, supplying, or furnishing of
telecommunications and all services and equipment provided in connection
therewith for a consideration, to persons other than the federal and state
governments, and state universities created by statute and other than between a
parent corporation and its wholly owned subsidiaries, or between wholly owned
subsidiaries for their use or consumption and not for resale.
   SERVICE ADDRESS.
      (1)   The location of telecommunications equipment from which
telecommunications services are originated or at which telecommunications
services are received by a taxpayer.
      (2)   In the event this may not be a defined location, as in the case of
mobile phones, paging systems, and maritime systems, SERVICE ADDRESS means the
customer’s place of primary use as defined in the Mobile Telecommunications
Sourcing Conformity Act, being 35 ILCS 638/1. For air-to-ground systems and the
like, SERVICE ADDRESS shall mean the location of a taxpayer’s primary use of
the telecommunications equipment as defined by telephone number, authorization
code, or location in the state where bills are sent.
   TAXPAYER. A person who individually, or through his or her agents,
employees, or permittees, engages in the act or privilege of originating or
receiving telecommunications in a municipality and who incurs a tax liability
as authorized by this subchapter.
   TELECOMMUNICATIONS. In addition to the meaning ordinarily and popularly
ascribed to it, includes, without limitation, messages or information
transmitted through use of local, toll, and wide area telephone service,
private line services, channel services, telegraph services, teletypewriter,
computer exchange services, cellular mobile telecommunications service,
specialized mobile radio, stationary two-way radio, paging service, or any
other form of mobile and portable one-way or two-way communications, or any
other transmission of messages or information by electronic or similar means,
between or among points by wire, cable, fiber optics, laser, microwave, radio,
satellite, or similar facilities.
      (1)   As used in this subchapter, PRIVATE LINE means a dedicated non-
traffic sensitive service for a single customer, that entitles the customer to
exclusive or priority use of a communications channel or group of channels,
from one or more specified locations to one or more other specified locations.
      (2)   TELECOMMUNICATIONS shall not include value added services in which
computer processing applications are used to act on the form, content, code,
and protocol of the information for purposes other than transmission.
      (3)   TELECOMMUNICATIONS shall not include purchases of
telecommunications by a telecommunications service provider for use as a
component part of the service provided by such provider to the ultimate retail
consumer who originates or terminates the taxable end-to-end communications.
Carrier access charges, right of access charges, charges for use of inter-
company facilities, and all TELECOMMUNICATIONS resold in the subsequent
provision of, used as a component of, or integrated into, end-to-end
telecommunications service shall be non-taxable as sales for resale.
      (4)   Prepaid telephone calling arrangements shall not be considered
TELECOMMUNICATIONS subject to the tax imposed under this subchapter. For
purposes of this section, “prepaid telephone calling arrangements” means that
term as defined in § 2-27 of the Retailers’ Occupation Tax Act, being 35 ILCS
120/2-27.
(Prior Code, § 36-6-1) (Ord. 2019-01, passed 2-4-2019)
§ 35.131 IMPOSITION.
   A tax is hereby imposed upon any and all the following acts or privileges.
   (A)   The act or privilege of originating in the village or receiving in the
village intrastate telecommunications by a person at a rate of 6% of the gross
charge for such telecommunications purchased at retail from a retailer. To
prevent actual multi-municipal taxation of the act or privilege that is subject
to taxation under this section, any taxpayer, upon proof that the taxpayer has
paid a tax in another municipality on that event, shall be allowed a credit
against any tax enacted pursuant to or authorized by this section to the extent
of the amount of the tax properly due and paid in the village that was not
previously allowed as a credit against any other municipal tax.
   (B)   (1)   The act or privilege of originating in the village or receiving
in the village interstate telecommunications by a person at a rate of 6.0% of
the gross charge for such telecommunications purchased at retail from a
retailer.
      (2)   To prevent actual multi-state or multi-municipal taxation of the
act or privilege that is subject to taxation under this section, any taxpayer,
upon proof that the taxpayer has paid a tax in another state or municipality in
the state on such event, shall be allowed a credit against any tax enacted
pursuant to or authorized by this section to the extent of the amount of such
tax properly due and paid in such other state or such tax properly due and paid
in another municipality in this state which was not previously allowed as a
credit against any other state or local tax in this state.
   (C)   The tax imposed by this subchapter is not imposed on such act or
privilege to the extent such act or privilege may not, under the Constitution
and statutes of the United States, be made the subject of taxation by the
village.
(Prior Code, § 36-6-2) (Ord. 2019-01, passed 2-4-2019)
§ 35.132 COLLECTION OF TAX BY RETAILERS.
   (A)   The tax authorized by this subchapter shall be collected from the
taxpayer by a retailer maintaining a place of business in this state and shall
be remitted by such retailer to the Department of Revenue. Any tax required to
be collected pursuant to or as authorized by this subchapter and any such tax
collected by such retailer and required to be remitted to the Department of
Revenue shall constitute a debt owed by the retailer to the state. Retailers
shall collect the tax from the taxpayer by adding the tax to the gross charge
for the act or privilege of originating or receiving telecommunications when
sold for use, in the manner prescribed by the Department of Revenue. The tax
authorized by this subchapter shall constitute a debt of the taxpayer to the
retailer until paid, and, if unpaid, is recoverable at law in the same manner
as the original charge for such sale at retail. If the retailer fails to
collect the tax from the taxpayer, then the taxpayer shall be required to pay
the tax directly to the Department of Revenue in the manner provided by the
Department of Revenue.
   (B)   Whenever possible, the tax authorized by this subchapter shall, when
collected, be stated as a distinct item separate and apart from the gross
charge for telecommunications.
(Prior Code, § 36-6-3) (Ord. 2019-01, passed 2-4-2019)
§ 35.133 RETURNERS TO DEPARTMENT.
   On or before the last day of August, 2019, and on or before the last day of
every month thereafter, the tax imposed under this subchapter on
telecommunication retailers shall be returned with appropriate forms and
information as required by the Department of Revenue pursuant to the State
Simplified Municipal Telecommunications Tax Act (35 ILCS 636/5-50) and any
accompanying rules and regulations created by the Department to implement the
Act.
(Prior Code, § 36-6-4) (Ord. 2019-01, passed 2-4-2019)
§ 35.134 RESELLERS.
   (A)   If a person who originates or receives telecommunications claims to be
a reseller of such telecommunications, such person shall apply to the
Department of Revenue for a resale number. Such applicant shall state facts
which will show the Department of Revenue why such applicant is not liable for
the tax authorized by this subchapter on any of such purchases and shall
furnish such additional information as the Department of Revenue may reasonably
require.
   (B)   Upon approval of the application, the Department of Revenue shall
assign a resale number to the applicant and shall certify such number to the
applicant. The Department of Revenue may cancel any number which is obtained
through misrepresentation, or which is used to send or receive such
telecommunication tax-free when such actions in fact are not for resale, or
which no longer applies because of the person’s having discontinued the making
of resales.
   (C)   Except as provided in divisions (A) and (B) above, the act or
privilege of originating or receiving telecommunications in this state shall
not be made tax-free on the ground of being a sale for resale unless the person
has an active resale number from the Department of Revenue and furnishes that
number to the retailer in connection with certifying to the retailer that any
sale to such person is non-taxable because of being a sale for resale.
(Prior Code, § 36-6-5) (Ord. 2019-01, passed 2-4-2019)
§ 35.135 EFFECTIVE DATE.
   This subchapter shall be in full force and effect from and after its passage
and approval and publication as required by law; provided, however, that the
tax provided for herein took effect for all bills issued on or after March 1,
2019. Copies of this subchapter were certified and sent to the Department of
Revenue prior to September, 2019.
(Ord. 2019-01, passed 2-4-2019)
CANNABIS RETAILERS’ OCCUPATION TAX
§ 35.150 IMPOSITION; RATE.
   (A)   A tax is hereby imposed upon all persons engaged in the business of
selling cannabis, other than cannabis purchased under the Compassionate Use of
Medical Cannabis Program Act, being 410 ILCS 130/1, at retail in the village at
the rate of 3% of the gross receipts from these sales made in the course of
that business.
   (B)   The imposition of this tax is in accordance with the provisions of 65
ILCS 5/8-11-23.
(Ord. 2019-08, passed 10-21-2019)
§ 35.151 COLLECTION OF TAX BY RETAILERS.
   (A)   (1)   The tax imposed by this subchapter shall be remitted by such
retailer to the State Department of Revenue.
      (2)   Any tax required to be collected pursuant to or as authorized by
this subchapter and any such tax collected by such retailer and required to be
remitted to the Department of Revenue shall constitute a debt owed by the
retailer to the state.
      (3)   Retailers may reimburse themselves for their seller’s tax liability
hereunder by separately stating that tax as an additional charge, which charge
may be stated in combination, in a single amount, with any state tax that
sellers are required to collect.
   (B)   The taxes hereby imposed, and all civil penalties that may be assessed
as an incident thereto, shall be collected and enforced by the Department of
Revenue. The Department of Revenue shall have full power to administer and
enforce the provisions of this subchapter.
(Ord. 2019-08, passed 10-21-2019)
§ 35.152 EFFECTIVE DATE.
   This subchapter shall be in full force and effect from and after its passage
and approval and publication as required by law; provided, however, that the
tax provided for herein took effect for all sales on or after January 1, 2020,
or as soon thereafter as the State Department of Revenue began administering
the Municipal Cannabis Retailers’ Occupation Tax Law, being 65 ILCS 5/8-11-23.
Copies of this subchapter were certified and sent to the State Department of
Revenue prior to June 1, 2020, or as soon thereafter as shall be accepted by
the State Department of Revenue.
(Ord. 2019-08, passed 10-21-2019)
INVESTMENT POLICY
§ 35.165 SCOPE; ADOPTION AND MODIFICATION.
   (A)   It is the policy of the village to invest public funds in a manner
which will provide the highest investment return with the maximum security
while meeting the daily cash flow demands of the village and conforming to all
state and local statutes governing the investment of public funds.
(Prior Code, § 22-4-1)
   (B)   This policy includes all public funds of the village.
(Prior Code, § 22-4-2)
   (C)   The investment policy has been adopted by ordinance. The policy shall
be reviewed on an annual basis by the Village Treasurer, and any modifications
made thereto shall be made by ordinance.
(Prior Code, § 22-4-16)
§ 35.166 PRUDENCE.
   (A)   Investments shall be made with judgment and care, under circumstances
then prevailing, which persons of prudence, discretion, and intelligence
exercise in the management of their own affairs, not for speculation, but for
investment, considering the probable safety of their capital, as well as the
probable income to be derived.
   (B)   The standard of prudence to be used by investment officials shall be
the prudent person standard and shall be applied in the context of managing an
overall portfolio.
(Prior Code, § 22-4-3)
§ 35.167 OBJECTIVE.
   (A)   The primary objective, in order of priority, shall be:
      (1)   Legality. Conformance with federal, state, and other legal
requirements;
      (2)   Safety. Preservation of capital and protection of investment
principal;
      (3)   Liquidity. Maintenance of sufficient liquidity to meet operating
requirements; and
      (4)   Yield. Attainment of market rates of return.
   (B)   The portfolio should be reviewed periodically as to its effectiveness
in meeting the village’s needs for safety, liquidity, rate of return,
diversification, and its general performance.
(Prior Code, § 22-4-4)
§ 35.168 DELEGATION OF AUTHORITY.
   Management and administrative responsibility for the investment program is
hereby delegated to the Village Treasurer who may establish written procedures
for the operation of the investment program.
(Prior Code, § 22-4-5)
§ 35.169 ETHICS AND CONFLICTS OF INTEREST.
   Officers and employees involved in the investment process shall refrain from
personal business activity that could conflict with the proper execution and
management of the investment program, or that could impair their ability to
make impartial decisions.
(Prior Code, § 22-4-6)
§ 35.170 AUTHORIZED FINANCIAL DEALERS AND INSTITUTIONS.
   The Village Treasurer will maintain a list of financial institutions
authorized to provide investment services. In addition, a list will also be
maintained of approved security brokers/dealers selected by creditworthiness.
(Prior Code, § 22-4-7)
§ 35.171 AUTHORIZED AND SUITABLE INVESTMENTS.
   Investments may be made in any type of security allowed for in state
statutes regarding the investment of public funds. Investments shall be made
that reflect the cash flow needs of the fund type being invested.
(Prior Code, § 22-4-8)
§ 35.172 COLLATERIZATION.
   (A)   Collateralization may be required, at the discretion of the village,
on all funds held in banks or savings and loans above the insured limits
provided by the FDIC or FSLIC.
   (B)   In order to anticipate market changes and provide a level of security
for all funds, the collateralization level will be a minimum of 102% of market
value of principal and accrued interest.
(Prior Code, § 22-4-9)
§ 35.173 SAFEKEEPING AND CUSTODY.
   (A)   All security transactions, including collateral for repurchase
agreements, entered into by the village, shall be conducted on a delivery-
versus-payment (DVP) basis.
   (B)   Securities will be held by an independent third party custodian
designated by the Village Treasurer and evidenced by safekeeping receipts and a
written custodial agreement.
(Prior Code, § 22-4-10)
§ 35.174 DIVERSIFICATION.
   The village shall diversify its investments to the best of its ability based
on the type of funds invested and the cash flow needs of those funds.
Diversification can be by type of investment, number of institutions invested
in, and length of maturity.
(Prior Code, § 22-4-11)
§ 35.175 MAXIMUM MATURITIES.
   To the extent possible, the village shall attempt to match its investments
with anticipated cash flow requirements. Unless matched to a specific cash
flow, the village will not directly invest in securities maturing more than two
years from the date of purchase. Reserve funds may be invested in securities
exceeding two years if the maturity of such investments are made to coincide as
nearly as practicable with the expected use of the funds.
(Prior Code, § 22-4-12)
§ 35.176 INTERNAL CONTROL.
   (A)   The Village Treasurer is responsible for establishing and maintaining
an internal control structure designed to ensure that the assets of the village
are protected from loss, theft or misuse. The internal control structure shall
be designed to provide reasonable assurance that these objectives are met.
   (B)   The internal controls shall address the following points:
      (1)   Control of collusion;
      (2)   Separation of transaction authority from accounting;
      (3)   Custodial safekeeping; and
      (4)   Written confirmation of telephone transactions for investments and
wire transfers.
(Prior Code, § 22-4-13)
§ 35.177 PERFORMANCE STANDARDS.
   The investment portfolio will be managed in accordance with the parameters
specified within this policy. The portfolio should obtain a comparable rate of
return during a market/economic environment of stable interest rates. Portfolio
performance should be compared to benchmarks with similar maturity, liquidity
and credit quality as the portfolio maintained by the State Public Treasurer’s
Investment Pool (IPUP).
(Prior Code, § 22-4-14)
§ 35.178 REPORTING.
   The Village Treasurer shall prepare an investment report at least monthly.
The report should be provided to the Board of Trustees and available upon
request. The report should be in a format suitable for review by the general
public. An annual report should also be provided to the Board of Trustees. A
statement of the market value of the portfolio shall be issued to the Board of
Trustees quarterly.
(Prior Code, § 22-4-15)
§ 35.999 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which no
specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to §
10.999 of this code of ordinances.
   (B)   Any taxpayer (utility company) who fails to make a return, or who
makes a fraudulent return, or who willfully violates any other provision of §§
35.070 through
35.078, is guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be fined
not less than $100, nor more than $750 and, in addition, shall be liable in a
civil action for the amount of tax due.
(Prior Code, § 36-3-10)
   (C)   Any taxpayer who fails to make a return, or who make a fraudulent
return, or who willfully violates any other provision of §§
35.090 through
35.095, is guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be fined
not less than $100 nor more than $500 in addition, shall be liable in a civil
action for the amount of tax due.
(Prior Code, § 35-4-7)
   (D)    Any person, firm or corporation found willfully guilty of failing to
pay, collect, report, and transmit said hotel or motel tax to the Village
Treasurer in accordance with the terms of §§
35.110 through
35.115 shall, except when otherwise specifically provided, upon conviction
thereof, be punished by a fine not to exceed $500 for each offense. A separate
and distinct offense shall be regarded as committed each day upon which said
person shall continue any such violation, or permit any such violation to exist
after notification thereof.
(Prior Code, § 35-5-7)
(Ord. 94-2, passed 3-7-1994; Ord. 96-5, passed 1-15-1996; Ord. 04-10, passed 7-
19-2004; Ord. 2019-02, passed 2-4-2019)
Statutory reference:
   Related provisions, 65 ILCS 5/8-11-2
TITLE V: PUBLIC WORKS
   Chapter
      
50.   UTILITIES GENERALLY
      
51.   SOLID WASTE
      
52.   POLLUTION CONTROL
      
53.   WATER
      
54.   SEWAGE
CHAPTER 50: UTILITIES GENERALLY
Section
Management
   
50.001   Department established
   
50.002   Superintendent; powers and duties
Regulations and Payment Procedures
   
50.015   Contract
   
50.016   Consumer lists
   
50.017   Liability for charges
   
50.018   Estimated charge
   
50.019   Utility service fees mandatory
   
50.020   Utility deposits
   
50.021   Utility and trash rates
 
   
50.999   Penalty
MANAGEMENT
§ 50.001 DEPARTMENT ESTABLISHED.
   (A)   There shall be an executive department of the village known as the
“Utilities Department.” The department shall be under the general supervision
of the Superintendent of Utilities, and the Department shall consist of such
other officers and employees and may be, from time to time, lawfully provided
by the President and the Board of Trustees. The Superintendent of the Utilities
Department shall hereinafter be known as the “Superintendent.”
   (B)   The Mayor shall appoint the Superintendent with the advice and consent
of the Board of Trustees. The Superintendent shall not have a fixed term, but
shall serve at the pleasure of, and subject to removal by the Mayor.
   (C)   Subject to the supervision of the Mayor and the Board of Trustees, the
Utilities Department shall have supervision, management, and control of the
maintenance, enlargement, and operation of the combined water and sewer system,
the securing and selling of water, the safe, healthy, and lawful disposal of
sewage and waste, and all matters and all things connected with the operation,
maintenance, and extension of the waterworks system and sewage system and the
selling of water therefrom and the preserving of the property belonging to the
combined Utilities Department. In addition, the Superintendent shall have
supervision, management, and control of the village’s garbage and trash
collection and disposal system.
(Prior Code, § 38-1-1)
§ 50.002 SUPERINTENDENT; POWERS AND DUTIES.
   (A)   Powers and responsibilities. Subject to the general direction of the
Mayor and the Board of Trustees, the Superintendent shall have the general
responsibility and control of the Utilities Department and shall see that the
objects and purposes of this code as well as those of the Utilities Department
are carried out, and that the water and sewer system, as well as the garbage
collection and trash and disposal system, are conducted on an economical,
businesslike basis, and for this purpose it shall be the duty of the
Superintendent and all of the officers and employees of the Utilities
Department to enforce all of the provisions of this code and to observe, obey,
and carry out all of the orders and directions of the Mayor and the Board of
Trustees. It shall further be the duty of the Superintendent to see that such
orders and directions are faithfully observed, carried out, and obeyed. The
Superintendent shall, when requested by the Mayor or the Water, Sewer, Garbage,
and Trash Committee, report upon the condition of the Utilities Department and
all matters relating thereto.
   (B)   Duties. In addition to the duties and obligations imposed upon the
Superintendent herein, the Superintendent shall have the following duties.
      (1)   Monthly report. The Superintendent shall prepare, or cause to be
prepared, each month a full and complete report of all claims, salaries, and
expenses incurred by said Department in the course of its operations, if
requested by the Board of Trustees or its designated representative. This
report shall be signed by the Superintendent and submitted to the Board of
Trustees.
      (2)   Quarterly report. The Superintendent, if requested, shall prepare,
or cause to be prepared, quarterly reports to the Board of Trustees showing the
costs of water and costs of distribution thereof, the cost of sewage disposal,
the costs of garbage collection and disposal, as well as all salaries and other
operating expenses incurred in the operation of the Utilities Department.
      (3)   Annual report. The Superintendent, if requested, shall present to
the Board of Trustees on or before January 2 in each year, a complete and
detailed report of the financial condition and property interest of the
Utilities Department. This report shall detail all transactions, revenues
received from any source, costs of repairs, maintenance, as well as the present
condition of said Utilities Department. This report shall further include an
estimate of sum, if any, will be needed by said Utilities Department, in
addition to the revenues thereof, to meet the payment of interest or maturing
indebtedness of the Utilities Department. The report shall also include an
estimate and recommendation of what, if any, plant improvements or extensions
or expansions will be necessary in the following 12 months for the proper
maintenance of said Utilities Department.
      (4)   Records. The Superintendent shall keep, or cause to be kept, full
and complete records detailing how much water each piece of property consumes
and the amount charged for both water consumption and sewer use. The
Superintendent shall have the responsibility of transmitting this information,
as well as all other information necessary, to the Village Clerk so that the
Village Clerk may perform her duties, as provided for herein, of collecting the
proper sums for consumers. The Superintendent shall further maintain a complete
and correct map or profile of all water and sewer lines now or hereinafter
laid, showing their location, connections, valves, hydrants, shut-offs, as well
as any other necessary information. Any and all records, books of account,
maps, or profiles shall be opened and availed at all times for inspection by
the Mayor and the Board of Trustees. It shall further be the duty of the
Superintendent to maintain a record of each permit, as herein required, showing
the size of the meter and the amount of all charges and fees assessed for
connection to said system.
      (5)   Recommendations regarding employees. The Superintendent shall
submit to the Mayor his or her recommendation as to the employees necessary,
from time to time, to be employed in and about the Utilities Department. The
compensation to be paid to these employees shall be fixed by the Mayor and
Board of Trustees.
      (6)   Compliance with federal and state laws. It shall be the
responsibility of the Superintendent to ensure that all federal and state laws
and regulations are complied with, including those of the United States
Environmental Protection Agency and the State Environmental Protection Agency.
The Superintendent shall prepare, as is necessary from time to time, proposed
guidelines, rules, regulations, and standards for consideration by the Board of
Trustees to ensure that all these federal and state laws and regulations are
complied with.
      (7)   Billing procedures. The Superintendent shall cooperate fully with
the Village Clerk in assisting the Village Clerk in the billing of customers
and performance of his or her duties as provided for herein.
      (8)   Recommendations for ordinances. The Superintendent shall prepare as
from time to time needed rules and regulations for approval by the Board of
Trustees as provided for herein, consistent with this section for connection to
the waterworks and sewage system. The rules and regulations shall specify the
type and sizes of pipes and all of the other appurtenances and extensions
thereto and ensure that all proposed rules and regulations comply with federal
and state laws and guidelines.
(Prior Code, § 38-1-2) (Ord. 618, passed 8-6-1990)
REGULATIONS AND PAYMENT PROCEDURES
§ 50.015 CONTRACT.
   (A)   Customer accepts service. The rates, rules, and regulations contained
in this title shall constitute and be considered a part of the contract with
every person, company, or corporation who is supplied with water and sewer
services from the waterworks and sewerage system and every person, company, or
corporation, hereinafter called a “customer,” who accepts and uses village
water and sewer services shall be held to have consented to be bound thereby.
   (B)   Not liable for interrupted service. The Utilities Department shall
endeavor at all times to provide a regular and uninterrupted supply of service,
but in case the supply of service shall be interrupted, irregular, defective,
or fail from causes beyond its control, or through ordinary negligence of
employees, servants, or agents, the Utilities Department shall not be liable
therefor.
   (C)   Using services without paving. Any person using utility services from
the village without paying therefor, or who shall be found guilty of breaking
the seal of any meter or appurtenances, or bypass any meter, shall be guilty of
violating this code, and, upon conviction, shall be fined a sum as provided in
§
10.999.
   (D)   Destroying property. Any person found guilty of defacing, tampering,
injuring, or destroying, or in any manner limiting the use or availability of
any meter or any property of the waterworks system and sewerage system, or
erecting signs on the property of the Utilities Department without permission,
shall, upon conviction for such act, be fined as provided in §
10.999.
   (E)   Service obtained by fraud.
      (1)   All contracts for water and sewer services must be made in the name
of the head of the household, firm, or corporation using the established
spelling of that person’s or firm’s name. Attempts to obtain service by the use
of other names, different spellings, or by substituting other persons or firms
will be considered a subterfuge and service will be denied.
      (2)   If service has been discontinued because of nonpayment of bills, or
any unpaid obligation and service has again been obtained through subterfuge,
misrepresentation, or fraud, that service will be promptly disconnected and the
whole or such part of the advanced payment as may be necessary to satisfy the
unpaid obligation shall be retained by the village and credited to the
appropriate account.
   (F)   Failure to receive bill. Failure to receive a bill shall not excuse a
customer from his or her obligation to pay within the time specified. Should
the Utilities Department be unable to bill a customer for services used during
any month, the following billing shall include the charges for services used
during the unbilled month.
   (G)   Request to discontinue services. Services shall have been deemed to
have been supplied to any property connected to the water and sewer systems
during a month unless the customer notifies the village prior to the first day
of the new billing month in which the services are to be discontinued.
   (H)   Billing; utility shut-off; hearing.
      (1)   (a)   All bills for utility and trash services shall be due and
payable at the office of the Village Clerk upon presentation. All customers
shall present their bill or a copy thereof at the time of payment.
         (b)   Any failure to present a bill or copy thereof at the time of
payment shall result in an administrative fee, further described in §
50.999.
      (2)   Any customer who fails to pay the utility and trash bills within 17
days of presentation shall have the utility services disconnected after a
written notice by the Village Clerk has been mailed by certified mail to the
customer, affording the customer an opportunity for a hearing. The aforesaid
notice shall be mailed to the customer 12 days after billing specifically
advising the customer of the following:
         (a)   Name and address of the customer and the amount of the bill;
         (b)   The date, time, and location of the hearing to be held;
         (c)   The customer has a right to be heard and to present evidence in
his or her behalf if he or she does not agree with the bill; and
         (d)   If the customer fails to appear at the hearing, the customer’s
utility service shall be terminated without further proceedings.
      (3)   The time, date, and location of the hearing shall be determined by
the Mayor, the Village Clerk, or the designee of the Mayor. The Mayor, Village
Clerk, or designee shall preside over the hearing. The Mayor, Village Clerk, or
designee of the Mayor shall make a final determination as to the rights of the
consumer and the village based on the information received at the hearing.
      (4)   The customer shall be notified within two working days of the
decision rendered by the Hearing Officer. If the service is to be discontinued,
a date and time will be set out in the notice to terminate the service or
services of the customer. Notice of the Hearing Officer’s decision shall be
made by first-class mail.
      (5)   If the Hearing Officer decides in favor of the village, the village
shall have the right to discontinue the customer’s utility services. Should the
customer fail to appear at the hearing, or should the notice be returned non-
accepted, then the village shall also have the right to terminate the
customer’s utility services without further proceedings.
      (6)   If the customer who has been notified for nonpayment of utility
bills is not the owner of record, then the village shall also notify the owner
of the property by first-class mail.
   (I)   Lien notice.
      (1)   Whenever a bill for utility services remains unpaid for 60 days
after it has been rendered, the Village Clerk shall file with the County
Recorder of Deeds a statement of lien claim. This statement shall contain the
legal description of the premises served, the amount of the unpaid bill, and a
notice that the municipality claims a lien for this amount to the period
covered by the bill.
      (2)   If the consumer of utility services whose bill is unpaid is not the
owner of the premises and the Village Clerk has notice of this, then the notice
shall be mailed to the owner of the premises if his or her address is known to
the Village Clerk whenever such bill remains unpaid for a period of 30 days
after it has been rendered.
      (3)   The failure of the Village Clerk to record such lien or to mail
such notice, or the failure of the owner to receive such notice shall not
affect the right to foreclose the lien for unpaid utility bills as mentioned
herein.
   (J)   Foreclosure of lien.
      (1)   Property subject to a lien for unpaid utility charges shall be sold
for non-payment of the same, and the proceeds of such sale shall be applied to
pay the charges, after deducting costs, as is the case in the foreclosure of
statutory liens. Such foreclosure shall be by bill-in-equity in the name of the
village.
      (2)   The Village Attorney is hereby authorized to institute such
proceedings in the name of the village in any court having jurisdiction over
such matters against any property for which the bill for utility services has
remained unpaid 60 days after it has been rendered.
(Prior Code, § 38-2-1) (Ord. 16-08, passed 6-6-2016) Penalty, see §
50.999
§ 50.016 CONSUMER LISTS.
   (A)   It is hereby made the duty of the Village Clerk to prepare or cause to
be prepared a complete and accurate list of all premises and properties
receiving utility services, showing the name and address of the occupant and
the owner of the same.
   (B)   The list shall be kept up-to-date, and shall be corrected from time to
time to allow changes in the occupancy or ownership of any such property or
premises. It shall be presented at the regular monthly meeting, if requested.
(Prior Code, § 38-2-2)
§ 50.017 LIABILITY FOR CHARGES.
   The owner of any lot, parcel of land, or premises and the user of the
services shall be jointly and severally liable for the payment of the services
to such lot, parcel of land, or premises, and all services are rendered to the
premises by the village only on the condition that such owner, occupant, and
user shall be jointly and severally liable therefor to the village.
(Prior Code, § 38-2-3)
§ 50.018 ESTIMATED CHARGE.
   (A)   Whenever any meter, by reason of its being out of repair or from any
cause fails to properly register the utilities, passing through the same, the
consumer shall be charged the average charge of the previous three months
usage.
   (B)   If no record of the previous three months exists, then it shall be the
duty of the Village Clerk to estimate the amount of utilities consumed during
the time the meter fails to operate, and the consumer shall be charged with
such estimated amount; bills may be estimated whenever it is impossible to read
the meters during inclement weather.
(Prior Code, § 38-2-4)
§ 50.019 UTILITY SERVICE FEES MANDATORY.
   No free utility service shall be furnished to any person, public or private,
and all rates and charges shall be non-discriminatory, provided that the Mayor
and the Board of Trustees reserve the right to impose special rates and charges
in cases where particular circumstances render the regular rates inadequate or
unjust.
(Prior Code, § 38-2-5)
§ 50.020 UTILITY DEPOSITS.
   (A)   Residential.
      (1)   When any application is made for utility services in accordance
with the provisions of this chapter, all applicants for which the service is
requested shall deposit with the application the amount of $150.
      (2)   When the amount of the deposit provided for above is not sufficient
to adequately protect the Utilities Department, a greater amount than stated
above may be required, based on the consumer’s estimated bill for a customary
billing period.
   (B)   Termination of service. Whenever the utility customer terminates
utility services, $15 of the deposit will be retained by the village to cover
bookkeeping and administrative costs.
   (C)   Security for payment; no interest.
      (1)   The deposits made under the provisions of this chapter shall be
held by the village as security for the payment of utility services used by the
applicant upon the premises to which his or her application pertains, and may
be so applied when any default is made in the payment in the utilities bill in
accordance with this chapter. The depositor shall earn no interest.
      (2)   If the applicant is the owner of the property, his or her deposit
may be returned after one year if all previous bills have been paid on time.
   (D)   Liability for deposit.
      (1)   The owner of the premises and the tenant thereof shall be jointly
and severally liable to pay the required deposit herein established before
water and sewer facilities shall be made available to the tenant-occupied
premises.
      (2)   In case a portion of the deposit is used as aforesaid, the tenant
and/or owner of the premises shall immediately deposit with the Village Clerk
an amount sufficient to bring the deposit to the established rate of deposit.
(Prior Code, § 38-2-6) (Ord. 07-08, passed 6-4-2007)
§ 50.021 UTILITY AND TRASH RATES.
   (A)   There shall be established the following rates and charges for the use
of the water, sewer, and trash systems of the village, based upon the amount of
water consumed as follows.
 
Service                               First 1,000 Gallons Over 1,000 Gallons
                                      (Minimum per Month) (per 1,000 Gallons)
Sewer users inside village limits     $11.67              $8.01
Sewer users outside village limits    $16.12              $11.76
Water users inside village limits     $17.86              $10.91
Water users outside village limits    $23.24              $15.56
Water and sewer users inside village  $29.53              $18.92
limits
Water and sewer users outside village $39.36              $27.32
limits
 
   (B)   All bulk water sales shall be at the rate $20.40 per 1,000 gallons.
   (C)   For trash and garbage pickup, all regular customers under the age of
65 shall be billed at the rate of $10 per month; all regular customers age 65
or older shall be billed at the rate of $8 per month.
   (D)   The water and sewer rates contained in this section shall continue to
increase automatically and in proportion to any increases in rates that the
Kaskaskia Water District charges to the village.
   (E)   Of the revenue that is raised from the water/sewer fees, 2% shall
continue to be placed in a Reserve Fund to be used by the Board of Trustees for
future water/sewer infrastructure improvements.
(Prior Code, § 38-3-80) (Ord. 17-08, passed 6-5-2017; Ord. 2024-16, passed 11-
20-2024)
§ 50.999 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which no
specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to §
10.999 of this code of ordinances. Any person found in violation of §
50.015(C) or (D) shall, upon conviction, shall be fined a sum as provided in §
10.999.
   (B)   Any failure to present a bill or copy thereof at the time of payment,
as described in §
50.015(H)(1), shall result in an administrative fee in the amount of $5. If a
bill is not paid by the tenth day of the month, a penalty equal to 10% of the
amount due on the bill shall be added thereto. This penalty shall be in
addition to the charge heretofore established for the utility service.
   (C)   As described in §
50.015(H), once utility services have been disconnected, the same shall not be
again connected or used until all delinquent accounts and bills of service are
paid in full, including a fee of $35 for the first offense; $75 for the second
offense; and $150 for the third offense within any calendar year for each
connection of such utility services, plus any expenses incurred in the
reconnecting of the utility services.
(Prior Code, § 38-2-1) (Ord. 16-08, passed 6-6-2016)
CHAPTER 51: SOLID WASTE
Section
General Provisions
   
51.001   Definitions
   
51.002   Parked garbage trucks
   
51.003   Truck wastewaters
   
51.004   Windblown garbage unlawful
   
51.005   Garbage falling from truck
   
51.006   Accumulation of garbage unlawful
   
51.007   Industrial and construction waste
   
51.008   Landfill restrictions
License and Equipment Regulations
   
51.020   License required; fee
   
51.021   License application
   
51.022   Truck requirement; cleanliness
   
51.023   Location of equipment yards
   
51.024   Revocation of permit
Local Service
   
51.035   Definition
   
51.036   Service required
   
51.037   Containers and service
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 51.001 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   GARBAGE. Wastes resulting from the handling, preparation, cooking, and
consumption of food; wastes from the handling, storage, and sale of produce.
   RUBBISH. Combustible trash, including, but not limited to, paper, cartons,
boxes, barrels, wood, excelsior, tree branches, yard trimmings, wood furniture,
bedding; non-combustible trash, including, but not limited to, metals, tin
cans, metal furniture, dirt, small quantities of rock and pieces of concrete,
glass, crockery, other mineral waste; street rubbish, including, but not
limited to, street sweepings, dirt, leaves, catch-basin dirt, contents of
litter receptacles, provided, however, that refuse shall not include earth and
wastes from building operations, nor shall it include solid wastes resulting
from industrial presses and manufacturing operations such as food processing
wastes, boiler house cinders, lumber, scraps, and shavings.
(Prior Code, § 16-1-1)
§ 51.002 PARKED GARBAGE TRUCKS.
   No truck carrying garbage or rubbish, or both, shall be parked or be
permitted to stand anywhere in the village except as provided for in §
51.023 any longer than is necessary to pick up containers; however, providing
that the standing of such vehicle was made necessary by mechanical trouble,
traffic conditions, accident, or obedience to the direction of police officers
or traffic signals, shall not be considered a violation of this code of
ordinances.
(Prior Code, § 16-1-5) Penalty, see §
10.999
Cross-reference:
   Parking regulations, see
Chapter 72
   Parking schedules, see
Chapter 75
§ 51.003 TRUCK WASTEWATERS.
   A garbage truck or other equipment shall not be washed on village streets or
public property and will not be washed where the wastewaters will cause any
offensive odors to adjoining property owners.
(Prior Code, § 16-1-6) Penalty, see §
10.999
§ 51.004 WINDBLOWN GARBAGE UNLAWFUL.
   It shall be unlawful to place garbage or rubbish in such a manner as to
allow the same to be blown by the wind onto the property of other residents.
(Prior Code, § 16-1-7) Penalty, see §
10.999
§ 51.005 GARBAGE FALLING FROM TRUCK.
   It shall be unlawful to deposit or permit to fall from any vehicle any
garbage, refuse, or ashes on any public street or alley in the village;
provided, that this code of ordinances shall not be construed to prohibit
placing garbage, refuse, or ashes in a container complying with the provisions
of this code of ordinances, preparatory to having such material collected and
disposed of in the manner provided herein.
(Prior Code, § 16-1-8) Penalty, see §
10.999
§ 51.006 ACCUMULATION OF GARBAGE UNLAWFUL.
   The fact that garbage or rubbish remains on an occupant’s premises in the
village in violation of this chapter shall be prima facie evidence that the
occupant of such premises is responsible for the violations of the chapter
occurring.
(Prior Code, § 16-1-9) Penalty, see §
10.999
§ 51.007 INDUSTRIAL AND CONSTRUCTION WASTE.
   Nothing in this code shall be deemed to prevent or regulate the hauling of
rubbish or refuse from industrial processes, from construction projects, or
other matter not normally collected on a regular schedule and haulers of
rubbish not normally collected in regular collections shall be excused from the
requirements of obtaining a collector’s license as provided in this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 16-1-11) Penalty, see §
10.999
§ 51.008 LANDFILL RESTRICTIONS.
   (A)   Accumulations of grass or shrubbery cuttings, leaves, tree limbs, and
other materials accumulated as the result of care of lawns, shrubbery, vines,
and trees shall be considered prohibited materials.
   (B)   The following items are hereby prohibited at the village landfill:
      (1)   White goods. Refrigerators, freezers, stoves, ovens, ranges,
dishwashers, water heaters, air conditioners, heat pumps, furnaces, boilers,
humidifiers, dehumidifiers, clothes washers, clothes dryers, water coolers, and
chillers;
      (2)   Tires. Whole, cut, quartered, halved, sidewalls, tread, and beads;
      (3)   Hazardous waste, batteries, and liquid waste. All hazardous waste,
batteries, and liquid waste, except liquid waste approved for solidification;
      (4)   Potentially infectious medical waste (PIMW). PIMW which has been
rendered non-infectious (autoclaving) is conditionally allowed for disposal,
within the framework of applicable regulations; and
      (5)   Electronics. Printers, monitors, scanners, televisions, cable
receivers, electronic mice, satellite receivers, computers (including tablet
computers), electronic keyboards, facsimile machines, videocassette recorders,
small scale servers, portable digital music players, digital video disc
players, video game consoles, digital converter boxes, and digital video disc
recorders.
(Prior Code, § 16-3-1) Penalty, see §
10.999
LICENSE AND EQUIPMENT REGULATIONS
§ 51.020 LICENSE REQUIRED; FEE.
   No person shall engage in the business as a residential or commercial
collector of garbage and rubbish unless such person shall have first made
application to and secured a license from the village. The license fee shall be
$100 per year. The fee shall be paid on or before May 1 of each year. The
village is not subject to the provisions of this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 16-1-2) Penalty, see §
10.999
§ 51.021 LICENSE APPLICATION.
   (A)   Upon application for a license, the person applying for same shall
furnish the Village Clerk, along with the application, proof of insurance for
liability and property damage, and at that time, he or she shall file with the
Village Clerk a rate schedule for services to be performed for a residential
application. The rate schedule shall set forth the type of service to be
offered and the price for same, including the size and number of cans per
pickup for the charge, the charge for any extra cans, the charge for the bags,
the size of the bags, and the charge for bundles and size of the bundles; also,
a rate schedule shall include an unlimited service charge; the schedule shall
set forth whether this is once-a-week or twice-a-week pickup.
   (B)   The rate schedule shall also set forth the day or days of each week
that the collector shall schedule his or her pickup within the village. The
rate schedule as filed shall be valid for one year and the licensee shall not
be permitted to increase the price on the schedule for a period of one year
from the date of filing of the rate schedule. The rate schedule shall be
effective upon approval by the Board of Trustees.
(Prior Code, § 16-1-3)
§ 51.022 TRUCK REQUIREMENT; CLEANLINESS.
   (A)   The firm that handles the collection of trash shall be of good
character and give evidence that the equipment used by it is adequate for the
purposes intended.
   (B)   The successful firm shall have a truck or trucks which shall be so
designed that garbage and rubbish that is collected will be covered at all
times except in the loading of garbage or rubbish, so that offensive odors are
not permitted to permeate the air and cause a nuisance within the village.
   (C)   The trucks and all containers in which garbage is collected and
transported shall be cleaned daily and the collector shall not collect any
garbage on any day without having a clean truck and hand containers if
containers are used.
(Prior Code, § 16-1-4)
§ 51.023 LOCATION OF EQUIPMENT YARDS.
   (A)   A licensee shall designate the location of the yards on which his or
her equipment will be parked while not in use and the equipment shall not be
parked within the village limits unless the designated location shall not, in
the opinion of the Code Enforcement Officer, create any nuisance for adjoining
property owners.
   (B)   The licensee shall have as additional equipment a truck for the
disposal of large or unusual items of rubbish which cannot be placed in the
designated containers and shall have available for such pickups such equipment
at least one day each week or on such additional days as may be necessary to
satisfy the needs of the public.
(Prior Code, § 16-1-10)
§ 51.024 REVOCATION OF PERMIT.
   If the licensee fails to perform any services according to his or her
application and rate schedule, the Mayor may revoke his or her permit.
(Prior Code, § 16-1-12)
LOCAL SERVICE
§ 51.035 DEFINITION.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definition shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   TRASH. Shall be construed as meaning the offal of food stuff, tin cans,
bottles, glass, papers, rags, ashes, and other waste and discard that is
generated from a normal household or business of that type. It shall not
include brush, leaves, yard cuttings, street sweepings, tree limbs, dead
animals, animal excretion, sewage, or residue from the construction of building
demolition.
(Prior Code, § 16-2-1)
§ 51.036 SERVICE REQUIRED.
   Trash collection service shall be provided by the village. All residents and
businesses are required to receive this service.
(Prior Code, § 16-2-2)
§ 51.037 CONTAINERS AND SERVICE.
   (A)   Regular service collection shall be made on a weekly basis, providing
for the collection in containers of not less than a five-gallon capacity, nor
more than a 32-gallon capacity, with each resident or establishment being
limited to a weekly collection not to exceed two containers, each being not
more than 32 gallons, or three plastic bags (liners for 20- to 30-gallon cans)
instead of trash cans. No barrels shall be dumped, but may be used for the
storage of filled, tied plastic bags. No container shall weigh more than 50
pounds.
(Prior Code, § 16-2-3)
   (B)   Containers for collection are to be placed within six feet of curb or
alley line.
(Prior Code, § 16-2-4)
   (C)   Commercial containers are available for businesses which require
additional service, with fees for same to be negotiated with contractor and
billed by the village.
(Prior Code, § 16-2-5)
Penalty, see §
10.999
CHAPTER 52: POLLUTION CONTROL
Section
Landfill Code
   
52.001   Siting Authority
   
52.002   Definitions
   
52.003   Applications; fee
   
52.004   Hearing; Hearing Officer   
   
52.005   Approval; application and site
   
Appendix A:    Application for Siting of Regional Pollution Control Facility
LANDFILL CODE
§ 52.001 SITING AUTHORITY.
   The Board of Trustees and the Mayor shall be the Siting Authority and power
to make and establish, by resolution, such rules and regulations as it shall
from time to time deem reasonable and necessary for site approval of new
regional pollution control facilities or the expansion thereof in the village.
(Prior Code, § 20-1-2) (Ord. 94-12, passed 9-7-1994)
§ 52.002 DEFINITIONS.
   (A) For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
      ACT. The Illinois Environmental Protection Act, 415 ILCS 5/1 et seq.
   (B) All definitions and procedures shall be in conformity with the
provisions of the Act.
(Prior Code, § 20-1-3) (Ord. 94-12, passed 9-7-1994)
§ 52.003 APPLICATIONS; FEE.
   (A)   The Village Clerk shall have the authority to accept on behalf of the
village applications for siting regional pollution control facilities.
(Prior Code, § 20-1-1)
   (B)   Any applicant subject to this code shall, in its application filed
with the Village Clerk, address each of the criteria established by the Act,
415 ILCS 5/39.2(a)(i) through (ix), and shall provide the village with such
additional information as the village shall require for the purpose of
evaluating the application.
(Prior Code, § 20-1-4)
   (C)   Any applicant shall file, in addition to the information required by
the Act, a completed application in substantial conformity with the attached
application, marked as Appendix A hereto, and incorporated by reference herein.
(Prior Code, § 20-1-6)
   (D)   (1)   Together with its application, any applicant must pay an initial
application fee for site certification in the amount of $150,000. The amount
shall be paid in full within five days of the date of filing of the application
with the Village Clerk.
      (2)   Any provision of this code to the contrary notwithstanding, the
village may reject any application in the event the initial application fee has
been paid in a timely fashion.
(Prior Code, § 20-1-7)
(Ord. 94-12, passed 9-7-1994)
§ 52.004 HEARING; HEARING OFFICER.
   (A)   The applicant and/or its employees, agents, or representatives shall
be present at all public hearings specified by the Act.
(Prior Code, § 20-1-5)
   (B)   The Board of Trustees and Mayor shall designate and identify a hearing
officer who shall have the authority to preside over such public hearings as
may be required by the Act and the Hearing Officer shall act at the direction
of the Mayor and the Board of Trustees in accordance with such hearing
procedures, rules, and regulations as the village may adopt from time to time.
(Prior Code, § 20-1-8)
(Ord. 94-12, passed 9-7-1994)
§ 52.005 APPROVAL; APPLICATION AND SITE.
   (A)   Site approval shall be based upon the criteria established by the
provisions of the Act, 415 ILCS 5/39.2(a)(i) through (ix).
(Prior Code, § 20-1-9)
   (B)   The Board of Trustees of Trustees and Mayor shall, in conformity with
the Act, approve or disapprove of any application properly filed with the
Village Clerk within the times established by the Act, by a majority vote with
the Mayor voting only the event of a tie.
(Prior Code, § 20-1-10)
   (C)    The decision of the Board of Trustees and Mayor shall be made at any
regular or special meeting of the Board of Trustees called and noticed in
accordance with village ordinance and the State Open Meetings Act, 5 ILCS 120/
1 et seq., and within the time parameters established by the Act. In the event
no decision is made by the Board of Trustees within 180 days, the application
shall be deemed approved pursuant to the Act.
(Prior Code, § 20-1-11)
   (D)    Any and all publications or notices required by the Act for the
purpose of site approval for a regional pollution control facility shall be in
conformity with the Act.
(Prior Code, § 20-1-12)
(Ord. 94-12, passed 9-7-1994)
APPENDIX A: APPLICATION FOR SITING OF REGIONAL POLLUTION CONTROL FACILITY
A.   Identification of Applicant
1.   Name of Applicant
_________________________________________________________
Address of Applicant _______________________________________________________
B.   Identification of Site
1.   Name of Site
______________________________________________________________
2.   Legal Description of Site (please attach survey map)
C.   Identification of Land Ownership
1.   Current owner of land in site
________________________________________________
2.   Does the Applicant have a lease on the land, and if so, what are the
terms?
_______ Yes   Term of Lease__________________________________________________
_______ No
3.   Does the Applicant have an option to purchase the land, and if so, what
are the terms?
_______ Yes   Term of the Option______________________________________________
_______ No
D.   Identification of Proposed Operation of Site
1.   Describe the type of facility proposed
_______ Landfill
_______ Transfer Station
_______ Other (explain)
E.   Illinois Environmental Protection Act Criteria:
Address each of the applicable criteria as required by the Illinois
Environmental Protection Act, being 415 ILCS 5/1 et seq.
(1)   The facility is necessary to accommodate the waste needs of the area it
is intended to serve;
(2)   The facility is so designed, located, and proposed to be operated that
the public health, safety, and welfare will be protected;
(3)   The facility is located so as to minimize incompatibility with the
character of the surrounding area and to minimize the effect on the value of
the surrounding property;
(4)   The facility is located outside the boundary of the 100-year floodplain
or the site is flood-proofed;
(5)   The plan of operations for the facility is designed to minimize the
danger to the surrounding area from fire, spills, or other operational
accidents;
(6)   The traffic patterns to or from the facility are so designed as to
minimize the impact on existing traffic flows;
(7)   If the facility will be treating, storing, or disposing of hazardous
waste, an emergency response plan exists for the facility which includes
notification, containment, and evacuation procedures to be used in case of an
accidental release;
(8)   If the facility is to be located in a county where the County Board has
adopted a solid waste management plan consistent with the planning requirements
of the Local Solid Waste Disposal Act, being 415 ILCS 10/1 et seq., or the
Solid Waste Planning and Recycling Act, being 415 ILCS 15/1 et seq., the
facility is consistent with the plan; and
(9)   If the facility will be located within a regulated recharge area, any
applicable requirements specified by the Board for such areas have been met.
   Because the Applicant’s discussion of these criteria will likely involve
voluminous materials, the Applicant is free to present this information in any
convenient format.
   F.   In all respects, it is the intent of this Application to be in
conformity with the terms and provisions of the Illinois Environmental
Protection Act, 415 ILCS 5/1 et seq., (the “Act”) and in the event this
Application is inconsistent with the Act, the Act shall govern.
   G.   Signature
      I hereby affirm that all the information contained in this Application
and all the attachments thereto are true and complete to the best of my
knowledge and belief.
                                 _________________________________________
                                 Title _____________________________________
                                 _________________________________________
                                 _________________________________________
                                 Date
(Prior Code, Ch. 20, Exhibit A) (Ord. 94-12, passed 9-7-1994)
CHAPTER 53: WATER
Section
General Provisions
   
53.001   Definitions
   
53.002   Application for tap and connection
   
53.003   Contract; rules to join
System Construction and Maintenance
   
53.015   All service to be by meter
   
53.016   Removal of meters
   
53.017   Damage to meter
   
53.018   Master meters
   
53.019   Installing and maintaining service lines
   
53.020   Inspection
   
53.021   Easements
   
53.022   Allocation of maintenance costs
Use and Protection of System
   
53.035   Theft of village water
   
53.036   Resale of water
   
53.037   Discontinuing service due to dangerous usage
   
53.038   Electric ground wires
   
53.039   Water for building or construction
   
53.040   Fire hydrants
   
53.041   Limited water usage in emergencies
   
53.042   Shortage and purity of supply
   
53.043   Non-compliance with rules and regulations
   
53.044   Use of water on consumer’s premises
   
53.045   Interruption of supply or service
   
53.046   Water-well permits required
   
53.047   Abandoned connection
   
53.048   Alternative water source
Cross-Connection Administration
   
53.060   Approved backflow device
   
53.061   Cross-connection prohibited; exception
   
53.062   Investigations by Superintendent
   
53.063   Right to enter premises
   
53.064   Notice to customer; reconnection fee
   
53.065   Contamination cost
Cross-Connection Control Code
   
53.080   Purpose
   
53.081   Application
   
53.082   Responsibility of owner
   
53.083   Definitions
   
53.084   Water system
   
53.085   Cross-connection prohibited
   
53.086   Survey and investigations
   
53.087   Protection required
   
53.088   Backflow prevention devices
   
53.089   Inspection and maintenance
   
53.090   Booster pumps
   
53.091   Violations
Extension of Mains
   
53.105   Title
   
53.106   Determination of payment
   
53.107   Easements
   
53.108   Size and type
   
53.109   Maintenance and replacement
Rates and Service Charges
   
53.120   Definition
   
53.121   Water revenues
   
53.122   Water accounts
   
53.123   Access to books
   
53.124   Notice of rates
   
53.125   Appeals
   
53.126   Adequacy of service charges
   
53.127   Computation
   
53.128   Tap-on fees
   
53.129   Water purchase contract
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 53.001 DEFINITIONS.
   (A)   Definitions. For the purpose of this chapter, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.
      ADMINISTRATOR. The Administrator of the United States Environmental
Protection Agency.
      APPROVING AUTHORITY. The Board of Trustees of the Village of Marissa, or,
where such authority is specifically delegated, the Superintendent of the Water
and Sewer Department.
      BASIC USER CHARGE. The basic assessment levied on all users of the public
water system.
      CAPITAL IMPROVEMENT CHARGE. A charge levied on users to improve, extend,
or reconstruct the water works.
      CURB COCK. A shut-off valve attached to a water service pipe from a water
main to a building installed near the curb, which may be operated by a valve
key to start or stop flow in the water-supply lines of a building. Also called
a CURB STOP.
      DEBT SERVICE CHARGE. The amount to be paid each billing period for
payment of interest, principal, and coverage of (loan, bond, and the like)
outstanding.
      DIRECTOR. The Director of the Illinois Environmental Protection Agency.
      EASEMENT. An acquired legal right for the specific use of land owned by
others.
      FEDERAL ACT. The federal 1996 Safe Drinking Water Act amendments, being
42 U.S.C. §§ 300f et seq.
      LOCAL CAPITAL COST CHARGE. Charges for costs other than the operation,
maintenance, and replacement costs, (e.g., debt service and capital improvement
costs).
      MILLIGRAMS PER LITER. A unit of the concentration of water constituent.
It is 0.001 grams of the constituent in 1,000 milliliters of water. It has
replaced the unit formerly used commonly, parts per million, to which it is
approximately equivalent, in reporting the results of water analysis.
      PERSON. Any and all persons, natural or artificial, including any
individual, firm, or company, municipal, or private corporation, association,
society, institution, enterprise, governmental agency, or other entity.
      pH. The logarithm (base 10) of the reciprocal of the hydrogen-ion
concentration expressed by one of the procedures outlined in the IEPA Division
of Laboratories Manual of Laboratory Methods.
      PPM. Parts per million by weight.
      REPLACEMENT.
         (a)   Expenditures for obtaining and installing equipment,
accessories, or appurtenances, which are necessary during the useful life of
the works to maintain the capacity and performance for which such works were
designed and constructed.
         (b)   The TERM OPERATION AND MAINTENANCE includes REPLACEMENT.
      SERVICE BOX. A valve box used with corporation or curb cock.
      STATE ACT. The Illinois Anti-Pollution Bond Act of 1970, being 30 ILCS
405/1 et seq.
      STATE LOAN. The State of Illinois participation in the financing of the
construction of water works as provided for by the Illinois Anti-Pollution Bond
Act and for making such loans as filed with the Secretary of State of the State
of Illinois.
      USER CHARGE. A charge levied on users of water works for the cost of
operation, maintenance and replacement.
      USEFUL LIFE. The estimated period during which the water works will be
operated.
      WATER FUND. The principal accounting designation for all revenues
received in the operation of the water system.
      WATER SERVICE CHARGE. The charge per quarter or month levied on all users
of the water facilities. The SERVICE CHARGE shall be computed as outlined in
this section, and shall consist of the total of the basic user charge and the
local capital cost if applicable.
   (B)   Clarification of word usage. “Shall” is mandatory; “may” is
permissible.
(Prior Code, § 38-3-1)
§ 53.002 APPLICATION FOR TAP AND CONNECTION.
   (A)   An applicant desiring a water tap or service connection with the
waterworks system of the village shall file a written application at the
Village Hall, signed by the owner of the property for which the tap or service
connection is desired, or by the duly authorized agent of such owner.
   (B)   The application shall be accompanied by payment of the fee hereinafter
prescribed to cover the cost of such service connection. In the event the
application is made by an agent for the owner, then the application shall also
be accompanied by the written authority of the owner to the agent for the
making of the application. (See Appendix #1).
(Prior Code, § 38-3-2)
§ 53.003 CONTRACT; RULES TO JOIN.
   All of the rules and regulations concerning the use of the facilities of the
water system and the consumption of water shall be adopted and the same shall
become part of the contract with every water consumer and every water consumer
shall be considered to take water from the village, subject thereto and bound
thereby.
(Prior Code, § 38-3-25)
SYSTEM CONSTRUCTION AND MAINTENANCE
§ 53.015 ALL SERVICE TO BE BY METER.
   (A)   All water service, whether for domestic, commercial, or industrial use
shall be metered. All meters shall be so placed and installed as to render the
same accessible at all times for the purpose of reading or repairing and so as
to be free from danger of freezing. Meters outside of a building shall be set
in a suitable meter box approved by the Utilities Committee. Water shall not be
turned on for new connections until the meter has been installed and all other
requirements of this chapter on the part of the property owner have been fully
complied with.
   (B)   Should concrete or any other permanent materials be constructed or
placed around the meter tile, it shall be the responsibility of the owner and/
or user to remove said obstruction if it is not possible to repair or replace
the water meter. If a user back-fills his or her yard, it will be his or her
responsibility to raise the water service so as to be accessible to repair.
(Prior Code, § 38-3-3)
§ 53.016 REMOVAL OF METERS.
   (A)   All meters shall remain the property of the Water Department and may
be removed from the customer’s premises at any time without notice for the
purpose of testing and repairing the same or upon discontinuance of service.
   (B)   Upon discovery of any unlawful act by any customer, his or her agent,
or employee herein prohibited or upon failure to comply with any other rules
and regulations of the Water Department, such service shall be disconnected.
(Prior Code, § 38-3-4) (Ord. 2024-16, passed 11-20-2024)
§ 53.017 DAMAGE TO METER.
   Whenever a meter is found to have been damaged by hot water being forced
back into it from the consumer’s hot water or heating apparatus or for any
other cause within control of the consumer, the consumer shall pay the village
for the actual cost of the removal, repair, and replacement of the damaged
meter and all previous water bills shall be corrected on an estimated basis to
cover such period as it appears that the meter was out of order for such
damage.
(Prior Code, § 38-3-7)
§ 53.018 MASTER METERS.
   (A)   (1)   With regard to any private residential property where a master
meter is in place and functioning, the village shall have the right and option
to read said master meter and assess the full charge to the owner or agent of
said master meter.
      (2)   The village shall have the right and option to refuse to read
individual meters connected to said master meter, and to separately assess and/
or collect utility fees which may be pertinent to said master meter.
   (B)   From and after the effective date of this section, all new private
residential properties, and any existing private residential properties that
change ownership, including, but not limited to, trailer parks and apartment
complexes, shall have a master meter in place and functioning.
(Prior Code, § 38-4-24) (Ord. 05-09, passed 11-7-2005)
§ 53.019 INSTALLING AND MAINTAINING SERVICE LINES.
   (A)   The user shall be responsible for installation and maintenance of
service lines between the meter and the residence or business. Such service
lines must be at least three-fourths of an inch in diameter, and must be
installed at a minimum depth of three feet. Service lines must have a minimum
working pressure rating of 160 psi at 73.4°F and must be constructed of one of
the following types of materials: copper (Type K), polyvinyl chloride (PVC),
polyethylene, or polybutylene. Service lines shall not be covered until they
are inspected and approved by the Superintendent.
   (B)   The user shall not connect any service line or any plumbing connected
with the service line to any other water source. The service line shall meet
all requirements of the State Environmental Protection Agency’s rules and
regulations, the State Plumbing Code, being Ill. Admin. Code tit. 77, pt. 890,
and the regulations in this chapter.
   (C)   All new or replacement service lines that are non-metallic/non-
conductive shall have a tracer wire installed at the time of service line
installation/replacement.
(Prior Code, § 38-3-5) (Ord. 25-06, passed 7-21-2025)
§ 53.020 INSPECTION.
   (A)   Access to premises.
      (1)   The village shall have access to all portions of the premises of
the consumer at any reasonable time for inspection of the use of water and the
consumer’s pipe, fixtures, plumbing, and any other apparatus in any manner
connected to the waterworks system of the village.
      (2)   The village shall have the right and option to demand change or
stopping of use or to require any repair, change, removal, or improvement of
any pipe, fixture, plumbing, or other apparatus that would in any manner affect
the water supply or system of the village or the supply or fixtures of other
consumers.
   (B)   Meters to be open to inspection. All water meters and water fixtures,
connections, and appurtenances on private property connected with the
waterworks system of the village shall be open to the inspection of the proper
officers and employees of the village at all reasonable hours.
(Prior Code, § 38-3-6)
§ 53.021 EASEMENTS.
   The consumer shall give such easements and rights-of-way as necessary to the
village and allow access for the purpose of construction, repair, maintenance,
meter reading, relocation, or expansion of the water system. The necessity
shall be determined by the Superintendent.
(Prior Code, § 38-3-17)
§ 53.022 ALLOCATION OF MAINTENANCE COSTS.
   The village shall maintain and repair all water service pipes between the
water mains and the curb lines. Any repairs to service lines or taps between
the water mains and the sidewalk or property line shall be the village’s
expense. Any repairs or renewals of water service pipes between the property
line or curb line and extending to the owner’s premises shall be made at the
sole expense of the consumer or owner of the premises.
(Prior Code, § 38-3-19)
USE AND PROTECTION OF SYSTEM
§ 53.035 THEFT OF VILLAGE WATER.
   Whenever a meter is found to have been damaged by hot water being forced
back into it from the consumer’s hot water or heating apparatus or for any
other cause within control of the consumer, the consumer shall pay the village
for the actual cost of the removal, repair, and replacement of the damaged
meter and all previous water bills shall be corrected on an estimated basis to
cover such period as it appears that the meter was out of order for such
damage.
(Prior Code, § 38-2-7) Penalty, see §
10.999
§ 53.036 RESALE OF WATER.
   No water supplied by the waterworks system shall be resold by any user. No
water user may supply water to other families or allow them to take it, except
for use on the premises and for the purpose specified in such user’s approved
application, nor after water is introduced into any building or upon any
premises shall any person make or employ any other person to make any tap or
connection with work upon the premises for alterations, repairs, extension, or
attachments without written permit therefor. Resale or unauthorized use of
water shall be grounds for discontinuance of water service to the user, the
premises, or both.
(Prior Code, § 38-3-9) Penalty, see §
10.999
§ 53.037 DISCONTINUING SERVICE DUE TO DANGEROUS USAGE.
   The village shall have the right to refuse water service or to discontinue
water service, without notice, at any time to any consumer if the village finds
any apparatus or appliances, the operation of which will be detrimental to the
water system of the village or to any or all of its consumers. Standpipes,
hydrants, gate valves, and any other apparatus that cause water hammer or any
danger to the water system or other customer’s plumbing shall be immediately
repaired or removed upon notice from the village or, at its option, the village
may immediately discontinue service without notice and without any liability
for direct or resulting damages therefrom.
(Prior Code, § 38-3-10) Penalty, see §
10.999
§ 53.038 ELECTRIC GROUND WIRES.
   (A)   All persons are strictly forbidden to attach any electric ground wire
to any plumbing or water piping which is or may be connected to any water
service pipe, water meter, or water main belonging to the village.
   (B)   The village shall hold the owner of the premises responsible and
liable for any damage to the property or injury to the employees of the village
caused by such ground wire.
   (C)   Any and all owners and consumers shall remove any existing ground
wires immediately upon written notice from the village. If not so disconnected
five days after notice, the village, through its officials, may enter the
property and remove such ground wires and the consumer shall pay all costs.
(Prior Code, § 38-3-11) Penalty, see §
10.999
§ 53.039 WATER FOR BUILDING OR CONSTRUCTION.
   (A)   Applicants desiring to use water from the village waterworks system
for building or construction purposes shall make application therefor to the
Superintendent on a form provided by the Water and Sewer Department for that
purpose.
   (B)   (1)   Upon a permit being granted, the service pipe shall be carried
at the expense of the applicant to the inside of the curb line where a service
cock and meter shall be placed with pipe leading to the surface and a faucet
placed at the end thereof above the surface.
      (2)   When the building or construction is completed, the faucet and
meter shall be removed and the water shut-off unless permanent connection is
made in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. Charge for the use and
connection of the meter shall be prescribed by the Superintendent.
(Prior Code, § 38-3-12)
§ 53.040 FIRE HYDRANTS.
   (A)   All public fire hydrants with gate valves, tees, and connections from
the main, inside the village limits, shall be owned, maintained, and used only
by the village and shall be solely responsible for same. Use of water from fire
hydrants by contractors and others shall be only upon permission by the village
and after approved application to the village.
   (B)   The village shall not be held liable and will not assume any
responsibility for the condition of any fire hydrant inside or outside of the
village limits or the pressure or amount of water obtainable therefrom or any
damage either direct or resultant because of the condition, pressure, or amount
of water available at any fire hydrant.
   (C)   (1)   All public fire hydrants located outside the village limits
owned by the village shall be maintained in as good order as reasonably
possible, but the village will not undertake or assume any responsibility or
liability for their condition or use or abuse.
      (2)   Such public fire hydrants shall be used only for the purpose of
extinguishing fires except when the village may issue a special permit for
their use to contractors who shall then be responsible for the hydrants and the
use of water from them.
   (D)   The village may, from time to time, enter into an agreement for the
rental of the hydrants and the conditions under which it is entered into.
(Prior Code, § 38-3-13)
§ 53.041 LIMITED WATER USAGE IN EMERGENCIES.
   (A)   The Mayor is hereby authorized to proclaim the existence of an
emergency whenever it appears that the village water supply is inadequate for
all general uses and purposes, which proclamation shall be published in a
newspaper of general circulation in the community and the Mayor is further
authorized to declare in similar manner the end of an emergency period.
   (B)   (1)   From and after the publication of a proclamation as provided for
division (A) above, the following uses of water shall be prohibited:
         (a)   The washing of cars and other vehicles;
         (b)   The sprinkling of lawns and shrubbery;
         (c)   The watering of gardens; and
         (d)   Other nonessential uses.
      (2)   It shall be unlawful for any person to so use water from the
village supply during such an emergency.
(Prior Code, § 38-3-14) Penalty, see §
10.999
§ 53.042 SHORTAGE AND PURITY OF SUPPLY.
   The village shall not be held responsible for or in any manner liable to any
person, company, consumer, or public body for any claim or damage, either
direct or resultant because of any shortage of water supply, any shut-off of
water for any reason, any bursting or leakage of either the consumer’s or
village’s mains, pipes, and fixtures, any pollution or impurity in water supply
or any fire or water damage.
(Prior Code, § 38-3-15)
§ 53.043 NON-COMPLIANCE WITH RULES AND REGULATIONS.
   If any consumer fails to comply with any of the rules and regulations in
force, the village shall notify the consumer of such failure. If the consumer
does not remedy the same as the rules provide and within a reasonable time, the
village shall have the right to discontinue service. Except in case of non-
payment, emergency, necessity, or as otherwise provided, the village will not
discontinue service for violation of any rule until five days after notice has
been given and the violation has not been remedied.
(Prior Code, § 38-3-16)
§ 53.044 USE OF WATER ON CONSUMER’S PREMISES.
   The village shall reserve the right to use the water from the consumer’s
facilities at any time deemed necessary. No charge shall be made by the
consumer for the use of the facilities and no charge shall be made by the
village for the water used by the village.
(Prior Code, § 38-3-18)
§ 53.045 INTERRUPTION OF SUPPLY OR SERVICE.
   (A)   All connections for the water services applied for hereunder and all
connections now attached to the present village waterworks system and all use
or service of the system shall be upon the express condition that the village
shall not be liable for nor shall any claim be made against it for damages or
injury caused by reason of the breaking of any main, service, pipe, apparatus,
or appurtenance connected with the waterworks system or for any interruption of
the supply of water by reason of the breaking of machinery or by reason of
stoppages, alterations, extensions, or renewals.
(Prior Code, § 38-3-8)
   (B)   (1)   The village shall have the right to shut-off the supply of water
whenever it is necessary to make repairs, improvements, enforce rules, or, for
any notice as circumstances allow, will be given to consumers but in
emergencies, the water may be shut-off without notice. All hot water faucets
shall be left open during any shut-off to prevent damage to plumbing. Such
necessary work will be done as rapidly as may be practical and whenever
feasible at such times as will cause the least inconvenience. The village shall
not be held responsible for or liable because of any shut-off of supply for any
direct or resultant damages to any person, company, or consumer or to any pipe,
fixtures, or plumbing.
      (2)   Water for steam boilers, gas engines, ice plants, or other
industrial use, shall not be furnished by direct pressure from the mains, but
only to tanks holding ample reserve supply. Should any equipment be supplied
direct from mains, then in case of any shut-off of water, the village will not
be held responsible or liable for any direct or resulting damage because of
interrupted supply, insufficient pressure, or otherwise.
      (3)   Whenever water mains, pipes, and service connections are taken up,
shut-off or interfered with by reason of any village street improvements, the
village will endeavor to maintain service so far as reasonably possible, but
will not be directly or indirectly liable for any interruption, poor pressure,
or damage of any kind either to consumers, adjacent or to other consumers
affected thereby.
      (4)   The village expressly stipulates with all its consumers and other
persons that it will not insure or be responsible or liable in any manner for
any losses, or damages, direct or resultant by reason of any fire, and all
water service furnished shall always be conditional upon acts of God,
inevitable accidents, fire, strikes, riots, war, or any other cause not within
the reasonable control of the village.
(Prior Code, § 38-3-20)
§ 53.046 WATER-WELL PERMITS REQUIRED.
   It shall be unlawful to drill a water-well in the village without the proper
permits from the state and the Board of Trustees. All wells shall comply with
the Cross-Connection Code in this chapter. No wells shall be drilled when the
property is within 200 feet of the municipal water main.
(Prior Code, § 38-3-21) Penalty, see §
10.999
§ 53.047 ABANDONED CONNECTION.
   (A)   Whenever any connection to the waterworks system is abandoned, because
the building to which the water connection is made has been abandoned,
destroyed, or removed, the Superintendent may remove the meter and any pipe or
connections in the public right-of-way or easement, and cap, plug, or otherwise
seal the pipe or main.
   (B)   Before taking any such steps, the Superintendent shall notify the
owner of the real estate if the owner’s name and address is known, and shall
notify the person shown on the real estate tax records as having paid taxes on
the property the last time taxes were paid. Such notice shall be made by mail,
at least 30 days before any action is taken under this section.
   (C)   If water is leaking, the Superintendent shall take immediate action,
and send the notices within three working days of the time action was taken.
(Prior Code, § 38-3-22)
§ 53.048 ALTERNATIVE WATER SOURCE.
   (A)   (1)   Any customer with critical water requirements shall have an
alternate water source. Failure to provide such shall be considered a violation
of customer rules and loss or damages resulting therefrom shall be the
responsibility of the customer.
      (2)   Those customers shall include, but not be limited to,
manufacturers, hospitals, nursing homes, schools, greenhouses, hatcheries, or
any other building or business which might suffer any type of loss due to
interruption of water service.
   (B)   The village expressly stipulates with all customers and other persons
who may be affected by the discontinuance of service that it will neither
insure nor be responsible or liable in any manner for any loss or damages,
direct or indirect, by reason of fire or any other cause and all water service
furnished shall also be conditional upon acts of God, inevitable accidents,
failure of supply, fire, strikes, riots, or any other causes.
(Prior Code, § 38-3-23)
CROSS-CONNECTION ADMINISTRATION
§ 53.060 APPROVED BACKFLOW DEVICE.
   (A)   All plumbing installed within the village shall be installed in
accordance with the State Plumbing Code, 77 Ill. Adm. Code 890. If, in
accordance with the State Plumbing Code or in the judgment of the inspector, an
approved backflow prevention device is necessary for the safety of the public
water supply system, the inspector shall give notice to the water customer to
install such an approved device immediately.
   (B)   The water customer shall, at his or her own expense, install such an
approved device at a location and in a manner in accordance with the State
Plumbing Code, State Environmental Protection Agency, and all applicable local
regulations, and shall have inspections and tests made of such approved devices
upon installation and as required by the State Plumbing Code, State
Environmental Protection Agency, and local regulations.
(Prior Code, § 38-3-31)
§ 53.061 CROSS-CONNECTION PROHIBITED; EXCEPTION.
   No person shall establish or permit to be established or maintain or permit
to be maintained any connection whereby a private, auxiliary, or emergency
water supply other than the regular public water supply enters the supply or
distribution system of the village, unless such private, auxiliary, or
emergency water supply and the method of connection and use of such supply
shall have been approved by the Superintendent and the State Environmental
Protection Agency.
(Prior Code, § 38-3-32) Penalty, see §
10.999
§ 53.062 INVESTIGATIONS BY SUPERINTENDENT.
   It shall be the duty of the Superintendent to cause surveys and
investigations to be made of commercial industrial and other properties served
by the public water supply to determine whether actual or potential hazards to
the public water supply may exist. Such surveys and investigations shall be
made a matter of public record and shall be repeated at least every two years
or as often as the inspector shall deem necessary. Records of such surveys
shall be maintained and available for review for a period of at least five
years.
(Prior Code, § 38-3-33)
§ 53.063 RIGHT TO ENTER PREMISES.
   (A)   The approved cross-connection control device inspector shall have the
right to enter at any reasonable time any property served by a connection to
the public water supply or distribution system for the purpose of verifying the
presence or absence of cross-connections and that the inspector or his or her
authorized agent shall have the right to enter at any reasonable time any
property served by a connection to the public water supply or distribution
system for the purpose of verifying information submitted by the customer
regarding the required cross-connection control inspection.
   (B)   On demand, the owner, lessee, or occupants of any property so served
shall furnish to the inspector any information which he or she may request
regarding the piping system or systems or water use on such property. The
refusal of such information when demanded shall, within the discretion of the
inspector, be evidence of the presence of improper connections as provided in
this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 38-3-34)
§ 53.064 NOTICE TO CUSTOMER; RECONNECTION FEE.
   (A)   (1)   The Village Clerk is hereby authorized and directed to
discontinue, after reasonable notice to the occupant thereof, the water service
to any property wherein any connection in violation of the provisions of this
chapter is known to exist, and to take such other precautionary measures as he
or she may deem necessary to eliminate any danger of contamination of the
public water supply distribution mains.
      (2)   Water service to such property shall not be restored until such
conditions have been eliminated or corrected in compliance with the provisions
of this chapter and until a reconnection fee of $100 is paid to the Village
Clerk.
   (B)   Immediate disconnection with verbal notice can be effected when the
inspector is assured that imminent danger of harmful contamination of the
public water supply system exists. Such action shall be followed by written
notification of the cause of disconnection. Immediate disconnection without
notice to any party can be effected to prevent actual or anticipated
contamination or pollution of the public water supply; provided that, in the
reasonable opinion of the inspector or the State Environmental Protection
Agency, such action is required to prevent actual or potential contamination or
pollution of the public water supply.
   (C)   The public water supply, the inspector or the agents or assigns shall
not be liable to any customer for any injury, damages, or lost revenues which
may result from termination of the customer’s water supply in accordance with
the terms of this chapter, whether or not said termination was with or without
notice.
(Prior Code, § 38-3-35)
§ 53.065 CONTAMINATION COST.
   The consumer responsible for backsiphoned material or contamination through
backflow, if contamination of the potable water supply system occurs through an
illegal cross-connection or an improperly installed, maintained, or repaired
device, or a device which has been bypassed, shall bear the cost of clean-up of
the potable water supply system.
(Prior Code, § 38-3-36)
CROSS-CONNECTION CONTROL CODE
§ 53.080 PURPOSE.
   The purpose of these rules and regulations is:
   (A)   To protect the public water supply system from contamination or
pollution by isolating within the customer’s water system contaminants or
pollutants which could backflow through the service connection into the public
water supply system;
   (B)   To promote the elimination or control of existing cross-connections,
actual or potential, between the public or consumer’s potable water system and
non-potable water systems, plumbing fixtures, and sources or systems containing
substances of unknown or questionable safety; and
   (C)   To provide for the maintenance of a continuing program of cross-
connection control which will prevent the contamination or pollution of the
public and consumer’s potable water systems.
(Prior Code, § 38-3-41)
§ 53.081 APPLICATION.
   These rules and regulations shall apply to all premises served by the public
potable water supply system of the village.
(Prior Code, § 38-3-42)
§ 53.082 RESPONSIBILITY OF OWNER.
   (A)   The owner or official custodian shall be responsible for protection of
the public water supply system from contamination due to backflow or back-
siphonage of contaminants through the customers water service connection. If,
in the judgment of the Superintendent or his or her authorized representative,
an approved backflow prevention device is necessary for the safety of the
public water supply system, the Superintendent shall give notice to the
consumer to install such approved backflow prevention device at each service
connection to the premises.
   (B)   The consumer shall immediately install such approved device or devices
at his or her own expense; failure, refusal, or inability on the part of the
consumer to install such device or devices immediately shall constitute grounds
for discontinuing water service to the premises until such device or devices
have been installed. The consumer shall retain records of installation,
maintenance, testing, and repair as required in §
53.086(D) below for a period of at least five years. The Superintendent may
require the consumer to submit a cross-connection inspection report to the
village to assist in determining whether or not service line protection will be
required. All cross-connection inspections shall be conducted by a cross-
connection control device inspector certified by the State Environmental
Protection Agency.
(Prior Code, § 38-3-43)
§ 53.083 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   AGENCY. The Illinois Environmental Protection Agency.
   APPROVED. Backflow prevention devices or methods approved by the Research
Foundation for Cross-Connection Control of the University of Southern
California, Association of State Sanitary Engineers, American Water Works
Association, American National Standards Institute, or certified by the
National Sanitation Foundation.
   AUXILIARY WATER SYSTEM. Any water source or system on or available to the
premises other than the public water supply system and includes the water
supplied by the system. These AUXILIARY WATERS may include water from another
purveyor’s public water supply system; or water from a source such as wells,
lakes, or streams or process fluids; or used water. These waters may be
polluted or contaminated or objectionable or constitute a water source or
system over which the water purveyor does not have control.
   BACKFLOW. The backflow of water or other liquids, mixtures, or substances
into the distribution pipes of a potable water system from any source other
than the intended source of the potable water supply.
   BACKFLOW PREVENTION DEVICE. Any device, method, or type of construction
intended to prevent backflow into a potable water system. All devices used for
backflow prevention in the state must meet the standards of the State Plumbing
Code and the State Environmental Protection Agency.
   CONSUMER or CUSTOMER. The owner, official custodian, or person in control of
any premises supplied by or in any manner connected to a public water system.
   CONSUMER’S WATER SYSTEM. Any water system located on the customer’s
premises. A building plumbing system is considered to be a CUSTOMER’S WATER
SYSTEM.
   CONTAMINATION. An impairment of the quality of the water by entrance of any
substance to a degree which could create a health hazard.
   CROSS-CONNECTION. Any physical connection or arrangement between two
otherwise separate piping systems, one of which contains potable water and the
other a substance of unknown or questionable safety or quality, whereby there
may be a flow from one system into the other.
   DIRECT CROSS-CONNECTION. A cross-connection formed when a water system is
physically joined to a source of unknown or unsafe substance.
   DOUBLE CHECK VALVE ASSEMBLY. An assembly composed of single, independently
acting check valves approved under ASSE Standard 1015. A DOUBLE CHECK VALVE
ASSEMBLY and suitable connections for testing the water-tightness of each check
valve.
   FIXED PROPER AIR GAP. The unobstructed vertical distance through the free
atmosphere between the water discharge point and the flood level rim of the
receptacle.
   HEALTH HAZARD. Any condition, device, or practice in a water system or its
operation resulting from a real or potential danger to the health and well-
being of consumers. The word “severe” as used to qualify HEALTH HAZARD means a
hazard to the health of the user that could be expected to result in death or
significant reduction in the quality of life.
   INDIRECT CROSS-CONNECTION. A cross-connection through which an unknown
substance can be forced, drawn by vacuum, or otherwise introduced into a safe
potable water system.
   INSPECTION. A plumbing inspection to examine carefully and critically all
materials, fixtures, piping, and appurtenances, appliances, and installations
of a plumbing system for compliance with requirements of the State Plumbing
Code, 77 Ill. Adn. Code 890.
   NON-POTABLE WATER. Water not safe for drinking, personal, or culinary use as
determined by the requirements of 35 Ill. Adm. Code 604.
   PLUMBING. The actual installation, repair, maintenance, alteration, or
extension of a plumbing system by any person. PLUMBING includes all piping,
fixtures, appurtenances, and appliances for a supply of water for all purposes,
including, without limitation, lawn sprinkler systems, from the source of a
private water supply on the premises or from the main in the street, alley, or
at the curb to, within, and about any building or buildings where a person or
persons live, work, or assemble. PLUMBING includes all piping from discharge of
pumping units to and including pressure tanks in water supply systems. PLUMBING
includes all piping, fixtures, appurtenances, and appliances for a building
drain and a sanitary drainage and related ventilation system of any building or
buildings where a person or persons live, work, or assemble from the point of
connection of such building drain to the building sewer or private sewage
disposal system five feet beyond the foundation walls.
   POLLUTION. The presence of any foreign substance (organic, inorganic,
radiological, or biological) in water that tends to degrade its quality so as
to constitute a hazard or impair the usefulness of the water.
   POTABLE WATER. Water which meets the requirements of 35 Ill. Adm. Code 604
for drinking, culinary, and domestic purposes.
   POTENTIAL CROSS-CONNECTION. A fixture or appurtenance with threaded hose
connection, tapered spout, or other connection which would facilitate extension
of the water supply line beyond its legal termination point.
   PROCESS FLUID(S). Any fluid or solution which may be chemically,
biologically, or otherwise contaminated or polluted in a form or concentration
such as would constitute a health, pollutional, or system hazard if introduced
into the public or a consumer’s potable water system. This includes, but is not
limited to:
      (1)   Polluted or contaminated waters;
      (2)   Process waters;
      (3)   Used waters originating from the public water supply system which
may have deteriorated in sanitary quality;
      (4)   Cooling waters;
      (5)   Questionable or contaminated natural waters taken from wells,
lakes, streams, or irrigation systems;
      (6)   Chemicals in solution or suspension; and
      (6)   Oils, gases, acids, alkalis, and other liquid and gaseous fluids
used in industrial or other processes, or for fire fighting purposes.
   PUBLIC WATER SUPPLY. All mains, pipes, and structures through which water is
obtained and distributed to the public, including wells and well structures,
intakes and cribs, pumping stations, treatment plants, reservoirs, storage
tanks, and appurtenances, collectively or severally, actually used or intended
for use for the purpose of furnishing water for drinking or general domestic
use and which serve at least 15 service connections or which regularly serve at
least 25 persons at least 60 days per year. A PUBLIC WATER SUPPLY is either a
community water supply or a non-community water supply.
   REDUCED PRESSURE PRINCIPLE BACKFLOW PREVENTION DEVICE.
      (1)   A device containing a minimum of two independently acting check
valves together with an automatically operated pressure differential relief
valve located between the two check valves and approved under ASSE Standard
1013. During normal flow and at the cessation of normal flow, the pressure
between these two checks shall be less than the supply pressure.
      (2)   In case of leakage of either check valve, the differential relief
valve, by discharging to the atmosphere, shall operate to maintain the pressure
between the check valves at less than the supply pressure. The unit must
include tightly closed shut-off valves located at each end of the device, and
each device shall be fitted with properly located test cocks.
   SERVICE CONNECTION. The opening, including all fittings and appurtenances,
at the water main through which water is supplied to the user.
   SURVEY. The collection of information pertaining to a customer’s piping
system regarding the location of all connections to the public water supply
system and must include the location, type, and most recent inspection and
testing date of all cross-connection control devices and methods located within
that customer’s piping system. The SURVEY must be in written form, and should
not be an actual plumbing inspection.
   SYSTEM HAZARD. A condition through which an aesthetically objectionable or
degrading material not dangerous to health may enter the public water supply
system or a consumer’s potable water system.
   USED WATER. Any water supplied by a public water supply system to a
consumer’s water system after it has passed through the service connection and
is no longer under the control of the water supply official custodian.
   WATER PURVEYOR. The owner or official custodian of a public water system.
(Prior Code, § 38-3-44)
§ 53.084 WATER SYSTEM.
   (A)   The water system shall be considered as made up of two parts: the
public water supply system and the consumer’s water system.
   (B)   The public water supply system shall consist of the source facilities
and the distribution system, and shall include all those facilities of the
potable water system under the control of the Superintendent up to the point
where the consumer’s water system begins.
   (C)   The source shall include all components of the facilities utilized in
the production, treatment, storage, and delivery of water to the public water
supply distribution system.
   (D)   The public water supply distribution system shall include the network
of conduits used to deliver water from the source to the consumer’s water
system.
   (E)   The consumer’s water system shall include all parts of the facilities
beyond the service connection used to convey water from the public water supply
distribution system to points of use.
(Prior Code, § 38-3-45)
§ 53.085 CROSS-CONNECTION PROHIBITED.
   (A)   Connections between potable water systems and other systems or
equipment containing water or other substances of unknown or questionable
quality are prohibited except when and where approved cross-connection control
devices or methods are installed, tested, and maintained to ensure proper
operation on a continuing basis.
   (B)   No physical connection shall be permitted between the potable portion
of a supply and any other water supply not of equal or better bacteriological
and chemical quality as determined by inspection and analysis by the State
Environmental Protection Agency.
   (C)   There shall be no arrangement or connection by which an unsafe
substance may enter a supply.
(Prior Code, § 38-3-46)
§ 53.086 SURVEY AND INVESTIGATIONS.
   (A)   The consumer’s premises shall be open at all reasonable times to the
approved cross-connection control device inspector for the inspection of the
presence or absence of cross-connections within the consumer’s premises, and
testing, repair, and maintenance of cross-connection control devices within the
consumer’s premises.
   (B)   (1)   On request of the Superintendent, or his or her authorized
representative, the consumer shall furnish information regarding the piping
system or systems or water use within the customer’s premises.
      (2)   The consumer’s premises shall be open at all reasonable times to
the Superintendent for the verification of information submitted by the
inspection consumer to the public water supply custodian regarding cross-
connection inspection results.
   (C)   (1)   It shall be the responsibility of the water consumer to arrange
periodic surveys of water use practices on his or her premises to determine
whether there are actual or potential cross-connections to his or her water
system through which contaminants or pollutants could backflow into his or her
public potable water system.
      (2)   All cross-connection control or other plumbing inspections must be
conducted in accordance with 225 ILCS 320/3.
   (D)   It is the responsibility of the water consumer to prevent backflow
into the public water system by ensuring that:
      (1)   All cross-connections are removed; or approved cross-connection
control devices are installed for control of backflow and back-siphonage;
      (2)   Cross-connection control devices shall be installed in accordance
with the manufacturer’s instructions;
      (3)   Cross-connection control devices shall be inspected at the time of
installation and at least annually by a person approved by the State
Environmental Protection Agency as a cross-connection control device inspector
(CCCDI). The inspection of mechanical devices shall include physical testing in
accordance with the manufacturer’s instructions; and
      (4)   Testing and records.
         (a)   Each device shall be tested at the time of installation and at
least annually or more frequently if recommended by the manufacturer.
         (b)   Records submitted to the community public water supply shall be
available for inspection by the State Environmental Protection Agency personnel
in accordance with 415 ILCS 5/4(e).
         (c)   Each device shall have a tag attached listing the date of most
recent test, name of CCCDI, and type and date of repairs.
         (d)   A maintenance log shall be maintained and include:
            1.   Date of each test;
            2.   Name and approval number of person performing the test;
            3.   Test results;
            4.   Repairs or servicing required;
            5.   Repairs and date completed; and
            6.   Serving performed and date completed.
(Prior Code, § 38-3-47)
§ 53.087 PROTECTION REQUIRED.
   (A)   (1)   An approved backflow device shall be installed on all
connections to the public water supply as described in the Plumbing Code, 77
Ill. Adm. Code 890 and the Agency’s regulations 35 Ill. Adm. Code 680. In
addition, an approved backflow prevention device shall be installed on each
service line to a consumer’s water system serving premises, where in the
judgment of the Superintendent, actual, or potential hazards to the public
water supply system exist.
      (2)   An approved backflow prevention device shall be installed on each
service line to a consumer’s water system serving premises where the following
conditions exist:
         (a)   Premises having an auxiliary water supply, unless such auxiliary
supply is accepted as an additional source by the Superintendent and the source
is approved by the State Environmental Protection Agency;
         (b)   Premises on which any substance is handled which can create an
actual or potential hazard to the public water supply system. This shall
include premises having sources or system containing process fluids or waters
originating from the public water supply system which are no longer under the
sanitary control of the Superintendent;
         (c)   Premises having internal cross-connections that, in the judgment
of the Superintendent, are not correctable or intricate plumbing arrangements
it make which impractical to determine whether or not cross-connections exist;
         (d)   Premises where, because of security requirements or other
prohibitions or restrictions, it is impossible or impractical to make a
complete cross-connection survey; and
         (e)   Premises having a repeated history or cross-connections being
established or reestablished.
      (3)   An approved backflow device shall be installed on all connections
to the public water supply as described in the Plumbing Code, 77 Ill. Adm. Code
890 and the Agency’s regulations 35 Ill. Adm. Code 653. In addition, an
approved backflow prevention device shall be installed on each service line to
a consumer’s water system serving, but not necessarily limited to, the
following types of facilities unless the Superintendent determines that no
actual or potential hazard to the public water supply system exists:
         (a)   Hospitals, mortuaries, clinics, nursing homes;
         (b)   Laboratories;
         (c)   Piers, docks, and waterfront facilities;
         (d)   Sewage treatment plants, sewage pumping stations, or storm water
pumping stations;
         (e)   Food or beverage processing plants;
         (f)   Chemical plants;
         (g)   Metal plating industries;
         (h)   Petroleum processing or storage plants;
         (i)   Radioactive material processing plants or nuclear reactors;
         (j)   Car washes;
         (k)   Pesticide, herbicide, or extermination plants and truck; and
         (l)   Farm service and fertilizer plants and trucks.
(Prior Code, § 38-3-48)
   (B)   (1)   The type of protection required under division (A) above shall
depend on the degree of hazard which exists as follows:
         (a)   An approved fixed proper air gap separation shall be installed
where the public water supply system may be contaminated with substances that
could cause a severe health hazard;
         (b)   An approved fixed proper air gap separation or an approved
reduced pressure principle backflow prevention assembly shall be installed
where the public water supply system may be contaminated with a substance that
could cause a system or health hazard; or
         (c)   An approved fixed proper air gap separation or an approved
reduced pressure principle backflow prevention assembly or a double check valve
assembly shall be installed where the public water supply system may be
polluted with substances that could cause a pollution hazard not dangerous to
health.
      (2)   The type of protection required under division (A) above of these
regulations shall be an approved fixed proper air gap separation or an approved
reduced pressure principle backflow prevention connected to the public water
supply when:
      (3)   Where a public water supply or an auxiliary water supply is used
for a fire protection system, reduced pressure principle backflow preventers
shall be installed on fire safety systems connected to the public water supply
when:
         (a)   The fire safety system contains antifreeze, fire retardant, or
other chemicals;
         (b)   Water is pumped into the system from another source;
         (c)   Water flows by gravity from a non-potable source, or water can
be pumped into the fire safety system from any other source; or
         (d)   There is a connection whereby another source can be introduced
into the fire safety system.
      (4)   All other fire safety systems connected to the potable water supply
shall be protected by a double check valve assembly on metered service lines
and a double detector check valve assembly on unmetered service lines.
(Prior Code, § 38-3-49)
§ 53.088 BACKFLOW PREVENTION DEVICES.
   (A)   All backflow prevention devices or methods required by these rules and
regulations shall be approved by the Research Foundation for Cross-Connection
Control of the University of Southern California, American Water Works
Association, American Society of Sanitary Engineering, or American National
Standards Institute, or certified by the National Sanitation Foundation to be
in compliance with applicable industry specification.
   (B)   Installation of approved devices shall be made in accordance with the
manufacturer’s instructions. Maintenance, as recommended by the manufacturer of
the device, shall be performed. The manufacturer’s maintenance manual shall be
available on-site.
(Prior Code, § 38-3-50)
§ 53.089 INSPECTION AND MAINTENANCE.
   (A)   It shall be the duty of the consumer at any premises on which backflow
prevention devices required by these regulations are installed to have
inspection, tests, maintenance, and repair made in accordance with the
following schedule or more often where inspections indicate a need or are
specified in manufacturer’s instructions.
      (1)   Fixed proper air gap separations shall be inspected to document
that a proper vertical distance is maintained between the discharge point of
the service line and the flood level rim of the receptacle at the time of
installation and at least annually thereafter. Corrections to improper or
bypassed air gaps shall be made within 24 hours.
      (2)   Double check valve assemblies shall be inspected and tested at time
of installation and at least annually thereafter, and required service
performed within five days.
      (3)   Reduced pressure principle backflow prevention assemblies shall be
tested at the time of installation and at least annually or more frequently if
recommended by the manufacturer, and required service performed within five
days.
   (B)   Testing shall be performed by a person who has been approved by the
agency as competent to service the device. Proof of approval shall be in
writing.
   (C)   Each device shall have a tag attached listing the date of most recent
test or visual inspection, name of tester, and type and date of repairs.
   (D)   A maintenance log shall be maintained and include:
      (1)   Date of each test or visual inspection;
      (2)   Name and approval number of person performing the test or visual
inspection;
      (3)   Test results;
      (4)   Repairs or servicing required;
      (5)   Repairs and date completed; and
      (6)   Servicing performed and date completed.
   (E)   Whenever backflow prevention devices required by these regulations are
found to be defective, they shall be repaired or replaced at the expense of the
consumer without delay as required by §
53.080(A).
   (F)   Backflow prevention devices shall not be bypassed, made inoperative,
removed, or otherwise made ineffective without specific authorization by the
Superintendent.
(Prior Code, § 38-3-51)
§ 53.090 BOOSTER PUMPS.
   Where a booster pump has been installed on the service line to or within any
premises, such pump shall be equipped with a low pressure cut-off device
designed to shut-off the booster pump when the pressure in the service line on
the suction side of the pump drops to 20 psi or less. It shall be the duty of
the water consumer to maintain the low pressure cut-off device in proper
working order and to certify to the Superintendent, at least once a year, that
the device is operable.
(Prior Code, § 38-3-52)
§ 53.091 VIOLATIONS.
   (A)   The Superintendent shall deny or discontinue, after reasonable notice
to the occupants thereof, the water service to any premises wherein any
backflow prevention device required by these regulations is not installed,
tested, maintained, and repaired in a manner acceptable to the Superintendent,
or if it is found that the backflow prevention device has been removed or
bypassed, or if an unprotected cross-connection exists on the premises, or if a
low pressure cut-off required by these regulations is not installed and
maintained in working order.
   (B)   Water service to such premises shall not be restored until the
consumer has corrected or eliminated such conditions or defects in conformance
with these regulations and to the satisfaction of the Superintendent, and the
required reconnection fee is paid.
   (C)   Water service to such premises shall not be restored until the
consumer has corrected or eliminated such conditions or defects on conformance
with these regulations and to the satisfaction of the Superintendent.
   (D)   Neither the village, the Superintendent, or its agents or assigns,
shall be liable to any customers of the village for any injury, damages, or
lost revenues which may result from termination of said customer’s water supply
in accordance with the terms of this chapter, whether or not said termination
of the water supply was with or without notice.
   (E)   The consumer responsible for back-siphoned material or contamination
through backflow, if contamination of the potable water supply system occurs
through an illegal cross-connection or an improperly installed, maintained, or
repaired device, or a device which has been bypassed, must bear the cost of
clean-up of the potable water supply system.
   (F)   Any person found to be violating any provision of this code shall be
served with written notice stating the notice of the violation and providing a
reasonable time limit for the satisfactory correction thereof. The offender
shall, within the period of time stated in such notice, permanently cease all
violation.
   (G)   Any person violating any of the provisions of this code in addition to
the fine provided shall become liable to the village for any expense, loss, or
damage occasioned by the village by reason of such violation, whether the same
was caused before or after notice.
(Prior Code, § 38-3-53) Penalty, see §
10.999
EXTENSION OF MAINS
§ 53.105 TITLE.
   Title to all main extensions shall be vested in the village and the village
shall have the right to further extend any main installed in and to other
streets or premises without repayment or refund to any applicant. However, the
village reserves the right to consider extensions made at the applicant’s
expense and without written agreement as to service lines. Upon such lines, the
village will set a meter at the beginning of the extension to measure all water
used and title to the line beyond the meter will be vested in the customer who
shall be responsible for maintenance and replacement, when necessary.
(Prior Code, § 38-3-64)
§ 53.106 DETERMINATION OF PAYMENT.
   (A)   The Board of Trustees shall first determine if an extension of water
main is economically feasible based on the estimated cost of the extension and
the number of existing potential users that will use water along the extension.
If the extension is economically feasible then the village may install and pay
the cost of the extension at the discretion of the Board of Trustees.
   (B)   If the village elects not to pay the cost of extending the water main,
then the person or persons desiring water service shall install the extension
at his, her, or their own personal expense upon written consent by the Board of
Trustees.
   (C)   The village may not pay for any extensions to an undeveloped area,
such as a subdivision being developed, unless there are sufficient existing
residents or businesses to make the extension economically feasible. All
extensions shall comply with the Standard Specifications for Water and Sewer
Construction in the State of Illinois. (See Appendix #2)
(Prior Code, § 38-3-61)
§ 53.107 EASEMENTS.
   Applicants for main extensions shall deliver, without cost to the village,
permanent easements, or right-of-way when necessary for the installation and
maintenance of the extensions or subsequent additions thereto. The village
shall not be obligated to authorize any construction until all requirements of
this chapter have been met.
(Prior Code, § 38-3-62)
§ 53.108 SIZE AND TYPE.
   The village reserves the right to determine and specify the diameter and
type of pipe required to provide the service requested, and subject to the
requirements of municipal authorities, its location within or without the
limits of a street. The village further reserves the right to install a main
larger in diameter than the main required to render the service requested, in
which case, the village will pay the difference in cost.
(Prior Code, § 38-3-63)
§ 53.109 MAINTENANCE AND REPLACEMENT.
   The village, at its own expense, shall maintain and, when necessary, replace
the village-owned mains used to supply water to its customers, and if adequate
service requires the reconstruction or replacement of such mains, the mains
shall be reconstructed or replaced by the village at its expense.
(Prior Code, § 38-3-65)
RATES AND SERVICE CHARGES
§ 53.120 DEFINITION.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definition shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   BUILDING UNIT. All persons or families residing in a building under one
roof, be it an apartment or homes converted into more than one dwelling place,
each family or individual resident residing therein shall be deemed an
individual customer or such homes, apartments, or dwellings shall be billed for
at least one minimum water and/or sewer account according to the number of
families or individual residents residing therein.
(Prior Code, § 38-3-70)
§ 53.121 WATER REVENUES.
   (A)   (1)   All revenues and moneys derived from the operation of the water
system shall be deposited in the water account of the water fund.
      (2)   All such revenues and moneys shall be held by the Village Treasurer
separate and apart from its private funds and separate and apart from all other
funds of the Village Treasurer not more than ten days after receipt of the
same, or at such more frequent intervals as may from time to time be directed
by the Board of Trustees.
   (B)   The Village Treasurer shall receive all such revenues from the water
system and all other funds and moneys incident to the operation of such system
as the same may be delivered to him or her and deposit the same in the account
of the fund designated as the “Water System Fund of the Village.” The Village
Treasurer shall administer such Fund in every respect in the manner provided by
65 ILCS 5/3.1-35-40 et seq.
(Prior Code, § 38-3-71)
§ 53.122 WATER ACCOUNTS.
   (A)   The Village Treasurer shall establish a proper system of accounts and
shall keep proper books, records, and accounts in which complete and correct
entries shall be made of all transactions relative to the system, and at
regular annual intervals shall cause to be made an audit by an independent
auditing concern of the books to show the receipts and disbursements of the
water system.
   (B)   In addition to the customary operating statements, the annual audit
report shall also reflect the revenues and operating expenses of the water
facilities, including a replacement cost. The financial information to be shown
in the audit report shall include the following:
      (1)   Flow data showing total gallons received at the water plant for the
current fiscal year;
      (2)   Billing data to show total number of gallons billed per fiscal
year;
      (3)   Debt service for the next succeeding fiscal year;
      (4)   Number of users connected to the system; and
      (5)   Number of non-metered users.
(Prior Code, § 38-3-72)
§ 53.123 ACCESS TO BOOKS.
   The State Environmental Protection Agency or its authorized representative
shall have access to any books, documents, papers, and records of the village
which are applicable to the village system of user charges for the purpose of
making audit, examination, excerpts, and transcriptions thereof to ensure
compliance with the terms of any loan agreement with the village.
(Prior Code, § 38-3-73)
§ 53.124 NOTICE OF RATES.
   (A)   A copy of this chapter, properly certified by the Village Clerk, shall
be filed in the office of the County Recorder of Deeds and shall be deemed
notice to all owners of real estate of the charges of the sewer system of the
village on their properties.
   (B)   Each user shall be notified at least annually, in conjunction with a
regular bill, of the rate and that portion of the user charges which are
attributable to sewer treatment services.
(Prior Code, § 38-3-74)
§ 53.125 APPEALS.
   The method for computation of rates and service charges established for user
charges in §§
53.120 through
53.127 shall be made available to a user within 15 days of receipt of a written
request for such. Any disagreement over the method used, or in the computation
thereof, shall be remedied by a third party selected by both parties within 90
days after notification of a formal written appeal outlining the discrepancies.
(Prior Code, § 38-3-75)
§ 53.126 ADEQUACY OF SERVICE CHARGES.
   (A)   The adequacy of the water service charge shall be reviewed, not less
often than annually by the Board of Trustees with assistance if requested by
the Board of Trustees from the Village Engineer and any accountant performing
audit services for the village. The water service charge rates shall be revised
periodically to reflect the change in local capital costs or operation,
maintenance, and replacement costs. The rates established by the village from
time to time shall include a basic user charge, a debt service charge, and a
capital improvement charge. The basic user charge is levied on all users to
recover the operation, maintenance plus replacement (O, M, and R) costs and
shall be based on water usage as recorded by water meters.
   (B)   The basic user charge shall be computed as follows:
      (1)   Estimate the annual water volume;
      (2)   Estimated the projected annual revenue required to operate and
maintain the water facilities, including a replacement fund for the year, for
all works categories; and
      (3)   Compute costs per 1,000 gallons.
   (C)   The debt service charge is computed by apportioning the annual debt
service as a charge per 1,000 gallons. The capital improvement charge is levied
on users to provide for capital improvements, extensions or reconstruction of
the water works. The capital improvement charge is computed by apportioning the
annual amount to be accrued as a charge per 1,000 gallons.
(Prior Code, § 38-3-76)
§ 53.127 COMPUTATION.
   The method for computation of rates and service charges established for user
charges in this chapter shall be made available to a user within 20 days of
receipt of a written request for such. Any disagreement over the method used or
in the computations thereof shall be remedied by the village within 45 days
after notification of a formal written appeal outlining the discrepancies.
(Prior Code, § 38-3-77)
§ 53.128 TAP-ON FEES.
   (A)   Inside village limits.
      (1)   All applicants for water service within the village limits shall
complete the prescribed application form found in the appendix to this chapter
and shall pay in advance the connection fees prescribed applicable to the water
service requested. The tap-in or connection fee shall be based upon the size of
the water line and tap into the water system. The schedule of connection
charges shall be as follows:
 
Size of Tap Connection Fee
3/4 inch    $1,200
1 inch      $1,200
Over 1 inch Cost of materials and labor
 
      (2)   The aforementioned connection fee shall include up to 25 feet of
service line from the water main to the property line.
      (3)   All applicants for water connections larger than two and one-half
inches shall pay the cost of all labor and materials as estimated by the
Superintendent prior to the installation of the service connection.
   (B)   Outside village. Applicants for water service outside the village may
be accepted if there is an existing acceptable main in a street or right-of-way
abutting the premises to be served. Easements shall be furnished without cost
to the village for the installation and maintenance of service lines and for
existing mains, which mains shall become the property of the village. The
village may authorize the extension, of a main at the expense of the applicant
in areas not served by a village-owned water main. Applicants shall pay the
village a tap-on fee of $1,200 per connection for a water line up to one inch
in size. For water lines over one inch, the customer will be charged the cost
of material and labor. The cost of the water meter, labor, and all materials
shall be paid by the applicant prior to the installation.
   (C)   State Plumbing Code. All water tap and service connections made to the
mains of the waterworks system of the village shall conform to the regulations
of this code of ordinances and of the State Plumbing Code. All connections and
installations shall be made by a licensed plumber.
(Prior Code, § 38-3-78) (Ord. 618, passed 8-6-1990; Ord. 05-02, passed 5-16-
2005)
§ 53.129 WATER PURCHASE CONTRACT.
   The village hereby approves the water purchase contract with Kaskaskia Water
District, which can be found in the Table of Special Ordinances and is
incorporated herein by reference.
(Prior Code, § 38-3-81) (Ord. 18-03, passed 5-7-2018)
Cross-reference:
   Contracts, see
TSO Table II
CHAPTER 54: SEWAGE
Section
General Provisions
   
54.001   Definitions
   
54.002   Use required
   
54.003   Village’s responsibility and liability
   
54.004   User responsibility
   
54.005   Extension of mains
   
54.006   Violations
Private Sewage Disposal Systems
   
54.020   Private disposal facilities; regulations
   
54.021   Permit
   
54.022   Inspection
   
54.023   Requirements for system
   
54.024   Maintenance of system
   
54.025   Availability of public connection
Building Sewers and Connections
   
54.040   Permit required
   
54.041   Unlawful discharges
   
54.042   Permit application; fee
   
54.043   Capacity of sewer
   
54.044   Cost of installation
   
54.045   Independent building sewer required
   
54.046   Old building sewers
   
54.047   Size and alignment
   
54.048   Elevation
   
54.049   Downspouts prohibited
   
54.050   Plumbing Code
   
54.051   Notification for inspection
   
54.052   Barricades at excavations
   
54.053   Grinder pump and service installations
Use and Protection of System
   
54.065   Storm water discharge
   
54.066   Prohibited discharges; pollution
   
54.067   Industrial wastes and discharges; control manhole
   
54.068   Specific substances prohibited
   
54.069   Approval of prohibited wastes
   
54.070   Interceptors provided
   
54.071   Facility maintenance
   
54.072   Laboratory analyses
   
54.073   Testing requirements
   
54.074   Special arrangements
   
54.075   Unauthorized damage
Powers and Authority of Inspectors
   
54.090   Inspection and testing
   
54.091   Observation of safety rules
   
54.092   Private property inspections
Sewer Repairs
   
54.105   Customer responsible
   
54.106   Village access; notification
   
54.107   Failure to repair
   
54.108   Joint liability
   
54.109   Reimbursement to village
   
54.110   Failure to pay claim; lien and foreclosure
   
54.111   Legal remedies
   
54.112   Unrepaired sewer line declared nuisance
Payment Procedures
   
54.125   Definition
   
54.126   Revenues
   
54.127   Accounts
   
54.128   Notice of rates
   
54.129   Access to records
   
54.130   Appeals
   
54.131   Costs bourne by owner
Rates and Service Charges
   
54.145   Basis for wastewater service charges
   
54.146   Measurement of flow
   
54.147   Debt service charge
   
54.148   Basic user rate
   
54.149   Surcharge
   
54.150   Service charge computation
   
54.151   Initial and minimum charges mandatory
   
54.152   Connection or tap-in fees
 
   
54.999   Penalty
   
Appendix A: Objectionable material effluent limits
   
Appendix B: Private waste disposal application
   
Appendix C: Residential or commercial building sewer application
   
Appendix C1: Residential or commercial building sewer application
   
Appendix C2: Residential or commercial building sewer with grinder pump
application
   
Appendix D: Industrial sewer connection application
   
Appendix E: Application for sanitary sewer service connection
   
Appendix F: Application for water system service connection
   
Appendix G: Receipt
   
Appendix H: Certificate of inspection, approval, and permit
   
Appendix I: Interceptors
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 54.001 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ADMINISTRATOR. The Administrator of the United States Environmental
Protection Agency.
   APPROVING AUTHORITY. The village.
   BIOCHEMICAL OXYGEN DEMAND (BOD). The quantity of oxygen utilized in the
biochemical oxidation of organic matter under standard laboratory procedure in
five days at 20°C, expressed in milligrams per liter.
   BUILDING DRAIN. The part of the lowest piping of a drainage system which
receives the discharge from soil, waste, and other drainage pipes inside the
walls of the building and conveys it to the building sewer or other approved
point of discharge, beginning five feet (one and one-half meters) outside the
inner face of the building wall.
   BUILDING SEWER. The extension from the building drain to the public sewer or
other place of disposal.
   CHARGES. The types of user charges, fees, and related funds and terms are:
      (1)   BASIC USER CHARGE. The basic assessment levied on all users of the
public sewer system.
      (2)   DEBT SERVICE CHARGE. The amount to be paid each billing period for
payment of interest, principal, and coverage of (loan, bond, and the like)
outstanding and shall be computed by dividing the annual debt service by the
number of users connected to the wastewater facilities.
      (3)   GRINDER PUMP MAINTENANCE FUND. The fund designated by the village
to hold the funds generated by the monthly surcharge to pay for the cost of the
grinder pump maintenance contractor as described under §
54.053(C)(2).
      (4)   REPLACEMENT. Expenditures for obtaining and installing equipment,
accessories, or appurtenances which are necessary during the service life of
the treatment works to maintain the capacity and performance for which such
works were designed and constructed. The term “operation and maintenance”
includes REPLACEMENT.
      (5)   SEWERAGE FUND. The principal accounting designation for all
revenues received in the operation of the sewerage system.
      (6)   SURCHARGE. The assessment in addition to the basic user charge and
debt service charge which is levied on those persons whose wastes are greater
in strength than average concentration values as established by code.
      (7)   USEFUL LIFE. The estimated period during which the collection
system and/or treatment works will be operated.
      (8)   USER CHARGE. A charge levied on users of treatment works for the
cost operation and maintenance.
      (9)   WASTEWATER SERVICE CHARGE. The charge per quarter or month levied
on all users of the wastewater facilities. The SERVICE CHARGE shall be computed
as outlined in this chapter and shall consist of the total or the basic user
charge, the debt service charge and a surcharge, if applicable.
   COMBINED SEWER. A sewer which is designed and intended to receive
wastewater, storm, surface, and ground water drainage.
   CONTROL MANHOLE. A structure located on a site from which industrial wastes
are discharged. Where feasible, the manhole shall have an interior drop. The
purpose of a CONTROL MANHOLE is to provide access for the village
representative to sample and/or measure discharges.
   DIRECTOR. The Director of the Illinois Environmental Protection Agency.
   EASEMENT. An acquired legal right for the specific use of land owned by
other.
   EFFLUENT CRITERIA. Are defined in any applicable NPDES permit.
   FEDERAL ACT. The Federal Clean Water Act (33 U.S.C. 1251 et seq.), as
amended (Pub. L. No. 95-217).
   FEDERAL GRANT. The United States government participation in the financing
of the construction of treatment works as provided for by Title II: Grants for
Construction of Treatment Works of the Act, being 33 U.S. Code, Subch. II, §
1281 et seq., and implementing regulations.
   FLOATABLE OIL. Oil, fat, or grease in a physical state such that it will
separate by gravity from wastewater by treatment in an approved pretreatment
facility. A wastewater shall be considered free of floatable fat if it is
properly pretreated and the wastewater does not interfere with the collection
system.
   FORCE MAIN. A pipe constructed or used to carry sewage under pressure.
   GARBAGE. Solid wastes from the domestic and commercial preparation, cooking,
and dispensing of food, and from the handling, storage, and sale of produce.
   GRINDER PUMP. A mechanical device that shreds solids and raises sewage to a
higher elevation through pressure sewers.
   INDUSTRIAL WASTE. Any solid, liquid, or gaseous substance discharged,
permitted to flow or escaping from any industrial, manufacturing, commercial,
or business establishment or process or from the development, recovery, or
processing of any natural resource as distinct from sanitary sewage.
   MAJOR CONTRIBUTING INDUSTRY. An industrial user the publicly owned treatment
works that:
      (1)   Has a flow of 50,000 gallons or more per average work day;
      (2)   Has a flow greater than 10% of the flow carried by the municipal
system receiving the waste;
      (3)   Has in its waste, a toxic pollutant in toxic amounts as defined in
standards issued under § 307(a) of the Federal Act, being 33 U.S.C. § 1317(a);
or
      (4)   Is found by the permit issuance authority, in connection with the
issuance of the NPDES permit to the publicly owned treatment works receiving
the waste, to have significant impact, either singly or in combination with
other contributing industries, on that treatment works or upon the quality of
effluent from that treatment works.
   MILLIGRAMS PER LITER (mg/l). A unit of the concentration of water or
wastewater constituent. It is 0.001 gram of the constituent in 1,000 milliliter
of water. It has replaced the unit formerly used commonly, parts per million,
to which it is approximately equivalent, in reporting the results of water and
wastewater analysis.
   NATURAL OUTLET. Any outlet into a watercourse, pond, ditch, lake, or other
body of surface or ground water.
   NPDES PERMIT. Any permit or equivalent document or requirements issued by
the Administrator, or, where appropriated by the Director, after enactment of
the Federal Water Pollution Control Amendments of 1972, to regulate the
discharge of pollutants pursuant to § 402 of the Federal Act, being 33 U.S.C. §
1342.
   PERSON. Any and all persons, natural or artificial, including any
individual, firm, company, municipal or private cooperation, association,
society, institution, enterprise, governmental agency, or other entity.
   pH. The logarithm (base 10) of the reciprocal of the hydrogen-ion
concentration expressed by one of the procedures outlined in the IEPA Division
of Laboratories’ Manual of Laboratory Methods.
   POPULATION EQUIVALENT. A term used to evaluate the impact of industrial or
other waste on a treatment works or stream. One population equivalent is 100
gallons of sewage per day, containing 0.17 pounds of BOD and 0.21 pounds of
suspended solids.
   PPM. Parts per million by weight.
   PRETREATMENT. The treatment of wastewater from sources before introduction
into the wastewater treatment works.
   PROPERLY SHREDDED GARBAGE. The wastes from the preparation, cooking, and
dispensing of food that have been shredded to such a degree that all particles
will be carried freely under the flow conditions normally prevailing in public
sewers, with no particle greater than one-half inch (1.27 centimeters) in any
dimension.
   PUBLIC SEWER. A sewer provided by or subject to the jurisdiction of the
village. It shall also include sewers within or outside the village boundaries
that serve one or more persons and ultimately discharge into the village
sanitary sewer or combined sewer system, even though those sewers may not have
been constructed with village funds.
   SANITARY SEWER. A sewer that conveys sewage or industrial wastes or a
combination of both, and into which storm, surface, and ground waters or
unpolluted industrial wastes are not intentionally admitted.
   SEWAGE. Used interchangeably with WASTEWATER.
   SEWER. A pipe or conduit for conveying sewage or any other waste liquids,
including storm, surface, and ground water drainage.
   SEWERAGE. The system of sewers and appurtenances for the collection,
transportation, and pumping of sewage.
   SLUG. Any discharge of water, sewage, or industrial waste which in
concentration of any given constituent or in quantity of flow exceeds for any
period of duration longer than 15 minutes more than five times the average 24-
hour concentration or flows during normal operation.
   STANDARD METHODS. The examination and analytical procedures set forth in the
most recent addition of Standard Methods for the Examination of Water and
Wastewater published jointly by the American Public Health Association, the
Water Pollution Control Federation, and the American Water Works Association.
   STATE ACT. The Illinois’ Anti-Pollution Bond Act of 1970, being 30 ILCS 405/
1 et seq.
   STATE GRANT. The State of Illinois participation in the financing of the
construction of treatment works as provided for by the Illinois Anti-Pollution
Bond Act and for making such grants as filed with the Secretary of Illinois.
   STORM SEWER. A sewer that carries storm, surface, and ground water drainage,
but excludes sewage and industrial wastes other than unpolluted cooling water.
   STORM WATER RUNOFF. The portion of the precipitation that is drained into
the sewers.
   SUSPENDED SOLIDS (SS). Solids that either float on the surface of, or are in
suspension in water, sewage, or industrial waste, and which are removable by a
laboratory filtration device. Quantitative determination of suspended solids
shall be made in accordance with procedures set forth in the IEPA Division of
Laboratories’ Manual of Laboratory Methods.
   UNPOLLUTED WATER. Water of quality equal to or better than the effluent
criteria in effect or water that would not cause violation of receiving water
quality standards and would not be benefited by discharge to the sanitary
sewers and wastewater treatment facilities provided.
   USER. The types of system users are as follows:
      (1)   COMMERCIAL USER. Include transit lodging, retail, and wholesale
establishments or places engaged in selling merchandise, or rendering services.
      (2)   INSTITUTIONAL/GOVERNMENTAL USER. Includes schools, hospitals,
churches, penal institutions, and users associated with federal, state, and
local government.
      (3)   INDUSTRIAL USER. Includes establishments engaged in manufacturing
activities involving the mechanical or chemical transformation of materials of
substance into products.
      (4)   RESIDENTIAL USER. All dwelling units such as houses, mobile homes,
apartments, and permanent multi-family dwellings.
      (5)   USER CLASS. The type of user; either residential, institutional/
governmental, commercial, or industrial, as defined herein.
   WASTEWATER. The spent water of a community. From this standpoint of course,
it may be a combination of the liquid and water-carried wastes from residences,
commercial buildings, industrial plants, and institutions, together with any
ground water, surface water, and storm water that may be present.
   WASTEWATER FACILITIES. The structures, equipment, and processes required to
collect, carry away, and treat domestic and industrial wastes and transport
effluent to a watercourse.
   WASTEWATER TREATMENT WORKS. An arrangement of devices and structures for
treating wastewater, industrial wastes, and sludge. Sometimes used as
synonymous with WASTE TREATMENT PLANT, WASTEWATER TREATMENT PLANT, or POLLUTION
CONTROL PLANT.
   WATERCOURSE. A channel in which a flow of water occurs, either continuously
or intermittently.
   WATER QUALITY STANDARDS. As defined in the water pollution regulations of
the state.
(Prior Code, § 38-5-1) (Ord. 08-01, passed 2-4-2008)
§ 54.002 USE REQUIRED.
   (A)   Except as hereinafter provided, it shall be unlawful to construct or
maintain any privy, privy vault, septic tank, cesspool, or other facility
intended or used for the disposal of sewage.
(Prior Code, § 38-5-7)
   (B)   The owner of all the houses, buildings, or properties used for human
occupancy, employment, recreation, or other purposes situated within the
village and abutting on any street, alley, or right-of-way in which there is
now located or may in the future be located any public sanitary (or combined)
sewer of the village is hereby required at his or her expense to install
suitable toilet facilities therein, and to connect such facilities directly
with the proper public sewer in accordance with the provisions of this code,
within 60 days after date of official notice to do so; provided that said
public sewer is within 300 feet (91.4 meters) of the property line.
(Prior Code, § 38-5-8)
Penalty, see §
10.999
§ 54.003 VILLAGE’S RESPONSIBILITY AND LIABILITY.
   (A)   Ownership, installation, and maintenance. The village shall install,
own, and maintain the complete sewer system, sewer mains, and service lines to
the property lines or a mutually agreed upon point subject to the Board of
Trustees’ determination that a particular service is economically feasible to
install.
   (B)   Refusal of service. The village may at any time refuse additional
services to any applicant if in the judgment of the Board of Trustees the
capacity of the system will not permit such use.
   (C)   Liability. All sewer service supplied by the village shall be upon the
express condition that the village shall not be liable nor shall any claim be
made against it for damages or injury caused by reason of the inability of any
user to use the sewer system during repairs, relocation, or expansion of any
part of the system, or failure of any part of the system.
   (D)   Use of sewer services on user premises. The user shall be responsible
for installation and maintenance of service lines between the manhole or sewer
main and the residence or business of the user. Such service lines must be
installed according to the specifications as required by the village. Service
lines must not be covered until they are inspected and approved by the
Superintendent. The user shall not connect any service line or any plumbing
connected with the service line until approved by the Superintendent. The
service line must meet any requirements of the State Environmental Protection
Agency.
(Prior Code, § 38-5-56)
§ 54.004 USER RESPONSIBILITY.
   (A)   Installing and maintaining service lines. The user shall be
responsible for installation and maintenance of service lines between the
manhole or sewer main and the residence or business of the user. Such service
lines must be installed according to the specifications as required by the
village. Service lines must not be covered until they are inspected and
approved by a duly authorized village representative. The user will not connect
any service line or any plumbing connected with the service line until approved
by the village. The service line must meet any requirements of the State
Environmental Protection Agency, and all connections to either the manhole or
sewer main shall be done by an Illinois licensed plumber at the user’s expense.
   (B)   Easements. The user shall give such easements and rights-of-way as
necessary to the village and allow access for the purpose of construction,
repair, maintenance, and relocation or expansion of the sewer system. The
necessity shall be determined by the Board of Trustees.
   (C)   Damage to the village. No user shall tamper, adjust, damage in any
manner, or interfere with the components or operation of the sewer system owned
by the village.
   (D)   Specified uses. Users may discharge into the sewage collection
facility of the village only waste which is produced in the ordinary domestic
or farm use upon the premises of the user, provided:
      (1)   No user shall charge another person for the discharge of waste
through the user’s property;
      (2)   Each dwelling, apartment, business, and livestock tap is a separate
unit. The user must make application for service for each unit, and each unit
shall have a separate service line, unless otherwise approved by the Board of
Trustees. Each user shall pay the minimum monthly rate and other rates and fees
hereby established for each unit; and
      (3)   Uses other than ordinary domestic and farm use may be approved by
the Board of Trustees upon such specific terms and conditions as may be set
forth by the Board of Trustees in each case.
(Prior Code, § 38-5-57) (Ord. 25-06, passed 7-21-2025)
§ 54.005 EXTENSION OF MAINS.
   (A)   (1)   The Board of Trustee shall first determine if an extension of a
sewer main is economically feasible based on the estimated cost of the
extension and the number of existing potential users that will be served by the
extension.
      (2)   If the extension is economically feasible, then the village may
install and pay the cost of the extension at the discretion of the Board of
Trustees.
      (3)   If the village elects not to pay the cost of extending the sewer
main, then the person or persons desiring sewer service shall install the
extension at his, her, or their own personal expense upon written consent by
the Board of Trustees.
      (4)   The village shall not pay for any extension to an undeveloped area
such as a subdivision being developed unless there are sufficient existing
residents or businesses to make the extension economically feasible.
(Prior Code, § 38-5-61)
   (B)   (1)   The village shall approve all plans and specifications for any
extensions. Before any extensions are installed, the plans and specifications
must be reviewed and approved by the State Environmental Protection Agency.
Ownership, rights-of-way, and title shall be conveyed to the village for all
extensions installed by anyone other than the village. The village will
maintain the mains thereafter.
      (2)   No extension will be permitted if in the opinion of the Board of
Trustees, the system does not have necessary capacity to serve the proposed
extension.
(Prior Code, § 38-5-62) Penalty, see §
54.999
§ 54.006 VIOLATIONS.
   Any person found to be violating any provisions of §§
50.015 through
50.021,
Chapter 53, and
Chapter 54 shall be served by the village with written notice stating the
nature of the violation and providing a reasonable time limit for the
satisfactory correction thereof. The offender shall, within the period of time
stated in such notice, permanently cease all violations. The village may revoke
any permit for sewage disposal as a result of any violation of any provision of
this code of ordinances.
(Prior Code, § 38-5-65) Penalty, see §
54.999
PRIVATE SEWAGE DISPOSAL SYSTEMS
§ 54.020 PRIVATE DISPOSAL FACILITIES; REGULATIONS.
   (A)   Except as hereinafter provided, it shall be unlawful to construct or
maintain any privy, privy vault, septic tank, cesspool, or other facility
intended or used for the disposal of sewage.
(Prior Code, § 38-5-7)
   (B)   Where a public sanitary sewer is not available under the provisions of
§
54.002, the building sewer shall be connected to a private sewage disposal
system complying with the provisions of this division.
(Prior Code, § 38-5-10)
§ 54.021 PERMIT.
   Before commencement of construction of a private sewage disposal system, the
owner shall first obtain a written permit signed by the village. The
application for such permit shall be made on a form furnished by the village,
which the applicant shall supplement by any plans, specifications, and other
information as deemed necessary by the village. A permit and inspection fee of
$50 shall be paid to the village at the time the application is filed. (See
Appendix.)
(Prior Code, § 38-5-11) (Ord. 2024-16, passed 11-20-2024)
§ 54.022 INSPECTION.
   A permit for a private sewage disposal system shall not become effective
until the installation is completed to the satisfaction of the village. He or
she shall be allowed to inspect the work at any stage of construction and, in
any event, the applicant for the permit, shall notify the village when the work
is ready for final inspection, and before any underground portions are covered.
The inspection shall be made within 48 hours of the receipt of written notice
by the village.
(Prior Code, § 38-5-12)
§ 54.023 REQUIREMENTS FOR SYSTEM.
   (A)   (1)   The type, capacities, location, and layout of a private sewage
disposal system shall comply with all recommendations of the State Private
Sewage Disposal Licensing Act, being 225 ILCS 225/1 et seq., and Code, being 77
Ill. Adm. Code pt. 905, and with the State Environmental Protection Agency.
      (2)   No permit shall be issued for any private sewage disposal system
employing subsurface soil absorption facilities unless the area of the lot is
less than 5,000 square feet (465 square meters). No septic tank or cesspool
shall be permitted to discharge to any natural outlet.
(Prior Code, § 38-5-13)
   (B)   No statement contained in this chapter shall be construed to interfere
with any additional requirements that may be imposed by the local health
officer or the County Health Department.
(Prior Code, § 3-5-15) Penalty, see §
54.999
§ 54.024 MAINTENANCE OF SYSTEM.
   The owner shall operate and maintain the private sewage disposal facilities
in a sanitary manner at all times, and at no expense to the village.
(Prior Code, § 38-5-14)
§ 54.025 AVAILABILITY OF PUBLIC CONNECTION.
   Within 60 days of the date a public sewer becomes available to a property
served by a private sewage disposal system, a direct connection shall be made
to the public sewer in compliance with this code of ordinances; the building
sewer shall be connected to the public sewer; and the private sewage disposal
system shall be cleaned of sludge and filled with clean bank-run gravel or
dirt, all at the owner’s sole expense.
(Prior Code, § 38-5-16) (Ord. 08-01, passed 2-4-2008)
BUILDING SEWERS AND CONNECTIONS
§ 54.040 PERMIT REQUIRED.
   No unauthorized person shall uncover, make any connections with, or opening
into, use, alter, or disturb any public sewer or appurtenance thereof without
first obtaining a written permit from the village.
(Prior Code, § 38-5-18) (Ord. 08-01, passed 2-4-2008) Penalty, see §
54.999
§ 54.041 UNLAWFUL DISCHARGES.
   All disposal by any person into the sewer system is unlawful except those
discharges in compliance with federal standards promulgated pursuant to the
Federal Act and more stringent state and local standards.
(Prior Code, § 38-5-19)
§ 54.042 PERMIT APPLICATION; FEE.
   (A)   There shall be three classes of building sewer permits as follows:
      (1)   Residential and commercial service;
      (2)   Residential and commercial service with grinder pump; and
      (3)   Service to establishments producing industrial wastes.
   (B)   In any case, the owner or his or her agent shall make applications on
a special form furnished by the village. (See Appendix Cl, C2, or MD.)
   (C)   The permit application shall be supplemented by any plans,
specifications, or other information considered pertinent in the judgment of
the village. A permit and inspection fee of $50 for residential or commercial
building sewer permit shall be paid to the village at the time the application
if filed. Any industry, as a condition of permit authorization, must provide
information describing its wastewater constituents, characteristics, and type
of activity.
(Prior Code, § 38-5-20) (Ord. 08-01, passed 2-4-2008)
§ 54.043 CAPACITY OF SEWER.
   A building sewer permit will only be issued and a sewer connection shall
only be allowed if it can be demonstrated that the downstream sewerage
facilities, including sewers, pump stations, and wastewater treatment
facilities, have sufficient reserve capacity to adequately and efficiently
handle the additional anticipated waste load.
(Prior Code, § 38-5-21)
§ 54.044 COST OF INSTALLATION.
   (A)   All costs and expense incident to the installation and connection of
the building sewer and/or grinder pump shall be borne by the owner.
   (B)   The owner shall indemnify the village from any loss or damage that may
directly or indirectly be occasioned by the installation of the building sewer.
(Prior Code, § 38-5-22) (Ord. 08-01, passed 2-4-2008)
§ 54.045 INDEPENDENT BUILDING SEWER REQUIRED.
   A separate and independent building sewer shall be provided for every
building, except that where one building stands at the rear of another on an
interior lot and no private sewer is available or can be constructed to the
rear building through an adjoining alley, court, yard, or driveway, the
building sewer from the front building may be extended to the rear building and
the whole considered as one building sewer.
(Prior Code, § 38-5-23)
§ 54.046 OLD BUILDING SEWERS.
   Old building sewers may be used in connection with new buildings only when
they are found, on examination and test by the village, to be of similar
material and construction to that required of new sewers.
(Prior Code, § 38-5-24)
§ 54.047 SIZE AND ALIGNMENT.
   The size, slope, alignment, and materials of construction of a building
sewer, and the methods to be used in excavating, placing of the pipe, jointing,
testing, and back-filling the trench, shall all conform to the requirements of
the building and plumbing code or other applicable rules and regulations of the
village. In the absence of code provisions or in amplification thereof, the
materials and procedures set forth in appropriate specifications of the
American Society of Testing Materials, Water Pollution Control Federation
Manual of Practice No. 9, and the Standard Specifications for Water and Sewer
Main Construction in Illinois, latest edition, shall apply.
(Prior Code, § 38-5-25) (Ord. 08-01, passed 2-4-2008)
§ 54.048 ELEVATION.
   Whenever possible, the building sewer shall be brought to the building at an
elevation below the basement floor. In all buildings in which any building
drain is too low to permit gravity flow to the public sewer, sanitary sewage
carried by such building drain shall be lifted by a means which is approved in
accordance with §
54.053, and discharged to the building sewer.
(Prior Code, § 38-5-26) (Ord. 08-01, passed 2-4-2008)
§ 54.049 DOWNSPOUTS PROHIBITED.
   No person(s) shall make connection of roof downspouts, exterior foundation
drains, areaway drains, or other sources of surface runoff or ground water to a
building sewer or building drain which in turn is connected directly or
indirectly to public sanitary sewer.
(Prior Code, § 38-5-27) Penalty, see §
54.999
§ 54.050 PLUMBING CODE.
   The connection of the building sewer into the public sewer shall conform to
the requirements of the Building and Plumbing Code, or other applicable rules
and regulations of the village, or the procedures set forth in appropriate
specifications of the American Society of Testing Materials, Water Pollution
Control Federation Manual of Practice No. 9, and the Standard Specifications
for Water and Sewer Main Construction in Illinois, latest edition. All such
connections shall be made gas-tight and water-tight. Any deviation from the
prescribed procedures and materials must be approved by the village before
installation.
(Prior Code, § 38-5-28) (Ord. 08-01, passed 2-4-2008)
§ 54.051 NOTIFICATION FOR INSPECTION.
   The applicant for the building sewer permit shall notify the village when
the building sewer is ready for inspection and connection to the public sewer,
and the village shall make an inspection within 24 hours. The connection shall
be made under the supervision of the village or his or her representative.
(Prior Code, § 38-5-29)
§ 54.052 BARRICADES AT EXCAVATIONS.
   All excavations for building sewer installation shall be adequately guarded
with barricades and lights so as to protect the public from hazard. Streets,
sidewalks, parkways, and other public property disturbed in the course of the
work shall be restored in a manner satisfactory to the village.
(Prior Code, § 38-5-30)
§ 54.053 GRINDER PUMP AND SERVICE INSTALLATIONS.
   All sanitary sewer services requiring the installation of grinder pumps
shall adhere to the following requirements.
   (A)   Grinder pump.
      (1)   All grinder pumps shall be of the manufacturer brand, model, and
size specified and approved by the village.
      (2)   Grinder pumps shall be installed by a contractor approved by the
village.
      (3)   The name and contact information of the approved installation
contractor and pump suppliers can be obtained from the village, and will also
be supplied with each approved village permit.
   (B)   Installation.
      (1)   All wastewater lines from the wastewater system (sewer force and/or
gravity mains) to and including the grinder pump shall be installed by and at
the expense of the property owner. Installation from the grinder pump to the
structure being served shall be by and at the expense of the property owner.
The county will inspect the final connections to the sewer mains and at the
grinder pump and shall be constructed as specified by the county. All
connections shall remain open to view until such inspections can take place.
      (2)   All wastewater connections to the village sewer system (force and/
or gravity mains) must comply with all state and county requirements.
      (3)   Wastewater service pipes from the structure to the grinder pump
shall be a four-inch Schedule 40 PVC pipe placed in a straight line alignment
with a minimum slope of 2%. The gravity pipe shall be installed a minimum of
three inches inside the grinder pump tank. The pressure service line connected
to the force and/or gravity mains shall e a minimum diameter of one and one-
fourth-inches, Schedule 40 PVC (minimum SDR 21). All fittings used in
conjunction with all pressure lines will be Schedule 80 PVC.
      (4)   A redundant ball and check valve shall be installed on the
discharge side of the grinder pump at property line to prevent backflow.
      (5)   Each grinder pump shall be equipped with alarm device to alert the
property owner of potential malfunctions.
   (C)   Repairs, replacement, and service.
      (1)   Repairs made on the service from the sewer system (force and/or
gravity mains) to the grinder pump shall be made by and at the expense of the
property owner. From the grinder pump to the structure being served, all
repairs shall be by and at the expense of the property owner. The homeowner is
also responsible for the proper maintenance and/or replacement of the grinder
pump. However, the cost of repairing or replacing the grinder pump itself shall
be paid out of the Grinder Pump Maintenance Fund.
      (2)   All repairs or replacement of the grinder pump shall be done by the
maintenance contractor designated by the village. The homeowner shall be
responsible to contact the designated maintenance contractor for purposes of
repair or replacement.
      (3)   If the service lines are not properly or timely maintained by the
property owner, the village will contract the required repairs, and these
expenses will be the responsibility of the property owner. The property owner’s
monthly sewer bill will be adjusted to include the cost of such repairs.
      (4)   Notwithstanding the above, the village reserves the right to charge
the homeowner for the cost of repair or replacement of the grinder pump if the
homeowner intentionally or negligently introduces into any sewer, either
directly or through a kitchen waste disposal unit, including, but not limited
to, any of the following items:
         (a)   Glass;
         (b)   Metal;
         (c)   Seafood shells;
         (d)   Goldfish stone;
         (e)   Explosives;
         (f)   Gasoline;
         (g)   Diapers, socks, rags, or cloth;
         (h)   Plastic objects (toys, utensils, and the like);
         (i)   Sanitary napkins or tampons;
         (j)   Kitty litter;
         (k)   Strong chemicals;
         (l)   Flammable material; and/or
         (m)   Lubricating oil and/or grease.
(Prior Code, § 38-5-31) (Ord. 08-01, passed 2-4-2008)
USE AND PROTECTION OF SYSTEM
§ 54.065 STORM WATER DISCHARGE.
   (A)   No person shall discharge, or cause to be discharged, any storm water,
surface water, ground water roof runoff, subsurface drainage, uncontaminated
cooling water, or unpolluted industrial process waters to any sanitary sewer.
(Prior Code, § 38-5-35)
   (B)   Storm water and all other unpolluted drainage shall be discharged to
such sewers as are specifically designated as storm sewers, or to a natural
outlet approved by the village. Industrial cooling water or unpolluted process
waters may be discharged on approval of the village, to a storm sewer, or
natural outlet.
(Prior Code, § 38-5-36)
Penalty, see §
54.999
§ 54.066 PROHIBITED DISCHARGES; POLLUTION.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to place, deposit, or permit to be
deposited in any unsanitary manner on public or private property within the
village or in any area under the jurisdiction of the village, any human or
animal excrement, garbage, or other objectionable waste.
(Prior Code, § 38-5-5)
   (B)   It shall be unlawful to discharge to any natural outlet within the
village, or in area under the jurisdiction of the village, any sewage or other
polluted waters, except where suitable treatment has been provided in
accordance with subsequent provisions of this code of ordinances.
(Prior Code, § 38-5-6)
   (C)   No person shall discharge, or cause to be discharged, any of the
following described waters or wastes to any public sewers:
      (1)   Any gasoline, benzene, naptha, fuel oil, or other flammable or
explosive liquid, solids, or gas;
      (2)   Any waters or wastes containing toxic or poisonous solids, liquids,
or gases in sufficient quantity, either singly or by interaction with other
wastes, to injure or interfere with any sewage treatment process, constitute a
hazard to humans or animals, create a public nuisance, or create any hazard in
the receiving waters of the sewage treatment plant;
      (3)   Any waters or wastes having a pH lower than five and one-half or
having any other corrosive property capable of causing damage or hazard to
structures, equipment, and personnel of the sewage works; and/or
      (4)   Solid or viscous substances in quantities or of such size capable
of causing obstruction to the flow in sewers, or other interference with the
proper operation of the sewage works such as, but not limited to, ashes,
cinders, sand, mud, straw, shavings, metal glass, rags, feathers, tar,
plastics, wood, unground garbage, whole blood, paunch manure, hair and
fleshings, entrails, and paper dishes, cups, milk containers, and the like,
either whole or ground by garbage grinders.
(Prior Code, § 38-5-37)
Penalty, see §
54.999
§ 54.067 INDUSTRIAL WASTES AND DISCHARGES; CONTROL MANHOLE.
   (A)   No industrial user may discharge sewage into any public sewer until
the village has adopted an industrial cost recovery system which:
      (1)   Meets the requirements of Federal Water Pollution Control Act
Amendments of 1972 § 204(b)(1)(B), being 33 U.S.C. § 1284(b), and applicable
federal regulations; and
      (2)   Has been approved by the agency in accordance with the conditions
of any grant made to the village by the United States Environmental Protection
Agency or by the state for construction of any part of the sewer system or
sewage treatment works of the village.
(Prior Code, § 38-5-38)
   (B)   Each industry shall be required to install a control manhole and, when
required by the village, the owner of any property serviced by a building sewer
carrying industrial wastes shall install a suitable control manhole together
with such necessary meters and other appurtenances in the building sewer to
facilitate observation, sampling, and measurement of the wastes. Such manhole,
when required, shall be accessible and safety located, and shall be constructed
in accordance with plans approved by the village. The manhole shall be
installed by the owner at his or her expense, and shall be maintained by him or
her so as to be safe and accessible at all times.
(Prior Code, § 38-5-43)
§ 54.068 SPECIFIC SUBSTANCES PROHIBITED.
   (A)   No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged the following
described substances, materials, waters, or wastes if it appears likely in the
opinion of the village that such wastes can harm either the sewers, sewage
treatment process, or equipment; have an adverse effect on the receiving
stream; or can otherwise endanger life, limb, public property, or constitute a
nuisance. In forming his or her opinion as to the acceptability of these
wastes, the village will give consideration to such factors as the quantities
of subject wastes in relation to flows and velocities in the sewers, materials
of construction of the sewers, nature of the sewage treatment process, capacity
of the sewage treatment plant, degree of treatability of wastes in the sewage
treatment plant, and maximum limits established by regulatory agencies.
   (B)   The substances prohibited are:
      (1)   Any liquid or vapor having a temperature higher than 150°F (65°C);
      (2)   Any waters or wastes containing toxic or poisonous materials; or
oils, whether emulsified or not, in excess of 100 mg/l or containing substances
which may solidify or become viscous at temperatures between 32°F and 150°F
(0°C and 65°C);
      (3)   Any garbage that has not been properly shredded. The installation
and operation of any garbage grinder equipped with a motor of three-fourths
horsepower (0.76 hp metric) or greater shall be subject to the review and
approval of the village;
      (4)   Any waters or wastes containing strong acid, iron pickling wastes,
or concentrated plating solution, whether neutralized or not;
      (5)   Any waters or wastes containing iron, chromium, copper, zinc, or
similar objectionable or toxic substances; or wastes exerting an excessive
chlorine requirement, to such degree that any such material received in the
composite sewage at the sewage treatment works exceeds the limits established
by the village for such materials;
      (6)   Any waters or wastes containing phenols or other waste odor-
producing substances, in such concentration exceeding limits which may be
established by the village as necessary after treatment of the composite
sewage, to meet the requirements of the state, federal, or other public
agencies of jurisdiction for such discharge to the receiving waters;
      (7)   Any radioactive wastes or isotopes of such half-life or
concentration as may exceed limits established by the village in compliance
with applicable state or federal regulations;
      (8)   Any wastes or waters having a pH in excess of 9.5;
      (9)   Any mercury or any of its compounds in excess of 0.0005 mg/l as Hg
at any time except as permitted by the village in compliance with applicable
state and federal regulations;
      (10)   Any cyanide in excess of 0.025mg/l at any time except as permitted
by the village in compliance with applicable state and federal regulations;
      (11)   Materials which exert or cause:
         (a)   Unusual concentrations or inert suspended solids (such as, but
not limited to, fullers earth, lime slurries, and lime residues) or of
dissolved solids (such as, but not limited to, sodium chloride and sodium
sulfate);
         (b)   Excessive discoloration (such as, but not limited to, dye wastes
and vegetable tanning solutions);
         (c)   Unusual BOD, chemical oxygen demand, or chlorine requirements in
such quantities as to constitute a significant load on the sewage treatment
works; or
         (d)   Unusual volume of flow or concentrations of wastes constituting
slugs, as defined herein.
      (12)   Waters or wastes containing substances which are not amendable to
treatment or reduction by the sewage treatment processes employed, or are
amendable to treatment only to such degree that the sewage treatment plant
effluent cannot meet the requirements of agencies having jurisdiction over
discharge to the receiving waters.
(Prior Code, § 38-5-39)
§ 54.069 APPROVAL OF PROHIBITED WASTES.
   (A)   If any waters or wastes are discharged or are proposed to be
discharged to the public sewers, which waters contain the substances or possess
the characteristics enumerated in §
54.068, and/or which are in violation of the standards for pretreatment
provided in 40 C.F.R. pt. 403, June 26, 1978 and any amendments thereto, and
which in the judgment of the village may have a deleterious effect upon the
sewage works, processes, equipment, or receiving waters, or which otherwise
create a hazard to life or constitute a public nuisance, the village may:
      (1)   Reject the wastes;
      (2)   Require pretreatment to an acceptable condition for discharge;
      (3)   Require control over the quantities and rates for discharge; and
      (4)   Require payment to cover the added costs of handling and treating
the wastes not covered by existing taxes or sewer charges, under the provisions
of §
54.073.
   (B)   If the village permits the pretreatment or equalization of waste
flows, the design, and the installation of the plants and equipment shall be
subject to the review and approval of the village, and subject to the
requirements of all applicable codes, articles, and laws.
(Prior Code, § 38-5-40)
§ 54.070 INTERCEPTORS PROVIDED.
   (A)   Grease, oil, and sand interceptors shall be provided in accordance
with the State Plumbing Code to assure the proper handling of liquid wastes
containing grease in excessive amounts, or any flammable wastes, sand, or other
harmful ingredients; except that such interceptors shall not be required for
private living quarters or dwelling units. All interceptors shall be of a type
and capacity approved by the village and shall be located as to be readily and
easily accessible for cleaning and inspection. All grease interceptors shall be
serviced and emptied of accumulated waste content as required or at a minimum
of once every four months in order to maintain minimum design capability or
effective volume of the grease interceptor and to prevent carry over of grease
into the sanitary sewer system. All fast food and sit-down restaurants shall
install a grease interceptor with a capacity of at least 1,500 gallons, and
designed in accordance with Appendix A. Food establishments that serve a
minimum amount of fried foods, such as deli sandwich shops, shall install a
grease interceptor with a capacity of at least 1,000 gallons, and designed in
accordance with Appendix B.
   (B)   Users whose operations cause or allow excessive grease to discharge or
accumulate in the village wastewater collection and treatment system may be
liable to the village for costs related to service calls for sewer line
blockages, line cleaning, line, and pump repairs, and the like including all
labor, materials, and equipment. Failure to pay all service related charges may
also be grounds for sewer service discontinuance.
   (C)   A grease trap cleaning/maintenance log indicating each pumping for the
previous 24 months shall be maintained by each food service facility. This log
shall include the date, time, amount pumped, hauler, and disposal site and
shall be kept in a conspicuous location for inspection. Said log shall be made
available to the village or his or her representative upon request.
   (D)   Each user shall submit all cleaning and maintenance records to the
village. The maintenance records shall include the following information:
      (1)   Facility name, address, contact person, and phone number;
      (2)   Company name, address, phone number, and contact name of person
responsible for performing the maintenance, cleaning, pumping, or repair of
grease trap;
      (3)   Types of maintenance performed;
      (4)   Dates maintenance was performed;
      (5)   Date of next scheduled maintenance;
      (6)   Copies of manifests; and
      (7)   The user shall be required to submit maintenance records to the
village on an annual basis. Records shall be submitted by September 1 of each
year. The records shall be submitted to: “Attn: Wastewater Superintendent.”
   (E)   (1)   The village will perform periodic inspections of these
facilities and shall notify the user of any additional required maintenance or
repairs.
      (2)   Upon written notification by the village, the user shall be
required to perform the maintenance and records of said maintenance within 14
calendar days.
      (3)   Upon inspection by the village the user may be required to install,
at his or her expense, additional controls to provide a complete system which
prevents discharges of undesirable materials into the wastewater collection
system.
   (F)   (1)   Any new construction, renovation, or expansion of food service
facilities shall be required to submit to the village a FOG and food waste
control plan that will effectively control the discharge of undesirable
materials into the wastewater collection system.
      (2)   Any existing food service facilities shall also be required to
submit a FOG and food waste control plan that will effectively control the
discharge of undesirable materials into the wastewater collection system.
Existing facilities shall not be exempt from the requirements of this section.
There will be no grandfathering.
   (G)   (1)   Should existing facilities be hampered by space constraints or
restrictions caused by unchangeable plumbing, an alternative interceptor may be
approved, provided that:
         (a)   Said interceptor and installation is endorsed by a licensed
plumbing contractor in regard to its operability;
         (b)   Said interceptor and installation is endorsed by the Village
Engineer; and
         (c)   Said interceptor and installation is approved by the
Superintendent and the Water and Sewer Committee.
      (2)   Such installations may be subject to more stringent inspections and
maintenance schedules.
(Prior Code, § 38-5-41)
§ 54.071 FACILITY MAINTENANCE.
   Where preliminary treatment or flow-equalizing facilities are provided, they
shall be maintained continuously in satisfactory and effective operation by the
owner at his or her expense.
(Prior Code, § 38-5-42)
§ 54.072 LABORATORY ANALYSES.
   (A)   The owner of any property serviced by a building sewer carrying
industrial wastes shall provide laboratory measurements, tests, and analyses of
waters and wastes to illustrate compliance with this code of ordinances and any
special conditions for discharge established by the village or regulatory
agencies having jurisdiction over the discharge.
   (B)   (1)   The number, type, and frequency of laboratory analyses to be
performed by the owner shall be as stipulated by the village, but no less than
once per year, the industry must supply a complete analysis of the constituents
of the wastewater discharge to assure that compliance with the federal, state,
and local standards are being met.
      (2)   The owner shall report the results of measurements and laboratory
analyses to the village at such times and in such a manner as prescribed by the
village. The owner shall bear the expense of all measurements, analyses, and
reporting required by the village. At such times as deemed necessary the
village reserves the right to take measurements and samples for analysis by an
outside laboratory service.
(Prior Code, § 38-5-44)
§ 54.073 TESTING REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   (1)   All measurements, tests, and analyses of the characteristics of
waters and wastes to which reference is made in this code of ordinances shall
be determined in accordance with the latest edition of the IEPA Division of
Laboratories’ Manual of Laboratory Methods, and shall be determined at the
control manhole provided, or upon suitable samples taken at the control
manhole.
      (2)   In the event that no special manhole has been required the control
manhole shall be considered to be the nearest downstream manhole in the public
sewer to the point at which the building sewer is connected.
   (B)   (1)   Sampling shall be carried out by customarily accepted methods to
reflect the effect of constituents upon the sewage works and to determine the
existence of hazards to life, limb, and property. (The particular analyses
involved will determine whether a 24-hour composite of all outfalls of a
premise is appropriate or whether a grab sample or samples should be taken.
      (2)   Normally, but not always, BOD and suspended solids analyses are
obtained from 24-hour composites of all outfalls, whereas pHs are determined
from periodic grab samples.)
(Prior Code, § 38-5-45)
§ 54.074 SPECIAL ARRANGEMENTS.
   No statement contained in this subchapter shall be construed as preventing
any special agreement or arrangement between the village and any industrial
concern whereby an industrial waste of unusual strength or character may be
accepted by the village for treatment, subject to payment therefor, in
accordance with this chapter, hereof, by the industrial concern provided such
payments are in accordance with federal and state guidelines for user charge
systems and industrial cost recovery systems.
(Prior Code, § 38-5-46)
§ 54.075 UNAUTHORIZED DAMAGE.
   (A)   No unauthorized person shall maliciously, willfully, or negligently
break, damage, destroy, or tamper with any structure, appurtenance, or
equipment which is part of the sewage works.
   (B)   Any person violating this provision shall be subject to immediate
arrest under charge of disorderly conduct.
(Prior Code, § 38-5-50) Penalty, see §
54.999
POWERS AND AUTHORITY OF INSPECTORS
§ 54.090 INSPECTION AND TESTING.
   (A)   The village and other duly authorized employees of the village, the
State Environmental Protection Agency, and the United States Environmental
Agency, bearing proper credentials and identification, shall be permitted to
enter all properties for the purposes of inspection, observation, measurement,
sampling, and testing in accordance with the provisions of this code of
ordinances.
   (B)   The village or his or her representative shall have no authority to
inquire into any processes, including metallurgical, chemical, oil refining,
ceramic, paper, or other industries beyond that point having a direct bearing
on the kind and source of discharge to the sewers or waterway or facilities for
waste treatment.
(Prior Code, § 38-5-52)
§ 54.091 OBSERVATION OF SAFETY RULES.
   While performing the necessary work on private properties referred to in §
54.090, the village or duly authorized employees of the village, the State
Environmental Protection Agency, and the United States Environmental Protection
Agency shall observe all safety rules applicable to the premises established by
the company and the company shall be held harmless for injury or death to the
village employees and the village shall indemnify the company against liability
claims and demands for personal injury or property damage asserted against the
company and growing out of the gauging and sampling operation, except as such
may be caused by negligence or failure of the company to maintain conditions as
required in §
54.067(B).
(Prior Code, § 38-5-53)
§ 54.092 PRIVATE PROPERTY INSPECTIONS.
   The village and other duly authorized employees of the village bearing
proper credentials and identification shall be permitted to enter all private
properties through which the village holds a duly negotiated easement for the
purposes of, but not limited to, inspection, observation, measurement,
sampling, repair, and maintenance of any portion of the sewage works lying
within the easement, shall be done in full accordance with the terms of the
duly negotiated easement pertaining to the private property involved.
(Prior Code, § 38-5-54)
SEWER REPAIRS
§ 54.105 CUSTOMER RESPONSIBLE.
   Every resident of the village shall be responsible, financially and
otherwise, for the proper repair and maintenance of any sewer line extending
from the sewer main to the residents’ building or other use of sewer services,
(Prior Code, § 38-5-70) (Ord. 96-4, passed 1-15-1996)
§ 54.106 VILLAGE ACCESS; NOTIFICATION.
   (A)   The village shall have access to all portions of a resident’s premises
at any reasonable time for inspection of the condition of sewer pipe, fixtures,
plumbing, and any other apparatus in any way connected to the sewer works
system of the village.
(Prior Code, § 38-5-71)
   (B)   The village may at its option demand repair, change, removal, or
improvement of any pipe, fixture, plumbing, or other apparatus that would in
any manner adversely affect the sewer system of the village or the sewer
service of any other resident.
(Prior Code, § 38-5-72)
   (C)   After written notification to a resident or any other person legally
responsible for the premises by the village of the necessity to make sewer
repairs, the resident, or any other person legally responsible for the
premises, shall take the actions specified in the written notice solely at his
or her own expense within 30 days, or, in the case of a situation determined by
the village to be an emergency, within the time limit prescribed by the village
in such written notification.
(Prior Code, § 38-5-73)
(Ord. 96-4, passed 1-15-1996)
§ 54.107 FAILURE TO REPAIR.
   If a resident or any other person legally responsible for the premises fails
to take the actions specified in the written notification within the prescribed
time, the village or its authorized agents may enter upon the premises and take
the actions specified in such written notification, seek an injunction, and/or
other legal relief from any court compelling the resident or any other person
legally responsible for the premises to take the actions specified in such
written notification.
(Prior Code, § 38-5-74) (Ord. 96-4, passed 1-15-1996)
§ 54.108 JOINT LIABILITY.
   The owner of any lot, parcel of land, or premises and the user of the sewer
services shall be jointly and severally liable for the payment of such repairs
as may be required by the village as set forth in its written notification. The
liability for payment shall include payment to the village in the event the
village or its agents makes the repairs in accordance with this section.
(Prior Code, § 38-5-75) (Ord. 96-4, passed 1-15-1996)
§ 54.109 REIMBURSEMENT TO VILLAGE.
   In the event the village makes the repairs as provided herein, the resident
or any other person legally responsible for the premises shall reimburse the
village within 15 days after completion of the work for costs it incurs in
taking the actions specified in the notice.
(Prior Code, § 38-5-76) (Ord. 96-4, passed 1-15-1996)
§ 54.110 FAILURE TO PAY CLAIM; LIEN AND FORECLOSURE.
   (A)   (1)   (a)   Whenever a bill for repairs specified in such notice and
owed to the village remains unpaid for 30 days after the work has been
completed, the Village Clerk or Village Attorney may file with the County
Recorder of Deeds a statement of lien claim.
         (b)   This statement shall contain the legal description of the
premises served, the amount of the unpaid bill, and a notice that the village
claims a lien for this amount to the period covered by the bill.
      (2)   If the resident whose bill is unpaid is not the owner of the
premises and the Village Clerk or Village Attorney has notice of this, then the
notice shall be mailed to the owner of the premises if his or her address is
known, whenever such bill remains unpaid for a period of 30 days after the work
has been completed. The failure of the Village Clerk or Village Attorney to
record such lien or to mail such notice, or the failure of the owner to receive
such notice, shall not affect the village’s right to collect any amount due as
provided herein.
(Prior Code, § 38-5-77)
   (B)   Property subject to a lien for unpaid sewer repairs may be sold for
nonpayment of the same and the proceeds of such sale shall be applied to pay
the village bill together with the attorney’s fees, costs and expenses incurred
by the village in connection with these proceedings as in the case in the
foreclosure of statutory liens. Such foreclosure shall be by bill in equity in
the name of the village. The Village Attorney is hereby authorized to institute
such proceedings in the name of the village in any court having jurisdiction
over such matters against any property for which the bill for utility services
has remained unpaid more than 30 days after the work has been completed.
(Prior Code, § 35-5-78)
(Ord. 96-4, passed 1-15-1996)
§ 54.111 LEGAL REMEDIES.
   In addition to any other legal remedies, the village may initiate an action
in any court to recover a debt owed to it for such sewer repairs together with
its attorney’s fees, costs, and expenses.
(Prior Code, § 38-5-79) (Ord. 96-4, passed 1-15-1996)
§ 54.112 UNREPAIRED SEWER LINE DECLARED NUISANCE.
   In addition to any other legal remedies, a resident’s sewer line found by
the village to be in need of repair is hereby declared to be a public nuisance
and may be abated as such in addition and not in exclusion of the remedies
provided herein.
(Prior Code, § 38-5-80) (Ord. 96-4, passed 1-15-1996)
PAYMENT PROCEDURES
§ 54.125 DEFINITION.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definition shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires another meaning.
   BUILDING UNIT. All persons or families residing in a building under one
roof, be it an apartment or homes converted into more than one dwelling place,
each family or individual resident residing therein shall be deemed an
individual customer or such homes or apartments or dwellings shall be billed
for at least one minimum sewer account according to the number of families or
individual residents residing therein.
(Prior Code, § 38-5-81)
§ 54.126 REVENUES.
   (A)   All revenues and moneys derived from the operation of the sewer system
shall be deposited in the Sewer Fund. All such revenues and moneys shall be
held by the Village Treasurer separate and apart from his or her private funds
and separate and apart from all other funds of the village and all of said sum,
without any deductions whatever, shall be delivered to the Village Treasurer
not more than ten days after receipt of the same, or at such more frequent
intervals as may, from time to time, be directed by the Board of Trustees.
   (B)   The Village Treasurer shall receive all such revenues from the sewer
system and all other funds and moneys incident to the operation of such system
as the same may be delivered to him or her and deposit the same in the account
of the fund designated as the “Sewage Fund of the Village.”
   (C)   The Village Treasurer shall administer such fund in every respect in
the manner provided by 65 ILCS 5/3.1-35-40 et seq.
(Prior Code, § 38-5-82)
§ 54.127 ACCOUNTS.
   (A)   The Village Treasurer shall establish a proper system of accounts and
shall keep proper books, records, and accounts in which complete and correct
entries shall be made of all transactions relative to the sewer system and at
regular annual intervals, he or she shall cause to be made an audit by an
independent auditing concern of the books to show the receipts and
disbursements of the sewer system.
   (B)   In addition to the customary operating statements, the annual audit
report shall also reflect the revenues and operating expenses of the sewer
facilities, including a replacement cost, to indicate that sewer service
charges under the waste cost recovery system and capital amounts required to be
recovered under the industrial cost recovery system do, in fact, meet these
regulations. In this regard, the financial information to be shown in the audit
report shall include the following:
      (1)   Flow data showing total gallons received at the sewer plant for the
current fiscal year;
      (2)   Billing data to show total number of gallons billed;
      (3)   Debt service for the next succeeding fiscal year;
      (4)   Number of users connected to the system;
      (5)   Number of non-metered users; and
      (6)   A list of users discharging non-domestic wastes (industrial users)
and volume of waste discharged.
(Prior Code, § 38-5-83)
§ 54.128 NOTICE OF RATES.
   (A)   A copy of this subchapter, properly certified by the Village Clerk,
shall be filed in the office of the County Recorder of Deeds and shall be
deemed notice to all owners of real estate of the charges of the sewer system
of the village on their properties.
   (B)   Each user shall be notified at least annually, in conjunction with a
regular bill, of the rate and that portion of the user charges which are
attributable to sewer treatment services.
(Prior Code, § 38-5-84)
§ 54.129 ACCESS TO RECORDS.
   The State Environmental Protection Agency and the United States
Environmental Protection Agency, or its authorized representative, shall have
access to any books, documents, papers, and records of the village which are
applicable to the village’s system of user charges or industrial cost recovery
for the purpose of making audit, examination, excerpts, and transcriptions
thereof to ensure compliance with the terms of the special and general
conditions to any state grants and loans.
(Prior Code, § 38-5-85)
§ 54.130 APPEALS.
   (A)   The method for computation of rates and service charges established
for user charges shall be made available to a user within 15 days of receipt of
a written request for such.
   (B)   Any disagreement over the method used, or in the computation thereof,
shall be remedied by a third party selected by both parties within 90 days
after notification of a formal written appeal outlining the discrepancies.
(Prior Code, § 38-5-86)
§ 54.131 COSTS BOURNE BY OWNER.
    All costs and expenses including labor and material incidental to the
installation, connection and maintenance of a lateral sewer line shall be borne
by the owner(s). The owner(s) shall indemnify the village from any loss or
damage that may directly or indirectly be occasioned by the installation,
connection and maintenance of the lateral sewer lines. This section shall apply
even where the lateral sewer line runs under a public street, public right-of-
way, or public easement.
(Prior Code, § 38-5-95)
RATES AND SERVICE CHARGES
§ 54.145 BASIS FOR WASTEWATER SERVICE CHARGES.
   The sewer service charge for the use of and for service supplied by the
sewer facilities of the village shall consist of a basic user charge,
applicable surcharges, and debt service charge.
   (A)   The debt service charge is computed by dividing the annual debt
service of all outstanding bonds by the number of users.
   (B)   The basic user charge shall be based on water usage as recorded by
water meters for wastes having the following normal domestic concentrations:
      (1)   A five-day, 20°C biochemical oxygen demand (BOD of 200 mg/l); and
      (2)   A suspended solids (SS) content of 250 mg/l.
   (C)   It shall be computed as follows:
      (1)   Estimate sewer volume, pounds of SS, and pounds of BOD to be
treated;
      (2)   Estimate the projected annual revenue required to operate and
maintain the sewer facilities including a replacement fund for the year, for
all work categories;
      (3)   Proportion the estimated operation, maintenance, and replacement
(O, M, and R) costs to each user class by volume, BOD, and SS;
      (4)   Proportion the estimated operation, maintenance, and replacement
(O, M, and R) costs to sewer facility categories by volume, SS, and BOD;
      (5)   Compute costs per 1,000 gallons for normal sewage strength; and
      (6)   Compute surcharge costs per pound per 1,000 gallons in excess of
normal sewage strength for BOD and SS.
   (D)   A surcharge will be levied to all users whose waste waters exceed the
normal domestic concentrations of BOD 200 mg/l and SS 225 mg/l. The surcharge
will be based on water usage as recorded by water meters or sewage meters for
all wastes which exceed the 200 mg/l and 225 mg/l concentration for BOD and SS
respectively (§
54.112 specifies the procedure to compute a surcharge).
   (E)   The adequacy of the sewer service charge shall be reviewed, not less
often than annually, by certified public accountants for the village in their
annual audit report. The sewer service charge shall be revised periodically to
reflect a change in operation and maintenance costs, replacement costs, and
Reserve Fund costs.
   (F)   The capital improvement charge is levied on users to provide for
capital improvements, extensions, or reconstruction of the sewage treatment
works. The capital improvement charge is computed by apportioning the annual
amount to be accrued as a charge per 1,000 gallons.
   (G)   The users of sewer treatment services will be notified annually, in
conjunction with a regular bill, of the rate and that portion of the user
charges which are attributable to the sewer treatment operation, maintenance,
and replacement.
(Prior Code, § 38-5-87)
§ 54.146 MEASUREMENT OF FLOW.
   (A)   The volume of flow used for computing basic user charges and
surcharges shall be the metered water consumption read to the lowest even
increments of 1,000 gallons. If the person discharging wastes into the public
sewer procures any part, or all, of his or her water from sources other than
the public waterworks system, all or a part of which is discharged into the
public sewer, the person shall install and maintain, at his or her expense,
water meters of a type approved by the village for the purpose of determining
the volume of water obtained from these other sources.
   (B)   Devices for measuring the volume of waste discharged may be required
by the approving authority if these volumes cannot otherwise be determined from
the metered water consumption records.
   (C)   Metering devices for determining the volume of waste shall be
installed, and maintained by the person and owned by the village. Following
approval and installation, such meters may not be removed, unless service is
canceled, without the consent of the village.
(Prior Code, § 38-5-88)
§ 54.147 DEBT SERVICE CHARGE.
   A debt service charge of $0.49 per month to each user of the wastewater
facility of the village is hereby established as part of the sewer rates.
(Prior Code, § 38-5-89)
§ 54.148 BASIC USER RATE.
   (A)   There shall be established the following rates and charges for the use
of the water, sewer, and trash systems of the village, based upon the amount of
water consumed as follows.
 
Service                            First 1,000 Gallons Over 1,000 Gallons
                                   (Minimum per Month) (per 1,000 Gallons)
Sewer users inside village limits  $11.60              $8.01
Sewer users outside village limits $16.12              $11.76
 
   (B)   The sewer rates contained in this section shall continue to increase
automatically and in proportion to any increases in rates that the Kaskaskia
Water District charges to the village.
   (C)   Of the revenue that is raised from the sewer fees, 2% shall continue
to be placed in a Reserve Fund to be used by the Board of Trustees for future
sewer infrastructure improvements.
(Prior Code, § 38-5-90) (Ord. 09-07, passed 11-2-2009; Ord. 17-08, passed 6-5-
2017)
Cross-reference:
   Utility rates in full, see §
50.021
§ 54.149 SURCHARGE.
   (A)   The rates of surcharge shall be $0.29 per pound of BOD and $0.25 per
pound of SS.
(Prior Code, § 38-5-91)
   (B)    (1)   The concentration of wastes used for computing surcharges shall
be established by flow measurement and waste sampling.
      (2)   Waste sampling and flow measurement shall be performed as often as
may be deemed necessary by the village and shall be binding as a basis for
surcharges.
(Prior Code, § 38-5-92)
§ 54.150 SERVICE CHARGE COMPUTATION.
   (A)   The wastewater service charge for users within the village corporate
limits shall be computed by the following formula: CW = CD + CM + (Vu-X)CU +
CS.
   (B)   Within the formula in division (A) above:
      (1)    CW = Amount of wastewater service charge ($) per billing period
(monthly);
      (2)   CD = Debt service charge (§ 38-4-23);
      (3)   CM = Minimum charge for operation, maintenance, and replacement (§
53.018);
      (4)   Vu = Wastewater volume for the billing period (gallons);
      (5)   X = Allowable consumption in gallons for the minimum charge (§
53.018);
      (6)   CU   = Basic user rate for operation, maintenance, and replacement
(§
53.018); and
      (7)   CS   = Amount of surcharge (§§ 38-4-25 and 38-4-26).
(Prior Code, § 38-5-93)
§ 54.151 INITIAL AND MINIMUM CHARGES MANDATORY.
   (A)   The rates as shown in the rates schedule in this subchapter shall be
paid by each customer who has signed a user contract, beginning at the time the
village makes the service available to the customer.
   (B)   The minimum rate shall be paid by those customers not using the
service even though they may not be connected to the system, provided the
service is available from the village.
(Prior Code, § 38-5-94)
§ 54.152 CONNECTION OR TAP-IN FEES.
   (A)   Inside village limits.
      (1)   All applicants for sanitary sewer service within the village limits
shall complete the prescribed application form found in the appendix of this
chapter and shall pay, in advance, the connection fees applicable. The sewer
connection fee may be increased based upon the size of sewer tap made. The
schedule of connection fees are as follows:
 
Type of Tap      Connection Fee
Commercial       $500 per unit
Industrial       $500 per facility
Mobile home park $500 per lot
Multi-family     $500 per unit
Residential      $500 per unit
 
      (2)   These connection charges represent the fee necessary for connecting
to the sanitary sewer system. The village does not provide any labor or
materials for this fee.
   (B)   Outside village limits. All sewer connections outside the village
limits shall be approved by the Board of Trustees. The minimum fee for a sewer
connection shall be $500. In addition to the above charges, a deposit as
required in §
50.020 shall be paid by each user to guarantee payment of sewer bills.
(Prior Code, § 38-5-96) (Ord. 05-02, passed 5-16-2005)
§ 54.999 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which no
specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to §
10.999 of this code of ordinances. Any person violating any of the provisions
of this code of ordinances shall become liable to the village by reasons of
such violation.
(Prior Code, § 38-5-67)
   (B)   (1)   The penalty for tampering, damaging, adjusting, or in any manner
interfering with the components of the operation of the system, as described in
§
54.004, shall be up to $500, payable to the village. If the penalty is not paid
within 30 days after the amount is determined by the Board of Trustees, the
Board of Trustees may shut-off the sewer service. The amount of penalty shall
be determined by the Board of Trustees.
      (2)   In addition to the penalty, the user shall reimburse the village
for the actual cost of repairing any damage arising from the user’s act. The
user shall report any known evidence of tampering, adjusting, damaging, or
interference with operation of the system, owned by the village, to the
Superintendent. Any malicious act or damage to the system that is not
appropriately punishable by the foregoing shall be prosecuted through a court
of law.
(Prior Code, § 38-5-57)
   (C)   Any person who shall continue any violation beyond the time limit
provided for in §
54.004, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, and, upon conviction thereof, shall
be fined in the amount not less than $100, nor more than $500 for each
violation. Each day in which any such violation shall continue shall be deemed
a separate offense.
(Prior Code, § 38-5-66)
APPENDIX A: OBJECTIONABLE MATERIAL EFFLUENT LIMITS
Waste or Chemical Concentration (mg/l)
Waste or Chemical                                      Concentration (mg/l)
Acid iron pickling waste or concentrated plating waste 0
Boron                                                  1.0
Cadmium                                                2.0
Chlorine demand                                        30.0
Chromium (Hexavalent)                                  5.0
Chromium (Trivalent)                                   10.0
Copper                                                 3.0
Cyanide                                                0.005
Free acids and alkalis pH                              Between 5.5 and 9.5
Iron                                                   15.0
Lead                                                   0.1
Mercury or its compounds                               0.005
Nickel                                                 3.0
Oil, grease, and the like (carbon tetrachloride        100.0
extraction)
Phenols                                                0.5
Temperature not over 150F (65C)
Zinc                                                   2.0
 
(Prior Code, Ch. 38, App. A)
APPENDIX B: PRIVATE WASTE DISPOSAL APPLICATION
(Number)   (Street)
(owner, owner’s agent)
   The undersigned, being the ____________________________________________ of
the property located at________________________________ does hereby request a
permit to install sanitary sewage
(residence, commercial building, etc.)
disposal facilities to serve the ______________________________________at the
location.
1.   The proposed facilities include:
____________________________________________ to be constructed in complete
accordance with the plans and specifications attached hereunto as Exhibit “A.”
2.   The area of the property is [_______] square feet or [_______] square
meters.
3.   The name and address of the person or firm who will perform the work is
____________________
_____________________________________________________________________________________
4.   The maximum number of persons to be served by the proposed facilities
is____________________
5.   The location and nature of all sources of private or public water supply
within one hundred feet (100') (30.5 meters) of any boundary of said property
are shown on the plat attached hereunto as Exhibit “B.”
IN CONSIDERATION OF THE GRANTING OF THIS PERMIT, THE UNDERSIGNED AGREES:
1.   To furnish any additional information relating to the proposed work that
shall be requested by the village.
2.   To accept and abide by all provisions of the Revised Code and of all other
pertinent codes or ordinances that may be adopted in the future.
3.   To operate and maintain the wastewater disposal facilities covered by this
application in a sanitary manner at all times, in compliance with all
requirements of the village and at no expense to the village.
4.   To notify the village at least twenty-four (24) hours to commencement of
the work proposed, and again at least twenty-four (24) hours prior to the
covering of any underground portions of the installation.
DATE: _____________________, _______         SIGNED:
_______________________________
(APPLICANT)
                                    _______________________________________
(ADDRESS OF APPLICANT)
(CERTIFICATION BY CLERK)
$__________   (Inspection Fee Paid)            DATE:
_________________________________
(CLERK)
$ __________   (Connection Fee Paid)         SIGNED:
________________________________
(APPLICATION APPROVED AND PERMIT ISSUED)
DATE: _____________________, _______         SIGNED:
_______________________________
(PUBLIC WORK DIRECTOR OR SUPERINTENDENT)
(Prior Code, Ch. 38, App. B)
APPENDIX C: RESIDENTIAL OR COMMERCIAL BUILDING SEWER APPLICATION
(Name)      (Street)
(owner, owner’s agent)
   The undersigned, being the ____________________________________________ of
the property located at________________________________ does hereby request a
permit to install sanitary sewage
(residence, commercial building, etc.)
disposal facilities to serve the ______________________________________at the
location.
1.   The following fixtures will be connected to the proposed building sewer:
         Number         Fixture               Number      Fixture
         _______         Kitchen Sinks         _______      Water Closets
         _______         Lavatories            _______      Bathtubs
         _______         Laundry Tubs         _______      Showers
         _______         Urinals               _______      Garbage Grinders
   Specify Other Fixtures:
____________________________________________________________
2.   The maximum number of persons who will use the above fixtures is
____________.
3.   The name and address of the person or firm who will perform the proposed
work is ____________
__________________________________________________________________________________
4.   Plans and specifications for the proposed building sewer are attached
hereunto as Exhibit “A.”
IN CONSIDERATION OF THE GRANTING OF THIS PERMIT, THE UNDERSIGNED AGREES:
1.   To accept and abide by all provisions of the Revised Code, and of all
other pertinent ordinances and codes that may be adopted in the future.
2.   To maintain the building sewer at no expense to the village.
3.   To notify the village when the building sewer is ready for inspection and
connection to the public sewer, but before any portion of the work is covered.
DATE: _____________________, _______         SIGNED:
_______________________________
(APPLICANT)
                                       ____________________________________
(ADDRESS OF APPLICANT)
(CERTIFICATION BY CLERK)
$__________   (Inspection Fee Paid)            DATE:
_________________________________
(CLERK)
$ __________   (Connection Fee Paid)         SIGNED:
________________________________
(APPLICATION APPROVED AND PERMIT ISSUED)
DATE: _____________________, _______         SIGNED:
_______________________________
(PUBLIC WORK DIRECTOR OR SUPERINTENDENT)
(Prior Code, Ch. 38, App. C)
APPENDIX C1: RESIDENTIAL OR COMMERCIAL BUILDING SEWER APPLICATION
(Name)      (Street)
(residence, commercial building, etc.)
   The undersigned, being the ____________________
(owner, owner’s agent)
________________________ of the property located
at________________________________ does hereby request a permit to install and
connect a building sewer to serve the ______________________________________at
the location.
1.   The following fixtures will be connected to the proposed building sewer:
         Number         Fixture               Number      Fixture
         _______         Kitchen Sinks         _______      Water Closets
         _______         Lavatories            _______      Bathtubs
         _______         Laundry Tubs         _______      Showers
         _______         Urinals               _______      Garbage Grinders
   Specify Other Fixtures:
____________________________________________________________
2.   The maximum number of persons who will use the above fixtures is
____________.
3.   The name and address of the person or firm who will perform the proposed
work is ____________
__________________________________________________________________________________
4.   Plans and specifications for the proposed building sewer are attached
hereunto as Exhibit “A.”
IN CONSIDERATION OF THE GRANTING OF THIS PERMIT, THE UNDERSIGNED AGREES:
1.   To accept and abide by all provisions of the Revised Code, and of all
other pertinent ordinances and codes that may be adopted in the future.
2.   To maintain the building sewer at no expense to the village.
3.   To notify the village when the building sewer is ready for inspection and
connection to the public sewer, but before any portion of the work is covered.
DATE: _____________________, _______         SIGNED:
_______________________________
(APPLICANT)
                                       ____________________________________
(ADDRESS OF APPLICANT)
(CERTIFICATION BY CLERK)
$__________   (Inspection Fee Paid)            DATE:
_________________________________
(CLERK)
$ __________   (Connection Fee Paid)         SIGNED:
________________________________
(APPLICATION APPROVED AND PERMIT ISSUED)
DATE: _____________________, _______         SIGNED:
_______________________________
(PUBLIC WORK DIRECTOR OR SUPERINTENDENT)
(Prior Code, Ch. 38, App. C1)
APPENDIX C2: RESIDENTIAL OR COMMERCIAL BUILDING SEWER WITH GRINDER PUMP
APPLICATION
(Name)      (Street)
(residence, commercial building, etc.)
   The undersigned, being the ____________________
(owner, owner’s agent)
________________________ of the property located
at________________________________ does hereby request a permit to install and
connect a building sewer and grinder pump to serve the
______________________________at said location.
1.   The following fixtures will be connected to the proposed building sewer:
         Number         Fixture               Number      Fixture
         _______         Kitchen Sinks         _______      Water Closets
         _______         Lavatories            _______      Bathtubs
         _______         Laundry Tubs         _______      Showers
         _______         Urinals               _______      Garbage Grinders
   Specify Other Fixtures:
____________________________________________________________
2.   The maximum number of persons who will use the above fixtures is
____________.
3.   The name and address of the person or firm who will perform the proposed
work is ____________
__________________________________________________________________________________
4.   Plans and specifications for the proposed building sewer are attached
hereunto as Exhibit “A.”
IN CONSIDERATION OF THE GRANTING OF THIS PERMIT, THE UNDERSIGNED AGREES:
1.   To accept and abide by all provisions of the Revised Code, and of all
other pertinent ordinances and codes that may be adopted in the future.
2.   To use only village approved suppliers for grinder pumps. See attached
list of approved suppliers.
3.   To use only village approved contractors for installation, repairs, and
maintenance of grinder pumps and their service lines. See attached list of
approved contractors.
4.   To maintain the building sewer and grinder pump at no expense to the
village. If not maintained on a proper and timely fashion, the village will
contract all required repairs and service of which all costs for such repairs
and service will be billed to the property owner in the next monthly sewer
bill.
5.   To notify the village when the building sewer is ready for inspection and
connection to the public sewer, but before any portion of the work is covered.
DATE: _____________________, _______         SIGNED:
_______________________________
(APPLICANT)
                                       ____________________________________
(ADDRESS OF APPLICANT)
(CERTIFICATION BY CLERK)
$__________   (Inspection Fee Paid)            DATE:
_________________________________
(CLERK)
$ __________   (Connection Fee Paid)         SIGNED:
________________________________
(APPLICATION APPROVED AND PERMIT ISSUED)
DATE: _____________________, _______         SIGNED:
_______________________________
(PUBLIC WORK DIRECTOR OR SUPERINTENDENT)
(Prior Code, Ch. 38, App. C2)
APPENDIX D: INDUSTRIAL SEWER CONNECTION APPLICATION
(Name)      (Street)
(residence, commercial building, etc.)
(owner, owner’s agent)
   The undersigned, being the ____________________________________________ of
the property located at________________________________ does hereby request a
permit to install and connect a building sewer and grinder pump to serve the
______________________________at said location.
1.   A plan of the property showing accurately all sewers and drains now
existing is attached hereunto as Exhibit “A.”
2.   Plans and specifications covering any work proposed to be performed under
this permit is attached hereunto as Exhibit “B.”
3.   A complete schedule of all process waters and industrial wastes produced
or expected to be produced at said property, Including a description of the
character of each waste, the daily volume, and maximum rates of discharge and
representative analyses is attached hereunto as Exhibit “C.”
4.   The name and address of the person or firm who will perform the work
covered by this permit is __
___________________________________________________________________________________
IN CONSIDERATION OF THE GRANTING OF THIS PERMIT, THE UNDERSIGNED AGREES:
1.   To furnish any additional information relating to the installation or use
of the industrial sewer for which this permit is sought as may be requested by
the village.
2.   To accept and abide by all provisions of the Revised Code, and of all
other pertinent ordinances or codes that may be adopted in the future.
3.   To operate and maintain a control manhole and any waste pretreatment
facilities, as may be required as a condition of the acceptance into the public
sewer of the industrial wastes involved in an efficient manner at all times,
and at no expense to the village.
4.   To cooperate at all times with the village and its representative(s) in
their inspecting, sampling, and study of the industrial wastes, and any
facilities provided for pretreatment.
5.   To notify the village immediately in the event of any accident,
negligence, or other occurrence that occasions discharge to the public sewers
of any wastes or process waters not covered by this permit.
DATE: _____________________, _______         SIGNED:
_______________________________
(APPLICANT)
                                    _______________________________________
(ADDRESS OF APPLICANT)
(CERTIFICATION BY CLERK)
$__________   (Inspection Fee Paid)            DATE:
_________________________________
(CLERK)
$ __________   (Connection Fee Paid)         SIGNED:
________________________________
(APPLICATION APPROVED AND PERMIT ISSUED)
DATE: _____________________, _______         SIGNED:
_______________________________
(PUBLIC WORK DIRECTOR OR SUPERINTENDENT)
(Prior Code, Ch. 38, App. D)
APPENDIX E: APPLICATION FOR SANITARY SEWER SERVICE CONNECTION
   The undersigned, representing himself or herself as owner of the property
located at
___________________________________________________________________________________
___________, hereby makes application for Sanitary Sewerage Service for said
property, and in consideration of the furnishing of said service covenants and
agrees as follows:
1.   I agree to abide by all rules and regulations as specified in and by the
ordinances of the village now in effect or ordinances enacted and passed from
time to time providing for the regulation of the sanitary sewer system or
specifying fees and rates to be charged for connection and sanitary sewer
service furnished by the village. It is further acknowledged and agreed that
the undersigned, his or her heirs, executors, administrators, successors, and
assigns shall pay all charges for connection fees and sewer usage which shall
become due as the result of the connecting of the sewerage mains and the
furnishing of sanitary sewerage service to the above property, and that all
such charges and fees for sanitary sewerage service rendered to the property,
together with penalties, if any, and the costs of collection are to be
considered and become a charge against the property, the lien so created to be
enforced in accordance with the ordinances of the village.
2.   All bills for the aforesaid charges are payable on or before the due date
following the receipt of said bill and if not paid, are subject to a ten
percent (10%) penalty.
3.   Each and all of the agreements and covenants herein contained shall run
with the real estate above described whose present owner is signatory to this
application.
4.   I understand that after making this application, I am to await
installation permit and instructions therewith.
5.   SERVICE CONNECTION FEE: $________ is enclosed herewith, payable to the
village.
6.   Permission is hereby granted to the village and its authorized
representatives at any reasonable time to enter the premises of the applicant
and any portion thereof for the purposes of inspecting all connections
appurtenant to the sewerage outlets, pipes, and mains.
____________________________________      _______________________________________
(APPLICANT’S SIGNATURE)
(STREET NUMBER AND NAME OF STREET)
____________________________________      _______________________________________
(VILLAGE, STATE, AND ZIP CODE)
(OWNER’S SIGNATURE, IF NOT APPLICANT)
(DATE)
____________________________________      _______________________________________
(TELEPHONE NUMBER)
                                    (
Do not fill in the
spaces to the right
if the information
is the same as the
applicant above.
                     MAIL BILLS TO:   (______________________________________
(NAME)
                                    (______________________________________
(STREET NUMBER AND NAME OF STREET)
                                    (
                                    (______________________________________
(VILLAGE, STATE, AND ZIP CODE)
(Prior Code, Ch. 38, App. E)
APPENDIX F: APPLICATION FOR WATER SYSTEM SERVICE CONNECTION
   The undersigned/representing himself or herself as owner of the property
located at
_____________________________________________________________________, hereby
makes application for connection to the water system of the village for said
property/ and in consideration of the furnishing of said service covenants and
agrees as follows:
1.   I agree to abide by all rules and regulations as specified in and by the
ordinances of the village now In effect or enacted and passed from time to time
providing for the regulation of service furnished by the village/it is further
acknowledged and agreed that the undersigned/his or her heirs, executors/
administrators, successors and assigns shall pay all charges for connection
fees and water usage which shall become due as the result of the connecting of
the water mains and the furnishing of water service to the above property, and
that all such charges and fees for water service rendered to the property,
together with penalties, if any, and the costs of collection are to be
considered and become a charge against the property, the lien so created to be
enforced in accordance with the ordinances of the village.
2.   All bills for the aforesaid charges are payable on or before the due date
following the receipt of said bill and if not paid, are subject to a ten
percent (10%) penalty.
3.   Each and all of the agreements and covenants herein contained shall run
with the real estate above described whose present owner is signatory to this
application.
4.   I understand that after making this application, I am to await
installation permit and instructions therewith.
5.   SERVICE CONNECTION FEE: $_______ is enclosed herewith, payable to the
village.
6.   Permission is hereby granted to the village and its authorized
representatives at any reasonable time to enter the premises of the applicant
and any portion thereof for the purposes of inspecting all connections
appurtenant to the water system.
CONNECTION MUST BE INSPECTED BEFORE BACK-FILLING:
____________________________________      _______________________________________
(APPLICANT’S SIGNATURE)
(STREET NUMBER AND NAME OF STREET)
____________________________________      _______________________________________
(VILLAGE, STATE, AND ZIP CODE)
(OWNER’S SIGNATURE, IF NOT APPLICANT)
(DATE)
____________________________________      _______________________________________
(TELEPHONE NUMBER)
Do not fill in the
spaces to the right
if the information
is the same as the
applicant above.
                                    (
                     MAIL BILLS TO:   (______________________________________
(NAME)
                                    (______________________________________
(STREET NUMBER AND NAME OF STREET)
                                    (
                                    (______________________________________
(VILLAGE, STATE, AND ZIP CODE)
(Prior Code, Ch. 38, App. F)
APPENDIX G: RECEIPT
   Receipt is hereby acknowledged of the executed application for sanitary
sewer service connection from the person and for the property indicated below.
   This receipt does not authorize service connection is made, inspection and
approval of the customer service line by an authorized representative of the
village is required, and approval of such connection and issuance of a
certificate of inspection and approval and permit is conditioned upon
compliance with all the ordinances, codes, rules and regulations of the
village.
NOTE:
1.   In the event the location of the sewer service connection is unknown, the
Superintendent is to be contacted.
2.   This office is to be notified the day before the work is to be done so
that inspection may be arranged in accordance with specifications furnished.
For example, if you desire inspection on Tuesday, contact us on Monday. If you
desire inspection on Monday, contact us on Friday, etc.
3.   If the sewer line is deep enough to drain your basement, if you have one,
then the wastes from the basement as well as the other floor(s) of the property
must go into the sanitary sewers. Downspout and surface drainage are prohibited
inasmuch as this is not a storm sewer system.
WARNING!   In order to coordinate our inspections, we must be advised a day in
advance before the work is done. The inspection must be made before the trench
is back-filled. If trench is back-filled before the inspection is made, it will
have to be reopened to permit inspection.
VILLAGE OF MARISSA
COUNTY OF ST. CLAIR
NO. _____________________________________
DATE: ___________________________________
ADDRESS:________________________________
OWNERS: ________________________________
__________________________________________
(Prior Code, Ch. 38, App. G)
APPENDIX H: CERTIFICATE OF INSPECTION, APPROVAL, AND PERMIT
   IT IS HEREBY CERTIFIED THAT inspection has been made of the individually-
owned sewer mains and sanitary service connection for the property described
below, and said installation is hereby approved as in compliance with the
specifications, rules, and regulations established by this code of ordinances
(being this Chapter 54).
   Permission is hereby granted to complete the construction of said
individually-owned sewer main to the village sanitary sewerage system and to
utilize the same for waste disposal in compliance at all times, with this code
of ordinances.
NO.___________________________
ADDRESS:
__________________________________________________________________________________
TYPE OF CONNECTION:
                     __________ Single-Family Residence
                     __________ Multiple dwelling or trailer court
                     __________ Commercial
                     __________ Industrial
                     __________ Institutional
                     __________ Governmental
INSTALLATION BY: ______________________________________________________________
      THE SERVICE IS IN OPERATION AS OF THIS DAY OF,_______________, ____.
VILLAGE OF MARISSA
COUNTY OF ST. CLAIR
                                    SIGNED:_______________________________
(Prior Code, Ch. 38, App. H)
APPENDIX I: INTERCEPTORS
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/55b2dcabe38ed28988c7fe1d84ccd8df76d568b7/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3383.jpg]
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/55b2dcabe38ed28988c7fe1d84ccd8df76d568b7/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3385.jpg]
(Prior Code, Ch. 38, App. A and B)
TITLE VII: TRAFFIC CODE
   Chapter
      
70.   VEHICLES GENERALLY
      
71.   TRAFFIC REGULATIONS
      
72.   PARKING REGULATIONS
      
73.   ABANDONED, MISSING, AND UNCLAIMED VEHICLES
      
74.   RECREATIONAL VEHICLES
      
75.   TRAFFIC SCHEDULES
      
76.   PARKING SCHEDULES
CHAPTER 70: VEHICLES GENERALLY
Section
General Provisions
   
70.001   Vehicle Code; definitions
   
70.002   Obedience to police
   
70.003   Scene of fire
Traffic-Control Devices
   
70.015   Signs and signals; obedience
   
70.016   Unauthorized signs
   
70.017   Interference
   
70.018   Advertising signs
Vehicle Impoundment
   
70.030   Definition
   
70.031   Violations authorizing impoundment
   
70.032   Seizure and impoundment
   
70.033   Administrative hearing
   
70.034   Disposition of impounded vehicle; fees; bond
   
70.035   Possession of vehicle
   
70.036   Towing agency
Vehicle License Stickers
   
70.050   Definitions
   
70.051   Reserved
   
70.052   Dealer’s license
   
70.053   Application issuance
   
70.054   Plates
   
70.055   Transfer; fee
   
70.056   Use of funds
   
70.057   Persons exempt from tax
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 70.001 VEHICLE CODE; DEFINITIONS.
   The State Vehicle Code, 625 ILCS 5/1, entitled “Title and Definitions,” as
passed, approved, and amended by the State General Assembly, is hereby adopted
by the village, the provisions thereof shall be controlling within the
corporate limits of the village.
(Prior Code, § 24-1-1)
§ 70.002 OBEDIENCE TO POLICE.
   Members of the Police Department, Special Police, Auxiliary Police, and
Marshals assigned to traffic duty are hereby authorized to direct all traffic
in accordance with the provisions of this chapter or in emergencies as public
safety or convenience may require, and it shall be unlawful for any person to
fail or refuse to comply with any lawful order, signal, or direction of a
police officer. Except in cases of emergency, it shall be unlawful for any
person not authorized by law to direct or attempt to direct traffic.
(Prior Code, § 24-2-1) Penalty, see §
10.999
Statutory reference:
   Related provisions, see 625 ILCS 5/11-203
§ 70.003 SCENE OF FIRE.
   The Fire Department officer in command or any firefighter designated by him
or her may exercise the powers and authority of a police officer in directing
traffic at the scene of any fire or where the Fire Department has responded to
an emergency call for so long as the Fire Department equipment is on the scene
in the absence of or in assisting the Police Department.
(Prior Code, § 24-2-2)
TRAFFIC-CONTROL DEVICES
§ 70.015 SIGNS AND SIGNALS; OBEDIENCE.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for the driver of any vehicle to disobey the
instructions of any traffic sign or signal placed in view by authority of the
corporate authorities or in accordance with the laws of the state, except upon
direction of a police officer.
   (B)   All signs and signals established by direction of the governing body
shall conform to the State Manual of Uniform Traffic Control Devices for
Streets and Highways.
(Prior Code, § 24-2-3) Penalty, see §
10.999
Statutory reference:
   Related provisions, see 625 ILCS 5/11-301
§ 70.016 UNAUTHORIZED SIGNS.
   No person shall place, maintain, or display upon or in view of any street,
any unauthorized sign, signal, marking, light, reflector, or device which
purports to be or is an imitation of or resembles an official traffic-control
device or railroad sign or signal, or which attempts to direct the movement of
traffic, nor shall any person place, maintain, or display upon or in view of
any street any other sign which hides from view or interferes with the movement
of traffic or effectiveness of any traffic-control device or any railroad sign
or signal, and no person shall place or maintain, nor shall any public
authority permit, upon any highway any traffic sign or signal bearing thereon
any commercial advertising. No tree, bush, or foliage of any kind shall be so
placed, maintained, allowed to remain, or be displayed upon either public or
private property in such a manner as to hide from view or interfere with the
movement of traffic or the effectiveness of any traffic-control device, sign,
or signal.
(Prior Code, § 24-2-4) Penalty, see §
10.999
§ 70.017 INTERFERENCE.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to deface, injure, move, or interfere
with any official traffic sign or signal.
(Prior Code, § 24-2-5) Penalty, see §
10.999
§ 70.018 ADVERTISING SIGNS.
   It shall be unlawful to maintain anywhere in the village any sign, signal,
marking or device other than a traffic sign or signal authorized by the Board
of Trustees or the State Department of Public Works and Buildings, which
purports to be or is an imitation of or resembles an official traffic-control
device or railroad sign or signal in view of any street or highway, and it
shall be unlawful to place or maintain any sign which hides from view any
lawful traffic-control device. It shall be unlawful to maintain or operate any
flashing or rotating beacon of light in view of any street or highway.
(Prior Code, § 24-2-6) Penalty, see §
10.999
Cross-reference:
   Offenses, see Title 13
   Street regulations, see
Chapter 93
   Zoning, see Title 154
VEHICLE IMPOUNDMENT
§ 70.030 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   BUSINESS DAY. Any day in which the offices of the Village Hall are open to
the public for a minimum of seven hours.
   CONTROLLED SUBSTANCES. Any substance as defined and included in the
schedules of Article II of the State Controlled Substances Act, 720 ILCS 570/
201 et seq.; cannabis as defined in the Cannabis Control Act, 720 ILCS 550/1 et
seq.; and the Methamphetamine Control and Community Protection Act, 720 ILCS
646/1 through 646/9999 et seq.
   DRIVING ON A SUSPENDED OR REVOKED LICENSE. Any offenses as defined in the
State Vehicle Code, 625 ILCS 5/6-303.
   DRIVING UNDER THE INFLUENCE OF ALCOHOL, DRUGS, AND/OR INTOXICATING
COMPOUNDS. Any offenses as defined in the State Vehicle Code, 625 ILCS 5/11-
501.
   DRUG PARAPHERNALIA. Any equipment, products, and materials as defined in 720
ILCS 600/2.
   FELONY. Any felony offense as defined by state statute or this code of
ordinances.
   FLEEING OR ATTEMPTING TO ELUDE A POLICE OFFICER. Any offenses as defined in
the State Vehicle Code, 625 ILCS 5/11-204 and 204.1.
   LEAVING THE SCENE OF A PERSONAL INJURY OR PROPERTY DAMAGE ACCIDENT. Any
offenses as defined in the State Vehicle Code, 625 ILCS 5/11-401, 402, and 403.
   MISDEMEANOR. Any misdemeanor offense as defined by an state statute or the
this code of ordinances.
   MOTOR VEHICLE. Every vehicle which is self-propelled, including, but not
limited to, automobiles, trucks, vans, motorcycles, and motor scooters.
   OWNER OF RECORD. The recorded title holder(s) of the motor vehicle as
registered with the Secretary of State, State of Illinois; or if not registered
in Illinois, the particular state where the motor vehicle is registered.
   SYNTHETIC DRUGS. Any drugs described in §§
132.090 through
132.095.
   TRAFFIC VIOLATION. Any offense as defined by the State Vehicle Code.
   WEAPONS OFFENSE. Any of the following offenses contained within Article 24
of Chapter 720 of the Illinois Compiled Statutes: 720 ILCS 5/24-1, 24-1.1, 24-
1.2, 24-1.2-5, 24-1.5, 24-1.6, 24-2.1, 24-2.2, 24-3, 24-3.1, 24-3.2, 24-3.3,
24-3.4, 24-3.5, 24-3.6, and 24-3A.
(Prior Code, § 24-8-1) (Ord. 09-03, passed 8-3-2009)
§ 70.031 VIOLATIONS AUTHORIZING IMPOUNDMENT.
   A motor vehicle operated with the express or implied permission of the owner
of record that is used in connection with the following violations shall be
subject to seizure and impoundment by the village, and the owner of record of
said motor vehicle shall be liable to the village for an administrative fee of
$200, in addition to any towing and storage fees as hereinafter provided:
   (A)   Operation or use of a motor vehicle in the commission of, or in the
attempt to commit, an offense for which a motor vehicle may be seized and
forfeited pursuant to § 36-1 of the Criminal Code of 2012, being 720 ILCS 5/36-
1;
   (B)   Driving under the influence of alcohol, another drug or drugs, an
intoxicating compound or compounds, or any combination thereof, in violation of
§ 11-501 of the Illinois Vehicle Code;
   (C)   Operation or use of a motor vehicle in the commission of, or in the
attempt to commit, a felony or in violation of the Cannabis Control Act, being
720 ILCS 550/2;
   (D)   Operation or use of a motor vehicle in the commission of, or in the
attempt to commit, an offense in violation of the State Controlled Substances
Act, being 720 ILCS 570/101;
   (E)   Operation or use of a motor vehicle in the commission of, or in the
attempt to commit, an offense in violation of §§ 24-1, 24-1.5, or 24-3.1 of the
Criminal Code of 1961 or the Criminal Code of 2012;
   (F)   Driving while a driver’s license, permit, or privilege to operate a
motor vehicle is suspended or revoked pursuant to § 6-303 of the Illinois
Vehicle Code, being 625 ILCS 5/6-303; except that vehicles shall not be
subjected to seizure or impoundment if the suspension is for an unpaid citation
(parking or moving) or due to failure to comply with emission testing;
   (G)   Operation or use of a motor vehicle while soliciting, possessing, or
attempting to solicit or possess cannabis or a controlled substance, as defined
by the Cannabis Control Act, being 720 ILCS 550/3 or the State Controlled
Substance Act, being 720 ILCS 570/102; or
   (H)   Operation or use of a motor vehicle with an expired driver’s license,
in violation of § 6-101 of the Illinois Vehicle Code, being 625 ILCS 5/6-101,
if the period of expiration is greater than one year;
   (I)   Operation or use of a motor vehicle without ever having been issued a
driver’s license or permit, in violation of § 6-101 of the Illinois Vehicle
Code, being 625 ILCS 5/6-101, or operating a motor vehicle without ever having
been issued a driver’s license or permit due to a person’s age;
   (J)   Operation or use of a motor vehicle by a person against whom a warrant
has been issued by a circuit clerk in the state for failing to answer charges
that the driver violated §§ 6-101, 6-303, or 11-501 of the Illinois Vehicle
Code, being 625 ILCS 5/6-101, 5/6-303, or 5/11-501, respectively;
   (K)   Operation or use of a motor vehicle in the commission of, or in the
attempt to commit, an offense in violation of Article 16 or 16A of the Criminal
Code of 1961 or the Criminal Code of 2012;
   (L)   Operation or use of a motor vehicle in the commission of, or in the
attempt to commit, any other misdemeanor or felony offense in violation of the
Criminal Code of 1961 or the Criminal Code of 2012, when so provided by local
ordinance; or
   (M)   Operation or use of a motor vehicle in violation of § 11-503 of the
Illinois Vehicle Code, being 625 ILCS 5/11-503;
      (1)   While the vehicle is part of a funeral procession; or
      (2)   In a manner that interferes with a funeral procession.
(Prior Code, § 24-8-2) (Ord. 09-03, passed 8-3-2009; Ord. 2017-06, passed 3-20-
2017)
§ 70.032 SEIZURE AND IMPOUNDMENT.
   (A)   (1)   Whenever a police officer has reason to believe that a vehicle
is subject to seizure and impoundment pursuant to this subchapter, the police
officer shall provide for the towing of the motor vehicle to a facility
approved by the village.
      (2)   This subchapter shall not apply if the motor vehicle used in the
violation was stolen at that time and the theft was reported to the appropriate
police authorities within 24 hours after the theft was discovered or reasonably
should have been discovered.
   (B)   The police officer shall notify any person identifying himself or
herself as the owner of the motor vehicle or any person who is found to be in
control of the motor vehicle at the time of the alleged violation, if there is
such a person, of the fact of the seizure and of the motor vehicle owner’s
right to request an administrative hearing to be conducted under this section.
(Prior Code, § 24-8-4) (Ord. 09-03, passed 8-3-2009)
§ 70.033 ADMINISTRATIVE HEARING.
   (A)   (1)   Within five business days after a motor vehicle is seized and
impounded pursuant to this subchapter, the village shall notify by personal
service or by certified mail the owner of record of the owner’s right to
request a hearing to challenge whether a violation of this subchapter has
occurred. The owner of record seeking a hearing must file a written request for
a hearing with the Chief of Police, or his or her designee, no later than ten
business days after notice was mailed.
      (2)   The hearing date must be scheduled no more than 20 business days
after a request for a hearing has been filed. All interested persons shall be
given a reasonable opportunity to be heard at the hearing. The formal rules of
evidence shall not apply at the hearing and hearsay evidence shall be
admissible.
   (B)   If, after the hearing, the Hearing Officer determines by a
preponderance of evidence that the motor vehicle was used in violation of this
subchapter, then the Hearing Officer shall enter an order finding the owner of
record of the motor vehicle civilly liable to the village for the
administrative fee of $200 for a Level 1 violation, or $100 for a Level 2
violation.
   (C)   If, after a hearing, the Hearing Officer does not determine by a
preponderance of the evidence that the motor vehicle was used in such a
violation, the Hearing Officer shall enter an order finding for the owner and
for the return of the motor vehicle.
   (D)   (1)   If the owner of record requests a hearing but fails to appear at
the hearing or fails to request a hearing in a timely manner, the owner of
record shall be deemed to have waived his or her right to a hearing and the
Hearing Officer shall enter a default order in favor of the village in the
amount of the administrative fee.
      (2)   However, if the owner of record pays such administrative fee and
the motor vehicle is returned to the owner, no default order need be entered if
the owner is informed of his or her right to a hearing and signs a written
waiver, in which case an order of liability shall be deemed to have been made
when the village receives the written waiver.
(Prior Code, § 24-8-5) (Ord. 09-03, passed 8-3-2009) Penalty, see §
10.999
§ 70.034 DISPOSITION OF IMPOUNDED VEHICLE; FEES; BOND.
   (A)   An administrative fee imposed pursuant to this subchapoter shall
constitute a debt due and owing the village. A motor vehicle impounded pursuant
to this subchapter shall remain impounded until:
      (1)   The administrative fee of $200 for a Level 1 violation or $100 for
a Level 2 violation is paid to the village and all applicable towing fees are
paid to the towing agent, in which case the owner of record shall be given
possession of the motor vehicle;
      (2)   A bond in the amount of $200 for a Level 1 violation or $100 for a
Level 2 violation is posted with the Police Department and all applicable
towing fees are paid to the towing agent, at which time the motor vehicle will
be released to the owner of record; or
      (3)   The motor vehicle is deemed abandoned, in which case the motor
shall be disposed of in the manner provided by law for the disposition of
abandoned motor vehicles.
(Prior Code, § 24-8-6)
   (B)   (1)   If a bond in the amount of $200 for a Level 1 violation or $100
for a Level 2 violation is posted with the Police Department, the impounded
motor vehicle shall be released to the owner of records. The owner of the motor
vehicle shall still be liable to the towing agent for any applicable towing
fees, if a $200 administrative fee for Level 1 violation or a $100
administrative fee for Level 2 violation is imposed for a violation of this
subchapter.
      (2)   The bond will be forfeited to the village; however if a violation
of this subchapter is not proven by a preponderance of the evidence, the bond
will be returned to the person posting the bond. All bond money posted pursuant
to this subchapter shall be held by the village until the Hearing Officer
issues a decision, or, if there is a judicial review, until the court of
jurisdiction issues its orders.
(Prior Code, § 24-8-7)
(Ord. 09-03, passed 8-3-2009) Penalty, see §
10.999
§ 70.035 POSSESSION OF VEHICLE.
   Any motor vehicle that is not reclaimed within 30 days after the expiration
of the time during which the owner of record may seek judicial review of the
village’s action under this subchapter, or the time at which a final judgment
is rendered in favor of the village, or the time a final administrative
decision is rendered against an owner of record who is in default, may be
disposed of as an unclaimed motor vehicle as provided by law; provided,
however, that where proceedings have been instituted under state or federal
drug asset forfeiture laws, the subject motor vehicle may not be disposed of by
the village except as consistent with those proceedings.
(Prior Code, § 24-8-8) (Ord. 09-03, passed 8-3-2009)
§ 70.036 TOWING AGENCY.
   (A)   (1)   It shall be the duty of the towing or storage company in
possession of the motor vehicle to obtain documentation issued by the Police
Department confirming compliance with the foregoing requirements and to retain
photocopies of that documentation in their files for a period of not less than
six months following release of the motor vehicle.
      (2)   The foregoing information shall be made available to the
authorities of the village for inspection and copying, upon their request, by
the towing or storage company. The towing or storage company is prohibited from
releasing any motor vehicle they may tow within the village until and unless
they obtain the documentation as aforesaid.
   (B)   The towing or storage company shall be entitled to receive a
reasonable fee from the owner or person entitled to possession of any such
motor vehicle prior to the release of the motor vehicle. The fee shall be to
cover the cost of removing said motor vehicle and, in addition thereto, the
cost of storage of said motor vehicle for each day or fraction thereof that
said motor vehicle shall have remained stored.
   (C)   The fees in this section shall be in addition to any fee levied or
assessed against the owner or operator of said motor vehicle by reason of
violation of any ordinance or statute and any arrest which may have resulted
from such violation.
(Prior Code, § 24-8-9) (Ord. 09-03, passed 8-3-2009) Penalty, see §
10.999
VEHICLE LICENSE STICKERS
§ 70.050 DEFINITION.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definition shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   MOTOR VEHICLE. Whenever used in this subchapter, is shall be construed to
include automobiles, trucks, motorcycles, mopeds, and all other vehicles
propelled otherwise than by muscular power.
(Prior Code, § 39-1-1)
§ 70.051 RESERVED.
§ 70.052 DEALER’S LICENSE.
   The license plates issued to dealers in motor vehicles for vehicles held for
sale and used only for demonstration may be transferred to any other vehicle so
held and used by the same dealer, provided that such dealers shall procure one
license for each motor vehicle so held by him or her at any one time during the
year.
(Prior Code, § 39-1-4)
§ 70.053 APPLICATION ISSUANCE.
   Every owner or operator of a motor vehicle or motor bicycle desiring a
license for such motor vehicle shall file a written application with the
Village Clerk, setting forth the name and address of the applicant and a
description of the vehicle for which the license is desired. Upon payment of
the fee herein provided the Village Clerk shall issue, or cause to be issued, a
license which shall be attested by him or her, authorizing the use of such
vehicle within the village until the expiration of the license.
(Prior Code, § 39-1-5)
§ 70.054 PLATES.
   Each applicant, upon payment of the fee, shall be given a windshield sticker
without charge, of such design and material as may be approved by the Mayor and
the Board of Trustees, which sticker shall be fastened in a prominent and
visible place on the front windshield (right side) of the vehicle at all times
that it is operated in the village.
(Prior Code, § 39-1-7)
§ 70.055 TRANSFER; FEE.
   (A)   Whenever the owner of any motor vehicle licensed under this chapter,
before the expiration of such license, sells or otherwise disposes of such
motor vehicle, and notifies the Village Clerk of such sale or disposal, and
thereafter acquires another motor vehicle with the same number of wheels as
that for which said license was originally issued, and desires to use the said
license on the newly acquired motor vehicle, such owner or owners shall make
application to the Village Clerk for transfer of such license, giving such
detailed description of the newly acquired motor vehicle as the Village Clerk
shall require, it shall then be permissible, upon the payment of a transfer fee
of $0.50 to the Village Clerk, and upon the surrender of the old license, for
the Village Clerk to authorize the transfer of such license to the motor
vehicle designated.
(Prior Code, § 39-1-8)
   (B)   Whenever the owner of any motor vehicle licensed under this
subchapter, before the expiration of such license sells or otherwise disposes
of such motor vehicle, and informs the Village Clerk of such sale as
hereinbefore provided, and thereafter acquires another motor vehicle of a class
which required the payment of a higher license fee than was originally paid for
the motor vehicle disposed of, and such owner makes application to the Village
Clerk for a license for such newly acquired motor vehicle, giving such detailed
description of such motor vehicle as the Village Clerk shall require, it shall
be permissible, upon the payment of the difference between the fee originally
paid for the license of the motor vehicle disposed of and the fee required to
be paid for the motor vehicle acquired, plus a transfer fee of $0.50 to be paid
to the Village Clerk to authorize the transfer of such license to the motor
vehicle designated.
(Prior Code, § 39-1-9)
§ 70.056 USE OF FUNDS.
   All revenue derived from such license fees, except for the cost of issuing
the stickers and collecting the fees, shall be kept as a separate fund and used
only for paying the cost of improving, paving, repairing, and maintaining the
streets or alleys as is provided by statute.
(Prior Code, § 39-1-10)
§ 70.057 PERSONS EXEMPT FROM TAX.
   (A)   Persons residing in the village who, by virtue of the Federal Statutes
of the United States, are exempt from the payment of the license fee herein
imposed. All such residents who are exempt by virtue of any such statute shall,
within 45 days from January 1 or when 45 days after becoming a resident of the
village, register their motor vehicles or vehicles with the Village Clerk and
shall, under oath, claim their exemption at which time it shall be granted. Any
person failing exemption within the 45-day period provided, shall be presumed
to be a resident of the village and said vehicle(s) shall be subject to the fee
imposed by this chapter.
   (B)   This exemption applies to only one car per exempt person.
(Prior Code, § 39-1-11)
CHAPTER 71: TRAFFIC REGULATIONS
Section
General Provisions
   
71.001   Vehicle Code adopted
   
71.002   Traffic lanes
   
71.003   Vehicle equipment requirements
Stop and Through Streets
   
71.015   Through streets
   
71.016   One-way streets and alleys
   
71.017   Stop streets
   
71.018   Right-of-way streets
   
71.019   Posting signs
Dangerous and Prohibited Driving
   
71.030   Reckless, negligent, or careless driving
   
71.031   Speed restrictions
   
71.032   Drag racing
   
71.033   Fleeing or eluding police
   
71.034   Manner of turning
   
71.035   Transporting liquor
   
71.036   Excessive noise
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 71.001 VEHICLE CODE ADOPTED.
   The State Vehicle Code, 625 ILCS 5/11, entitled “Rules of the Road,” as
passed, approved, and amended by the State General Assembly is hereby adopted
by the village and the provisions thereof shall be controlling within the
corporate limits of the village except for the following changes, deletions,
and omissions:
   (A)   Omit ILCS 11-207, 11-208.1, 11-208.2, 11-209.1, 11-302, 11-303, 11-310
(f), 11-313, 11-401 through 11-416, 11-500 through 11-502, 11-602, 11-603, 11-
604, 11-606(b), 11-608, and 11-1422.
   (B)   Change ILCS 11-904(a) to read: “Preferential right-of-way at an
intersection may be indicated by stop or yield signs as authorized by this
Code;” and
   (C)   Change 11-1416 to read:
“Any person who shall willfully and unnecessarily attempt to delay, hinder, or
obstruct any other person in lawfully driving and traveling upon or along any
highway within this state or who shall offer for barter or sale, merchandise on
said highway so as to interfere with the effective movement of traffic shall,
upon conviction, be guilty of a violation of this Code.”
(Prior Code, § 24-4-1)
§ 71.002 TRAFFIC LANES.
   Whenever any roadway within the village has been divided into two or more
clearly marked lanes for traffic, a vehicle shall be driven as nearly as
practicable entirely within a single lane and shall not be moved from such lane
until the driver has first ascertained that such movement can be made with
safety.
(Prior Code, § 24-4-2)
§ 71.003 VEHICLE EQUIPMENT REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   The State Vehicle Code, 625 ILCS 5/12, entitled “Equipment of
Vehicles,” as passed, approved, and amended by the State General Assembly is
hereby adopted by the village and the provisions thereof shall be controlling
within the corporate limits of the village.
(Prior Code, § 24-5-1)
   (B)   No motor vehicle shall be operated on any street unless such vehicle
is provided with a muffler in efficient actual working condition; and the use
of a cut-out is prohibited. No muffler shall cause an unreasonably loud or
excessive noise.
(Prior Code, § 24-5-2)
   (C)   (1)   No driver of any motor vehicle within this village shall operate
or permit operation of any sound amplification system which can be heard
outside the vehicle from 75 feet or more when the vehicle is being operated
upon a highway, unless such system is being operated to request assistance or
warn of a hazardous situation.
      (2)   This division (C) shall not apply to authorized emergency vehicles.
(Prior Code, § 24-5-3)
   (D)   (1)   It shall be unlawful for an operator of a commercial vehicle as
defined in 625 ILCS 5/1-111.8 to operate or actuate any engine braking system
within the village that emits excessive noise unless it is an emergency.
      (2)   The Superintendent is authorized and directed to post signs
stating: “EXCESSIVE ENGINE BRAKING NOISE PROHIBITED” at appropriate locations.
(Prior Code, § 24-5-4)
Statutory reference:
   Equipment of vehicles, see 625 ILCS 5/12-605, 5/12-605.1, and 5/12-605.2
   Excessive brake noise, see 625 ILCS 5/12-602.10
   Muffler noise, see 625 ILCS 5/12-60201
   Vehicle sound systems, see 625 ILCS 5/12-611
STOP AND THROUGH STREETS
§ 71.015 THROUGH STREETS.
   (A)   The streets and parts of streets of the village designated by
ordinance as “through streets” are hereby declared to be through streets.
   (B)   The driver of a vehicle shall stop at the entrance to a through street
and shall yield the right-of-way to other vehicles which have entered the
intersection or which are approaching so close on a through street as to
constitute an immediate hazard unless directed otherwise by the traffic
officer. See
Chapter 75, Schedule I for applicable through and stop streets.
(Prior Code, § 24-3-1)
§ 71.016 ONE-WAY STREETS AND ALLEYS.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful to operate any vehicle on any streets or alleys
designated as one-way streets or alleys by ordinance in any direction other
than that so designated.
   (B)   See
Chapter 75, Schedule II for the designated one-way streets and alleys.
(Prior Code, § 24-3-2)
Statutory reference:
   Related provisions, see 625 ILCS 5/11-208
§ 71.017 STOP STREETS.
   (A)   The driver of a vehicle shall stop in obedience to a stop sign at an
intersection where a stop sign is erected pursuant to ordinance at one or more
entrances thereto and shall proceed cautiously, yielding to the vehicles not so
obliged to stop which are within the intersection or approaching so close as to
constitute an immediate hazard, unless traffic at such intersection is
controlled by a police officer on duty, in which event, the directions of the
police officer shall be complied with.
   (B)   See
Chapter 75, Schedule I for designated stop intersections.
(Prior Code, § 24-3-3)
Statutory reference:
   Related provisions, see 625 ILCS 5/11-302
§ 71.018 RIGHT-OF-WAY STREETS.
   (A)   The driver of a vehicle approaching a yield sign, in obedience to such
sign, shall slow down to a speed reasonable for the existing conditions and if
required for safety to stop, shall stop at a clearly marked stop line, but if
none, before entering the crosswalk on the near side of the intersection or if
none, then at the point nearest the intersecting roadway where the driver has a
view of approaching traffic on the intersecting roadway.
   (B)   After slowing or stopping, the driver shall yield the right-of-way to
any vehicle in the intersection or approaching on another roadway so closely as
to constitute an immediate hazard during the time such driver is moving across
or within the intersection.
(Prior Code, § 24-3-4)
§ 71.019 POSTING SIGNS.
   Appropriate signs shall be posted to show all through, stop, and yield
right-of-way streets, all one-way streets, and alleys and all stop
intersections.
(Prior Code, § 24-3-5)
Statutory reference:
   Related provisions, see 625 ILCS 5/11-304
DANGEROUS AND PROHIBITED DRIVING
§ 71.030 RECKLESS, NEGLIGENT, OR CARELESS DRIVING.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful to operate a vehicle in the village in a careless
manner so as to interfere with the safe or lawful operation of any other
vehicle or so as to interfere with or to injure, damage, or endanger persons or
property engaged in the lawful use of the street.
(Prior Code, § 24-4-2)
   (B)   It shall be unlawful to operate any vehicle in the village in a
careless, reckless, negligent, or wanton manner, or carelessly so as to
endanger life or property.
(Prior Code, § 24-4-8)
(Penalty, see § 10.999)
§ 71.031 SPEED RESTRICTIONS.
   (A)   Special speed limitations on elevated structures.
      (1)   No person shall drive a vehicle over any bridge or other elevated
structure constituting a part of a highway at a speed which is greater than the
maximum speed which can be maintained with safety to such bridge or structure
when such structure is sign-posted.
      (2)   Upon the trial of any person charged with the violation of this
section, proof of the determination of the maximum speed by the village and the
existence of such signs is conclusive evidence of the maximum speed which can
be maintained with safety to such bridge or structure.
   (B)   General speed restrictions. The speed limits on the various streets
shall be approved by the Board of Trustees, but shall not exceed 20 mph in a
school zone and not to exceed 25 mph on a residential street; otherwise, 30 mph
on an arterial street unless otherwise posted. See
Chapter 75, Schedule IV for further speed limitations.
   (C)   Special speed limit while passing schools.
      (1)   No person shall drive a motor vehicle at a speed in excess of 20
mph while passing a school zone or while traveling upon any public thoroughfare
on or across which children pass going to and from school during school days
when school children are present.
      (2)   This section shall not be applicable unless appropriate signs are
posted upon streets and maintained by the village or state wherein the school
zone is located.
   (D)   Failure to reduce speed.
      (1)   A vehicle shall be driven upon the streets and alleys of this
village at a speed which is reasonable and proper with regard to traffic
conditions and the use of the street or alley. The fact that the vehicle does
not exceed the applicable maximum speed limit does not relieve the driver of
the duty to decrease speed when approaching and crossing an intersection or
when special hazard exists with respect to pedestrian or other traffic or by
reason of weather or highway conditions.
      (2)   Speed must be decreased as may be necessary to avoid colliding with
any person or vehicle on or entering the highway in compliance with legal
requirements and the duty of all persons to use due care.
(Prior Code, § 24-4-2) Penalty, see §
10.999
Statutory reference:
   General speed restrictions, see 625 ILCS 5/11-604
   Speed limitations on elevated structures, see 625 ILCS 5/11-608
   Speed limitations while passing schools, see 625 ILCS 5/11-605
§ 71.032 DRAG RACING.
   No person shall be a participant in drag racing as defined in 625 ILCS 5/11-
504.
(Prior Code, § 24-4-2) Penalty, see §
10.999
§ 71.033 FLEEING OR ELUDING POLICE.
   (A)   Any driver or operator of a motor vehicle who, having been given a
visual or audible signal by a police officer directing such driver or operator
to bring his or her vehicle to a stop, willfully fails to or refuses to obey
such direction, increases his or her speed, extinguishes his or her lights or
otherwise flees or attempts to elude the officer is guilty of a violation of
this chapter.
   (B)   The signal given by the police officer may be by hand, voice, siren,
or red or blue light. Provided, however, the officer giving such signal shall
be in police uniform and if driving a vehicle, such vehicle shall be marked
showing it to be an official police vehicle.
(Prior Code, § 24-4-2) Penalty, see §
10.999
§ 71.034 MANNER OF TURNING.
   No driver of a vehicle shall make a “U-turn” on any street or at any
intersection of any streets in the village.
(Prior Code, § 24-4-2)
§ 71.035 TRANSPORTING LIQUOR.
   No person shall transport, carry, possess, or have any alcoholic liquor
within the passenger area of any motor vehicle in this village except in the
original container and with the seal unbroken.
(Prior Code, § 24-4-4)
Statutory reference:
   Related provisions, see 625 ILCS 5/11-502
§ 71.036 EXCESSIVE NOISE.
   (A)   No operator of a motor vehicle shall, when the motor vehicle is
stopped, unreasonably accelerate the engine thereof with the gears of the
vehicle in neutral, thereby causing an unreasonably loud or excessive noise.
(Prior Code, § 24-4-5)
   (B)   No operator of a motor vehicle shall, when the motor vehicle is
stopped, accelerate the engine with the gears of such vehicle in neutral and
while so accelerating the engine, shift the gears of the vehicle into a forward
or reverse movement, thereby causing an unreasonably loud noise with the drive
wheels of the vehicle.
(Prior Code, § 24-4-6)
   (C)   No operator of a motor vehicle shall cause the wheels of such vehicle
to spin violently, thereby causing an unreasonably loud or excessive noise.
(Prior Code, § 24-4-7)
   (D)   No operator of a motor vehicle shall, when operating the vehicle,
accelerate the vehicle or rapidly stop the vehicle causing an unreasonably loud
noise.
(Prior Code, § 24-4-9)
Penalty, see §
10.999
Statutory reference:
   Squealing tires, see 625 ILCS 5/11-505
CHAPTER 72: PARKING REGULATIONS
Section
   
72.001   Time-limited parking
   
72.002   Parking for sale or repair
   
72.003   Stopping, standing, or parking prohibited
   
72.004   Handicapped parking
   
72.005   Towing of vehicles
   
72.006   Violations
 
   
72.999   Penalty
   
Appendix A: Parking violation notice
§ 72.001 TIME-LIMITED PARKING.
   It shall be unlawful to park any vehicle for a period of time in excess of
the amount of time designated by law and so posted.
(Prior Code, § 24-6-1) Penalty, see §
72.999
§ 72.002 PARKING FOR SALE OR REPAIR.
   No person shall park a vehicle upon any street for the purpose of:
   (A)   Displaying such vehicle for sale; or
   (B)   Washing, greasing, or repairing such vehicle, except when emergency
repairs are necessary.
(Prior Code, § 24-6-2) Penalty, see §
72.999
§ 72.003 STOPPING, STANDING, OR PARKING PROHIBITED.
   (A)   Except when necessary to avoid conflict with other traffic, or in
compliance with law or the directions of a police officer or official traffic-
control devices, no person shall:
      (1)   Stop, stand, or park a vehicle:
         (a)   On the roadway side of any vehicle stopped or parked at the edge
or curb of a street
         (b)   On a sidewalk;
         (c)   Within an intersection;
         (d)   On a crosswalk;
         (e)   Between a safety zone and the adjacent curb or within 30 feet of
points on the curb immediately opposite the ends of a safety zone, unless a
different length is indicated by signs or markings;
         (f)   Alongside or opposite any street excavation or obstruction when
stopping, standing, or parking would obstruct traffic;
         (g)   Upon any bridge or other elevated structure upon a highway or
within a highway tunnel;
         (h)   On any railroad tracks;
         (i)   At any place where official signs prohibit stopping;
         (j)   On any controlled-access highway;
         (k)   In the area between roadways of a divided highway, including
crossovers; or
         (l)   In any alley that is open and maintained.
      (2)   Stand or park a vehicle (whether occupied or not, except
momentarily to pick up or discharge passengers):
         (a)   In front of a public or private driveway;
         (b)   Within 15 feet of a fire hydrant;
         (c)   Within 20 feet of a crosswalk at an intersection;
         (d)   Within 30 feet upon the approach to any flashing signal, stop
sign, yield sign, or traffic-control signal located at the side of the roadway;
         (e)   Within 20 feet of the driveway entrance to any fire station and
on the side of a street opposite the entrance to any fire station within 75
feet of such entrance (when properly sign-posted);
         (f)   At any place where official signs prohibit standing or parking;
or
         (g)   On the north corner of 960 Main Street heading east on First
South Street to the first telephone pole.
      (3)   Parking a vehicle (whether occupied or not, except temporarily for
the purpose of and while actually engaged in loading or unloading property or
passengers):
         (a)   Within 50 feet of the nearest rail of a railroad crossing;
         (b)   At any place where official signs prohibit parking; or
         (c)   In yellow zones.
   (B)   No person shall move a vehicle not lawfully under his or her control
into any such prohibited area or away from a curb such distance as is unlawful.
   (C)   Schedules found in Chapter 75 shall list all applicable no-parking
zones.
(Prior Code, § 24-6-3) (Ord. 2021-05, passed 9-13-2021) Penalty, see §
72.999
Cross-reference:
   No parking zones, see
Chapter 76, Schedule I
Statutory reference:
   Related provisions, see 625 ILCS 5/11-303
§ 72.004 HANDICAPPED PARKING.
   (A)   Designated parking. Certain parking spaces within the confines of the
village shall be designated for use by handicapped persons’ vehicles only and
will be posted with appropriate signs to that effect.
   (B)   Use of designated handicapped parking. The use of designated
handicapped parking locations, duly posted and signed shall to that effect, be
open to any vehicle which bears the appropriate handicapped state registration
plate issued by the Secretary of State, or a valid handicapped parking permit
issued by another governmental agency or which bears a handicapped card
furnished in accordance with 625 ILCS 5/11-1301.1 et seq., furnished by the
village.
   (C)   Application for state handicapped registration plate. The issuance of
an state handicapped motor vehicle registration plate shall be made with the
Secretary of State at any facility provided and approved for that purpose by
the Secretary of State.
   (D)   Handicapped parking areas. Those places designated as handicapped
parking spaces are listed in
Chapter 76, Schedule IV.
(Prior Code, § 24-6-4)
Statutory reference:
   Related provisions, see 625 ILCS 5/11-1301.2
§ 72.005 TOWING OF VEHICLES.
   (A)   The Police Department and all members thereof assigned to traffic duty
are hereby authorized to remove and tow away, or have removed and towed away by
commercial towing service, any car, boat, trailer, or other vehicle illegally
parked in any place where such parked vehicle creates or constitutes a traffic
hazard, blocks the use of a fire hydrant, or obstructs or may obstruct the
movement of any emergency vehicle; or any vehicle which has been parked in any
public street or other public place for a period of 24 hours.
   (B)   Vehicles towed away shall be stored on any village property or in a
public garage or parking lot and shall be restored to the owner or operator
thereof after payment of the expense incurred by the village in removing and
storing such vehicle(s).
(Prior Code, § 24-6-6)
§ 72.006 VIOLATIONS.
   (A)   (1)   Any person accused of a violation of an ordinance prohibiting
parking a vehicle in a designated area, or restricting the length of time a
vehicle may be there parked, may settle and compromise the claim against him or
her for such illegal parking by paying a fine to the village as provided in §
72.999. Such payment may be made at the Village Hall and a receipt shall be
issued for all money so received and such money shall be promptly turned over
to the Village Treasurer to be credited to the General Fund.
      (2)   The members of the Police Department are hereby authorized to
refrain from instituting a prosecution for the alleged offense involved for at
least 48 hours; provided, however, that this division shall not apply to
persons parking a vehicle so as to obstruct the entrance or exit of any place
where Police Department or Fire Department apparatus or other emergency
equipment is kept or housed or so as to block an emergency entrance in a
hospital; nor shall this division apply to any person charged with parking a
vehicle so as to entirely obstruct traffic in any street or alley, or parking
in such a way as to reduce traffic on an arterial street to one-way traffic
only; nor to any person who refuses to remove a vehicle illegally parked at the
request of any member of the Police Department.
(Prior Code, § 24-6-7)
   (B)   The fact that a vehicle which is illegally parked or operated is
registered in the name of a person shall be considered prima facie proof that
such person was in control of the vehicle at the time of such violation.
(Prior Code, § 24-6-8)
   (C)   The Board of Trustees intends to utilize 625 ILCS 5/6-306.5 and the
procedure set forth therein. The appropriate authorities are hereby authorized
to utilize the statute and the procedure set forth therein.
(Prior Code, § 24-6-9)
(Ord. 2024-13, passed 11-20-2024) Penalty, see §
72.999
§ 72.999 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which no
specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to §
10.999 of this code of ordinances.
   (B)   Any vehicle parked in violation §
72.004 in a posted designated handicapped space which does not bear an state
handicapped registration plate, or a valid handicapped parking permit issued by
another governmental agency of a village handicapped registration card, will be
ticketed and the vehicle will be removed in accordance with departmental
policies and in accordance with 625 ILCS 5/11-1302. The registered owner of the
vehicle as ascertained by the registration plates of the vehicle will be
presumed to be in control of the vehicle and will be fined $200. The same
registered owner will be held liable for the cost of removal of the vehicle and
must pay that cost, plus storage charges, if any, prior to the release of the
vehicle.
(Prior Code, § 24-6-4)
   (C)   Pursuant to §
72.006, any person accused of a violation of an ordinance prohibiting parking a
vehicle in a designated area, or restricting the length of time a vehicle may
be there parked, may settle and compromise the claim against him or her for
such illegal parking by paying to the village $25 for each such offense.
(Prior Code, § 24-6-7)
(Ord. 2024-13, passed 11-20-2024)
APPENDIX A: PARKING VIOLATION NOTICE
                                                                A.M.
DATE___________________________________      TIME _______________________ P.M.
LIC. ___________________      STATE ____________      YEAR ___________________
MAKE _________________      COLOR ___________      STYLE __________________
VIOLATION
______________________________________________________________________
__________________________________________________________________________________
__________________________________________________________________________________
LOCATION
_______________________________________________________________________
ST. STICKER
_____________________________________________________________________
OFFICER _______________________________      BADGE ___________________________
PARKING VIOLATION
$25.00 PENALTY
MUST BE PAID WITHIN FIVE (5) DAYS
   Fine may be paid by currency, check, or money order. NO COINS. Payable to
the Village of Marissa, Illinois. Place in this envelope and seal it and
deposit it in a U.S. Mailbox with postage stamp affixed, or bring it to the
Village Clerk’s office.
PLEASE PRINT NAME AND ADDRESS BELOW
NAME
___________________________________________________________________________
ADDRESS
________________________________________________________________________
DEPARTMENT OF POLICE
212 N. Main St.
Marissa, IL 62257
(Prior Code, Ch. 24)
CHAPTER 73: ABANDONED, MISSING, AND UNCLAIMED VEHICLES
Section
   
73.001   Abandonment prohibited
   
73.002   Notification to law enforcement agencies
   
73.003   Removal; towing and hauling
   
73.004   Unknown owner; record searches
   
73.005   Identification and tracing
   
73.006   Reclaimed vehicles; expenses
   
73.007   Disposal of unclaimed or hazardous vehicles
   
73.008   Collection of unpaid charges
   
73.009   Public sale
   
73.010   Liability of law enforcement officers
 
   
73.999   Penalty
Cross-reference:
   Inoperable motor vehicles as a nuisance, see §§
91.050 through
91.055
§ 73.001 ABANDONMENT PROHIBITED.
   (A)   (1)   The abandonment of a vehicle or any part thereof on any highway
in the village is unlawful and subject to penalties as set forth under §
10.999.
      (2)   The abandonment of a vehicle or any part thereof on private or
public property, other than a highway, in view of the general public, anywhere
in this village is unlawful except on property of the owner or bailee of such
abandoned vehicle.
      (3)   A vehicle or any part thereof so abandoned on private property
shall be authorized for removal by the village after a waiting period of seven
days or more, or may be removed immediately if determined to be a hazardous
dilapidated motor vehicle under 65 ILCS 5/11-40-3.1.
      (4)   A violation of this division (A) is subject to penalties as set
forth under §
10.999.
   (B)   A towing service may begin to process an unclaimed vehicle as
abandoned by requesting a record search by the Secretary of State up to ten
days after the date of the tow, or any later date acceptable to the Secretary
of State. This paragraph shall not apply to vehicles towed by order or
authorization of the village or a law enforcement agency.
(Prior Code, § 24-7-1) Penalty, see §
73.999
Cross-reference:
   Related definitions of derelict vehicles, see §
91.001
Statutory reference:
   Related provisions, see 625 ILCS 5/4-201
§ 73.002 NOTIFICATION TO LAW ENFORCEMENT AGENCIES.
   When an abandoned, lost, stolen, or unclaimed vehicle comes into the
temporary possession or custody of a person in the village, not the owner of
the vehicle, such person shall immediately notify the municipal police when the
vehicle is within the corporate limits of any village having a duly authorized
police department, or the State Police or the County Sheriff when the vehicle
is outside the corporate limits of the village. Upon receipt of such
notification, the municipal police will authorize a towing service to remove
and take possession of the abandoned, lost, stolen, or unclaimed vehicle. The
towing service will safely keep the towed vehicle and its contents, and
maintain a record of the tow as set forth in 625 ILCS 5/4-204 for law
enforcement agencies, until the vehicle is claimed by the owner or any other
person legally entitled to possession thereof or until it is disposed of as
provided in this code. (Prior Code, § 24-7-2)
Statutory reference:
   Related provisions, see 625 ILCS 5/4-202
§ 73.003 REMOVAL; TOWING AND HAULING.
   (A)   (1)   When a vehicle is abandoned on a highway in an urban district
for ten hours or more, its removal by a towing service may be authorized by a
law enforcement agency having jurisdiction.
      (2)   When a vehicle is abandoned or left unattended on a highway other
than a toll highway, interstate highway, or expressway, outside of an urban
district for 24 hours or more, its removal by a towing service may be
authorized by a law enforcement agency having jurisdiction.
      (3)   When an abandoned, unattended, wrecked, burned, or partially
dismantled vehicle is creating a traffic hazard because of its position in
relation to the highway or its physical appearance is causing the impeding of
traffic, its immediate removal from the highway or private property adjacent to
the highway by a towing service may be authorized by a law enforcement agency
having jurisdiction.
(Prior Code, § 24-7-3)
   (B)   When a vehicle is authorized to be towed away as provided in §
73.003 or division (A) above:
      (1)   The authorization, any hold order, and any release shall be in
writing, or confirmed in writing, with a copy given to the towing service.
      (2)   The police headquarters or office of the law officer authorizing
the towing shall keep and maintain a record of the vehicle towed, listing the
color, year of manufacture, manufacturer’s trade name, manufacturer’s series
name, body style, vehicle identification number, license plate year and number,
and registration sticker year and number displayed on the vehicle. The record
shall also include the date and hour of tow, location towed from, location
towed to, reason for towing, and the name of the officer authorizing the tow.
      (3)   The owner, operator, or other legally entitled person shall be
responsible to the towing service for payment of applicable removal, towing,
storage, and processing charges and collection costs associated with a vehicle
towed or held under order or authorization of the law enforcement agency. If a
vehicle towed or held under order or authorization of a law enforcement agency
is seized by the ordering or authorizing agency or any other law enforcement or
governmental agency and sold, any unpaid removal, towing, storage, and
processing charges and collection costs shall be paid to the towing service
from the proceeds of the sale. If applicable law provides that the proceeds are
to be paid into the treasury of the appropriate civil jurisdiction, then any
unpaid removal, towing, storage, and processing charges and collection costs
shall be paid to the towing service from the treasury of the civil
jurisdiction. That payment shall not, however, exceed the amount of proceeds
from the sale, with the balance to be paid by the owner, operator, or other
legally entitled person.
      (4)   Upon delivery of a written release order to the towing service, a
vehicle subject to a hold order shall be released to the owner, operator, or
other legally entitled person upon proof of ownership or other entitlement and
upon payment of applicable removal, towing, storage, and processing charges and
collection costs.
(Prior Code, § 24-7-4)
Statutory reference:
   Related provisions, see 625 ILCS 5/4-204
§ 73.004 UNKNOWN OWNER; RECORD SEARCHES.
   (A)   When a law enforcement agency authorizing the impounding of a vehicle
does not know the identity of the registered owner, lienholder, or other
legally entitled person, that law enforcement agency will cause the vehicle
registration records of the state to be searched by the Secretary of State for
the purpose of obtaining the required ownership information.
   (B)   (1)   The law enforcement agency authorizing the impounding of a
vehicle will cause the stolen motor vehicle files of the State Police to be
searched by a directed communication to the State Police for stolen or wanted
information on the vehicle. When the State Police files are searched with
negative results, the information contained in the National Crime Information
Center (NCIC) files will be searched by the State Police.
      (2)   The information determined from these record searches will be
returned to the requesting law enforcement agency for that agency’s use in
sending a notification by certified mail to the registered owner, lienholder
and other legally entitled persons advising where the vehicle is held,
requesting a disposition be made and setting forth public sale information.
      (3)   Notification shall be sent no later than ten business days after
the date the law enforcement agency impounds or authorizes the impounding of a
vehicle; provided that if the law enforcement agency is unable to determine the
identity of the registered owner, lienholder, or other person legally entitled
to ownership of the impounded vehicle within a ten business day-period after
impoundment, then notification shall be sent no later than two days after the
date the identity of the registered owner, lienholder, or other person legally
entitled to ownership of the impounded vehicle is determined. Exceptions to a
notification by certified mail to the registered owner, lienholder, and other
legally entitled persons are set forth in 625 ILCS 5/4-209.
   (C)   (1)   When ownership information is needed for a towing service to
give notification as required under this code of ordinances, the towing service
may cause the vehicle registration records of the state of to be searched by
the Secretary of State.
      (2)   The written request of a towing service, in the form and containing
the information prescribed by the Secretary of State by rule, may be
transmitted to the Secretary of State in person, by United States Mail or other
delivery service, by facsimile transmission, or by other means the Secretary of
State deems acceptable.
      (3)   The Secretary of State shall provide the required information, or a
statement that the information was not found in the vehicle registration
records of the state, by United States Mail or other delivery service,
facsimile transmission, as requested by the towing service, or by other means
acceptable to the Secretary of State.
   (D)   The Secretary of State may prescribe standards and procedures for
submission of requests for record searches and replies via computer link.
   (E)   Fees for services provided under this section shall be in amounts
prescribed by the Secretary of State under 625 ILCS 5/3-821.1. Payment may be
made by the towing service using cash, any commonly accepted credit card, or
any other means of payment deemed acceptable by the Secretary of State.
(Prior Code, § 24-7-5)
Statutory reference:
   Related provisions, see 625 ILCS 5/4-205
§ 73.005 IDENTIFICATION AND TRACING.
   When the registered owner, lienholder, or other person legally entitled to
the possession of a vehicle cannot be identified from the registration files of
this state or from the registration files of a foreign state, if applicable,
the law enforcement agency having custody of the vehicle shall notify the State
Police, for the purpose of identifying the vehicle owner or other person
legally entitled to the possession of the vehicle. The information obtained by
the State Police will be immediately forwarded to the law enforcement agency
having custody of the vehicle for notification purposes as set forth in §
73.004.
(Prior Code, § 24-7-6)
Statutory reference:
   Related provisions, see 625 ILCS 5/4-206
§ 73.006 RECLAIMED VEHICLES; EXPENSES.
   (A)   Any time before a vehicle is sold at public sale or disposed of as
provided in §
73.07(A), the owner, lienholder, or other person legally entitled to its
possession may reclaim the vehicle by presenting to the law enforcement agency
having custody of the vehicle proof of ownership or proof of the right to
possession of the vehicle.
   (B)   No vehicle shall be released to the owner, lienholder, or other person
under this section until all towing, storage, and processing charges have been
paid.
(Prior Code, § 24-7-7)
Statutory reference:
   Related provisions, 625 ILCS 5/4-207
§ 73.007 DISPOSAL OF UNCLAIMED OR HAZARDOUS VEHICLES.
   (A)   (1)   When an abandoned, lost, stolen, or unclaimed vehicle seven
years of age or newer remains unclaimed by the registered owner, lienholder or
other legally entitled person for a period of 30 days after notice has been
given as provided in §§
73.004 and
73.005, the law enforcement agency or towing service having possession of the
vehicle shall cause it to be sold at public auction to a person licensed as an
automotive parts recycler, rebuilder, or scrap processor under 625 ILCS 5, or
the towing operator which towed the vehicle.
      (2)   Notice of the time and place of the sale shall be posted in a
conspicuous place for at least ten days prior to the sale on the premises where
the vehicle has been impounded. At least ten days prior to the sale, the law
enforcement agency where the vehicle is impounded, or the towing service where
the vehicle is impounded, shall cause a notice of the time and place of the
sale to be sent by certified mail to the registered owner, lienholder, or other
legally entitled persons. Notice as provided in §§
73.004 and
73.005, as provided in this section, shall state the time and place of sale and
shall contain a complete description of the vehicle to be sold and what steps
must be taken by any legally entitled persons to reclaim the vehicle.
      (3)   If an abandoned, lost, stolen, or unclaimed vehicle displays dealer
plates, notice under this section and division (B) below shall be sent to both
the dealer and the registered owner, lienholder, or other legally entitled
persons.
      (4)   In those instances where the certified notification specified in §§
73.004 and
73.005 has been returned by the postal authorities to the law enforcement
agency or towing service, the sending of a second certified notice will not be
required.
(Prior Code, § 24-7-8)
   (B)   (1)   When the identity of the registered owner, lienholder, or other
person legally entitled persons of an abandoned, lost, or unclaimed vehicle of
seven years of age or newer cannot be determined by any means provided for in
this subchapter, the vehicle may be sold as provided for in division (A) above
without notice to any person whose identity cannot be determined.
      (2)   When an abandoned vehicle of more than seven years of age is
impounded as specified by this subchapter, or when any such vehicle is towed at
the request or with the consent of the owner or operator and is subsequently
abandoned, it will be kept in custody or storage for a minimum of ten days for
the purpose of determining the identity of the registered owner, lienholder, or
other legally entitled persons and contacting the registered owner, lienholder,
or other legally entitled persons by the United States Mail, public service or
in person for a determination of disposition; and an examination of the State
Police stolen vehicle files for theft and wanted information. At the expiration
of the ten-day period, without the benefit of disposition information being
received from the registered owner, lienholder, or other legally entitled
persons, the vehicle may be disposed of in either of the following ways:
         (a)   The law enforcement agency having jurisdiction will authorize
the disposal of the vehicle as junk or salvage; or
         (b)   The towing service may sell the vehicle in the manner provided
in division (A) above, provided that the paragraph shall not apply to vehicles
towed by order or authorization of a law enforcement agency.
      (3)   A vehicle classified as an antique vehicle, custom vehicle, or
street rod may, however, be sold to a person desiring to restore it.
(Prior Code, § 24-7-9)
   (C)   Any hazardous, dilapidated motor vehicle impounded pursuant to the
provisions of this subchapter and 65 ILCS 5/11-40-3.1, whether impounded at a
public facility or on the property of private towing service, shall be kept in
custody for a period of ten days for the purpose of determining the identity of
the registered owner or lienholder and contacting such owner or lienholder, if
known, by regular United States Mail. At the expiration of the ten-day period,
without benefit of disposition information being received from the registered
owner or lienholder, the law enforcement agency having jurisdiction will
authorize the disposal of the vehicle as junk.
(Prior Code, § 2-7-10)
   (D)   When a vehicle in the custody of the village or law enforcement agency
is reclaimed by the registered owner, lienholder, or other legally entitled
person, or when the vehicle is sold at public sale or otherwise disposed of as
provided in this subchapter, a report of the transaction will be maintained by
that law enforcement agency for a period of one year from the date of the sale
or disposal.
(Prior Code, § 2-7-12)
Statutory reference:
   Provisions related to division (A) above, see 625 ILCS 5/4-208
   Provisions related to division (B) above, see 625 ILCS 5/4-209
   Provisions related to division (C) above, see 625 ILCS 5/4-209.1
   Provisions related to division (D) above, see 625 ILCS 5/4-210
§ 73.008 COLLECTION OF UNPAID CHARGES.
   In an action to collect towing, storage, and processing charges that remain
unpaid after disposition of a vehicle towed or relocated under this code, the
towing service may recover reasonable collection costs.
(Prior Code, § 24-7-11)
§ 73.009 PUBLIC SALE.
   When a vehicle located within the corporate limits is authorized to be towed
away by a law enforcement agency having jurisdiction and disposed of as set
forth in this subchapter, the proceeds of the public sale or disposition after
the deduction of towing, storage, and processing charges shall be deposited in
the treasury of the village. The provisions of this section shall not apply to
vehicles disposed of or sold at public sale under subsection (k) of 625 ILCS 5/
4-107.
(Prior Code, § 24-7-13)
Statutory reference:
   Related provisions, see 625 ILCS 5/4-211
§ 73.010 LIABILITY OF LAW ENFORCEMENT OFFICERS.
   (A)   A law enforcement officer or agency, a department of municipal
government designated under 625 ILCS 5/4-212.1 or its officers or employees, or
a towing service owner, operator, or employee shall not be held to answer or be
liable for damages in any action brought by the registered owner, former
registered owner, or his or her legal representative, lienholder, or any other
person legally entitled to the possession of a vehicle when the vehicle was
processed and sold or disposed of as provided by this subchapter.
   (B)   A towing service, and any of its officers or employees, that removes
or tows a vehicle as a result of being directed to do so by a law enforcement
officer or agency or a department of municipal government or its officers or
employees shall not be held to answer or be liable for injury to, loss of, or
damages to any real or personal property that occurs in the course of the
removal or towing of a vehicle or its contents on a limited access highway in a
designated Incident Management Program that uses fast lane clearance techniques
as defined by the Department of Transportation.
(Prior Code, § 24-7-14)
Statutory reference:
   Related provisions, see 625 ILCS 5/4-213
§ 73.999 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which no
specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to §
10.999 of this code of ordinances.
   (B)   Any person who violates §
73.001 or who aids and abets in that violation:
      (1)   Shall be subject to a mandatory fine of $200; and
      (2)   Shall be required by the court to make a disposition on the
abandoned or unclaimed vehicle and pay all towing, storage, and processing
charges and collection costs pursuant to §
73.003(A)(1) and (A)(5).
   (C)   (1)   When a vehicle is abandoned, it shall be presumed that the last
registered owner is responsible for the abandonment and shall be liable for all
towing, storage, and processing charges and collection costs, less any amounts
realized in the disposal of the vehicle. The last registered owner’s liability
for storage fees may not exceed a maximum of 30 days’ storage fees.
      (2)   The presumption established under this division (C) may be rebutted
by a showing that, prior to the time of the tow:
         (a)   A report of vehicle theft was filed with respect to the vehicle;
or
         (b)   The vehicle was sold or transferred and the last registered
owner provides the towing service with the correct identity and address of the
new owner at the time of the sale or transfer.
      (3)   If the presumption established under this section is rebutted, the
person responsible for theft of the vehicle or to whom the vehicle was sold or
transferred is liable for all towing, storage, and processing charges and
collection costs.
(Prior Code, § 24-7-15)
Statutory reference:
   Related provisions, see 625 ILCS 5/4-214
CHAPTER 74: RECREATIONAL VEHICLES
Section
Bicycles and Riding Animals
   
74.001   General obedience
   
74.002   Lamps and other equipment
Golf Carts and Neighborhood Vehicles
   
74.015   Definitions
   
74.016   Requirements
   
74.017   Permits
   
74.018   Validity
 
   
74.999   Penalty
BICYCLES AND RIDING ANIMALS
§ 74.001 GENERAL OBEDIENCE.
   Any person riding a bicycle or an animal or driving any animal drawing a
vehicle upon any street shall be subject to the provisions of this code of
ordinances applicable to the driver of a vehicle, except those provisions which
can have no application to one riding a bicycle or driving or riding an animal.
(Prior Code, § 24-2-7)
Statutory reference:
   Related provisions, see 625 ILCS 5/11-206
§ 74.002 LAMPS AND OTHER EQUIPMENT.
   (A)   Every bicycle, when in use at nighttime, shall be equipped with a lamp
on the front which shall emit a white light visible from a distance of at least
500 feet to the front and with a red reflector on the rear of a type approved
by the Police Department which shall be visible from all distances of 100 feet
to 600 feet to the rear when directly in front of lawful lower beams of
headlights on a motor vehicle. A lamp emitting a red light visible from a
distance of 500 feet to the rear may be used in addition to the red reflector.
   (B)   A bicycle shall not be equipped with, nor shall any person use any
siren upon a bicycle.
   (C)   Every bicycle shall be equipped with a brake which will adequately
control movement of and stop and hold such bicycle.
   (D)   No person shall sell a new bicycle or pedal for use on a bicycle that
is not equipped with a reflex reflector or conforming to specifications
prescribed by the state on each pedal, visible from the front and rear of the
bicycle during darkness from a distance of 200 feet.
   (E)   (1)   No person shall sell or offer for sale a new bicycle that is not
equipped with side reflectors. Such reflectors shall be visible from each side
of the bicycle from a distance of 500 feet and shall be essentially colorless
or red to the rear of the center of the bicycle and essentially colorless or
amber to the front of the center of the bicycle provided.
      (2)   The requirements of this paragraph may be met by reflective
materials which shall be at least three-sixteenths of an inch wide on each side
of each tire or rim to indicate as clearly as possible the continuous circular
shape and size of the tires or rims of such bicycle and which reflective
materials may be of the same color on both the front and rear tire or rim. Such
reflectors shall conform to specifications prescribed by the state.
   (F)   No person shall sell or offer for sale a new bicycle that is not
equipped with an essentially colorless front-facing reflector.
(Prior Code, § 24-2-8) (Ord. 2024-13, passed 11-20-2024) Penalty, see §
74.999
Statutory reference:
   Related provisions, see 625 ILCS 5/11-1507
GOLF CARTS AND NEIGHBORHOOD VEHICLES
§ 74.015 DEFINITIONS.
   (A)   Golf carts and neighborhood vehicles, as defined and qualified herein,
shall be allowed on village streets under the conditions as stated herein.
(Prior Code, § 24-9-1)
   (B)   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
      GOLF CART. A vehicle specifically designed and intended for the purposes
of transporting one or more person and their golf clubs or maintenance
equipment while engaged in the playing of golf, supervising the play of golf or
maintaining the condition of the grounds on a public or private golf course.
      NEIGHBORHOOD VEHICLE. A self-propelled, electronic-powered, four-wheeled
motor vehicle (or a self-propelled gasoline-powered, four-wheeled motor vehicle
with an engine displacement under 1,200 cubic centimeters) that is capable of
attaining in one mile a speed of more than 20 mph, and which conforms to the
federal regulations under 49 C.F.R. § 571.500.
      VILLAGE STREETS. Any of the streets within the boundaries of the village.
(Prior Code, § 24-9-2) (Ord. 12-06, passed 7-2-2012; Ord. 2019-10, passed 10-
21-2019)
§ 74.016 REQUIREMENTS.
   All persons wishing to operate a golf cart or a neighborhood vehicle on the
village streets must ensure compliance with the following requirements:
   (A)   Proof of current liability insurance;
   (B)   Must be certified with the village and have the vehicles certified
with the village by inspection by the Chief of Police or designated
representative;
   (C)   Must display village decal on the rear of the vehicle;
   (D)   Must have a current, valid state driver’s license;
   (E)   Golf carts must be equipped as follows:
      (1)   Horn;
      (2)   Brakes and brake lights;
      (3)   Turn signals;
      (4)   A steering wheel apparatus;
      (5)   Tires;
      (6)   Rearview mirror;
      (7)   Approved “Slow Moving Vehicle” emblem on the rear of the vehicle
(625 ILCS 5/12-709);
      (8)   Headlight that emits a white light visible from a distance of 500
feet to the front which must illuminate when in operation;
      (9)   Tail lamp that emits a red light visible from at least 100 feet
from the rear which must be illuminated when in operation; and
      (10)   Any additional requirements which may be amended by the State
Motor Vehicle Code, being 625 ILCS 5/.
   (F)   Neighborhood vehicles must be equipped as follows:
      (1)   Brakes and brake lights;
      (2)   Turn signals on the front and rear;
      (3)   A steering wheel apparatus;
      (4)   Tires;
      (5)   Rearview mirror;
      (6)   Approved “Slow Moving Vehicle” emblem on the rear of the vehicle
(625 ILCS 5/12-709);
      (7)   Headlight that emits a white light visible from a distance of 500
feet to the front which must illuminate when in operation;
      (8)   Tail lamp that emits a red light visible from at least 100 feet
from the rear which must be illuminated when in operation; and
      (9)   Any additional requirements which may be amended by 65 ILCS 5/11-
1426.1 or the State Motor Vehicle Code.
   (G)   Must obey all traffic laws of the state and the village;
   (H)   Must be 18 years of age;
   (I)   Must be operated only on village streets, except where prohibited;
   (J)   Must not be operated in excess of posted speed limit and, with respect
to neighborhood vehicles, may not exceed 25 mph;
   (K)   A person operating or who is in actual physical control of a golf cart
or neighborhood vehicle as described herein on a roadway while under the
influence is subject to 625 ILCS 5/11-500 through 11-502;
   (L)   Golf carts and neighborhood vehicles shall not be operated on
sidewalks or in Village Parks other than parking areas; and
   (M)   Golf carts and neighborhood vehicles may not be operated on streets
and highways and roads under the jurisdiction of the State Department of
Transportation (State Route 13 and 4).
(Prior Code, § 24-9-3) (Ord. 12-06, passed 7-2-2012; Ord. 2019-10, passed 10-
21-2019)
§ 74.017 PERMITS.
   (A)   No person shall operate a qualified golf cart or neighborhood vehicle
without first obtaining a permit from the Chief of Police as provided herein.
Permits shall be granted for a period of one year and renewed annually. The
cost of the permit is $25. Insurance coverage is to be verified to be in effect
by the Police Department when obtaining and renewing a permit. All village
permit stickers will be mounted on the outside of the vehicle designated by the
village’s Chief of Police or his or her designated representative. Proof of
insurance must be with the vehicle at all times if it is being driven on
village streets.
   (B)   Every application for a permit shall be made on a form supplied by the
village and shall contain the following information:
      (1)   Name and address of applicant;
      (2)   Name of liability insurance carrier;
      (3)   The serial number, make, model, and description of golf cart or
neighborhood vehicle;
      (4)   Signed waiver of liability by applicant releasing the village and
agreeing to indemnify and hold the village harmless from any and all future
claims resulting from the operation of their golf cart or neighborhood vehicle
on the village streets;
      (5)   Photocopy of applicable liability insurance coverage card
specifically for the vehicle to be operated pursuant to the permit; and
      (6)   Such other information as the village may require.
   (C)   No permit shall be granted unless the following conditions are met:
      (1)   The vehicle must be inspected by the Chief of Police (or designee)
to ensure that the vehicle is safe to operate on village streets and is in
compliance with this subchapter and with the State Motor Vehicle Code;
      (2)   A physically handicapped applicant must submit a certificate signed
by the physician, certifying that the applicant is able to safely operate a
qualified golf cart or neighborhood vehicle on village streets; and
      (3)   The applicant must provide evidence of insurance in compliance with
the provisions of the Illinois Compiled Statutes regarding minimum liability
insurance for passenger motor vehicles to be operated on the roads of the
state.
   (D)   The village may suspend or revoke a permit granted hereunder upon a
finding that the holder thereof has violated any provision of this subchapter
or there is evidence that permittee cannot safely operate a qualified golf cart
or neighborhood vehicle on the designated roadways.
(Prior Code, § 24-9-4) (Ord. 12-06, passed 7-2-2012; Ord. 2019-10, passed 10-
21-2019)
§ 74.018 VALIDITY.
   (A)   In the event that a court of competent jurisdiction declares any
particular provision of this subchapter to be invalid or unenforceable, the
remaining provisions of this subchapter shall be construed to be valid and
enforceable. The invalidity of any part of this subchapter shall not affect any
part or parts thereof.
   (B)   This subchapter shall be in full force and effect from and after
passage and approval as provided by law.
   (C)   Any subchapter, or portion thereof, of the village which is contrary
to this subchapter shall be deemed to be replaced.
(Prior Code, § 24-9-6) (Ord. 12-06, passed 7-2-2012; Ord. 2019-10, passed 10-
21-2019)
§ 74.999 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which no
specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to §
10.999 of this code of ordinances.
   (B)   Any person charge with a violation of §
74.002 shall pay a fine of $5 for the first offense and for a similar charge
during the same year a fine of $10.
(Prior Code, § 24-2-8)
   (C)   (1)   Any person who violates any provision of §§
74.015 through
74.018 shall be guilty of a petty misdemeanor and shall be punished by a fine
of $75. Any second or subsequent offense shall result in the revocation of the
permit for a period of not less than three years, nor more than five years.
      (2)   To the extent that any violation of §§
74.015 through
74.018 also constitutes a violation on a criminal statute of the state, then
the violator shall also be subject to criminal prosecution.
(Prior Code, § 24-9-5)
(Ord. 12-06, passed 7-2-2012; Ord. 2019-10, passed 10-21-2019)
Statutory reference:
   Related provisions, see 625 ILCS 5/11-1507
CHAPTER 75: TRAFFIC SCHEDULES
Schedule
      
I.   Stop intersections
      
II.   One-way streets and alleys
      
III.   Children at play zones
      
IV.   Speed limits
      
V.   Load limits
      
VI.   Truck restrictions
SCHEDULE I. STOP INTERSECTIONS.
   In accordance with the provisions of §§
71.015 and
71.017, the following streets are hereby designated as stop intersections.
   (A)   One- and two-way stops.
Through Street Stop Street Direction Ord. No. Date Passed
Through Street        Stop Street Direction            Ord. No. Date Passed
Bess Avenue           Forest Street (both directions)
Bess Avenue           Harding Avenue (both directions)
Bess Avenue           Keys Street (both directions)
Borders Avenue        Fredrick Street (west)
Borders Avenue        Harding Avenue (both directions)
Borders Avenue        Keys Avenue (both directions)
Borders Avenue        North Eighth Street (both
                      directions)
Borders Avenue        South Railroad Street (both
                      directions)
Borders Avenue        Reily Avenue (east)
Euclid Avenue         Mill Street (both directions)
Euclid Avenue         White Street (both directions)
Fulton Street         Park Street (both directions)    94-7
Fulton Street         White Drive (north)
Glenn Street          Sunrise Drive (both directions)  04-06
Grace Avenue          Keys Street (both directions)
Grace Avenue          Reily Avenue (both directions)   97-2
Hall Street           Euclid Avenue (both directions)  94-6
Hall Street           Grace Street (both directions)   94-1
Hall Street           Park Avenue (north)
Hamilton Street       Commercial Street (east)         95-7
Hamilton Street       East Church Street (east)        94-15
Hamilton Street       Glenn Street (both directions)   94-7
Hamilton Street       Hall Street (east)
Hamilton Street       Harding Street (both directions) 97-2
Hamilton Street       Keys Street (east)
Hamilton Street       Marissa Street (east)
Hamilton Street       Mill Street (both directions)    97-2
Hamilton Street       South Railroad Street (south)
Joan Avenue           Fulton Street (both directions)
John Hotz Street      Bess Street (south)
John Hotz Street      Cedar Street (north)
John Hotz Street      Elm Street (north)
John Hotz Street      Grace Street (south street)
John Hotz Street      Hamilton Street (south street)
John Hotz Street      Maple Street (north)
John Hotz Street      Pine Street (north)
Lyons Street          All intersecting streets
Main Street           All intersecting streets
Meek Avenue           Keys Avenue (both directions)
Mill Street           Grace Street (both directions)   94-1
Milton Street         Bess Avenue (south)
North Railroad Street All intersecting streets
Park Avenue           Forest Street (both directions)
Park Avenue           Glenn Street (both directions)
Park Avenue           Mill Street (both directions)
Park Avenue           Milton Street (both directions)
Park Avenue           South Railroad Street (north)
Park Avenue           White Street (both directions)
Pinckneyville Road    Borders Avenue (north)
Pinckneyville Road    Marissa Street (west)
Reily Avenue          Bess Avenue (both directions)
Reily Avenue          Meek Avenue (both directions)
Saint Clair Street    Grace Avenue (both directions)
Saint Clair Street    Park Avenue (south)
Saint Clair Street    South Railroad Street (north)
School View Road      County Highway 72 (south)
School View Road      High School Access Road (north)
South Railroad Street Bess Avenue (north)
South Railroad Street Church Avenue (north)
South Railroad Street Grace Avenue (north)
South Railroad Street Meek Avenue (north)
South Railroad Street Milton Street (east)
Spring Street         Grace Avenue (north)
Sunrise Drive         Fulton Street (both directions)  635
White Street          Grace Avenue (both directions)
 
   (B)   Two- and three-way stops.
Street Direction Stops At (Street Direction) Ord. No. Date Passed
Street Direction          Stops At (Street Direction)      Ord. No. Date Passed
First North Street (east) Hamilton Street (north)
First South Street (east) North Hamilton Street (north) at
                          Pinckneyville Road (west)
Fulton Street (west)      East Drive (both directions)
Fulton Street (west)      Grace Street (both directions)
John Hotz Street (east)   Wilke Road (north)
Pinckneyville Road        Borders Street (east and west)   2023-02  7-10-2023
Saint Clair Street (east) Bess Avenue (both directions)
Saint Clair Street (west) Borders Avenue (north)
 
   (C)   Four-way stops.
Street Intersecting Street Ord. No. Date Passed
Street              Intersecting Street  Ord. No. Date Passed
East Spring Street  North Bess Street
East Spring Street  North Borders Street
Fulton Street       Hamilton Street
Glenn Street        North Borders Street
Lyons Street        Main Street
North 7th Street    Hamilton Street
North 8th Street    Hamilton Street      2016-07
South Euclid Street West Forest Street
 
(Prior Code, Ch. 24, Schd. A)
SCHEDULE II. ONE-WAY STREETS AND ALLEYS.
   (A)   One-way streets.
 
Street Direction             Location                      Ord. No. Date Passed
Church Avenue (west)         From North Hamilton Street to 456
                             North Railroad Street
East Church Street (east)    From Main Street to Hamilton  94-15
                             Street
East Fulton Street (west)    From North Grace Street to    456
                             North Hamilton Street
East Glen Street (east)      From North Main Street to     456
                             North Railroad Street
North Railroad Street (east) From North Main Street to 140 385
                             feet west
 
   (B)   One-way alleys.
 
Street Direction Location                                  Ord. No. Date Passed
                 From North Hamilton Street to North Grace
Alley (east)     Street (which is south of East Lyons      423
                 Street)
Alley (south)    East Fulton Street to East Glenn Street   10-06
                 (which is west of North Grace Avenue)
Alley (south)    East Lyons Street to East Fulton Street   423
                 (which is west of North grace Avenue)
 
(Prior Code, Ch. 24, Schd. B)
SCHEDULE III. CHILDREN AT PLAY ZONES.
   (A)   The village shall be permitted to install “CHILDREN AT PLAY,” or other
similar signs as an advisory measure on streets within the village.
(Prior Code, § 24-10-1)
   (B)   The following areas are designated as children at play zones.
 
Street Direction                  Ord. No. Date Passed
7th Street (north and south)      2017-05  3-20-2017
North Park Street (east and west) 2017-05  3-20-2017
 
(Prior Code, Ch. 24, Schd. C)
SCHEDULE IV. SPEED LIMITS.
   In accordance with the provisions of §
71.031(B), the following streets shall have the applicable speed limits as
specified below.
 
Street               Location                 Speed Limit Ord. No. Date Passed
Finger Hill Road     Between Railroad Street  25 mph      625
                     and Woodlawn Acres
Main Street          Between hall Street and  20 mph      526
                     Lyons Street
Pinckneyville Street Between Route 13 and     25 mph      587
                     First South Street
                     Between West Saint Clair
South Park Street    Street to the end of the 20 mph      526
                     street
 
(Prior Code, Ch. 24, Schd. J)
SCHEDULE V. LOAD LIMITS.
   (A)   Established. There is hereby established gross load limits on certain
village streets. The term GROSS LOAD LIMIT shall mean the total weight of a
vehicle and the load it is carrying. The specified streets and the load limits
are hereby listed in division (D) below.
   (B)   Restrictions. It shall be unlawful to operate a vehicle upon any
street where the operation is prohibited by this section and where such signs
of prohibition are posted, except that a vehicle may be driven on such street
for not more than the minimum distance necessary for the purpose of making
deliveries or picking up loads.
   (C)   Exceptions. This schedule shall not include trash trucks or pickup
trucks, trucks operated by the village, or the operation of a vehicle owned by
the United States government or the state while on lawful business of these
agencies.
(Prior Code, § 24-6-5)
   (D)   Streets specified. The following street is declared to be a load limit
street.
 
Street         Location                       Load Limit Ord. No. Date Passed
               State Route 13 to railroad
Hillstown Road tracks adjacent to Cotton Wood 10 tons    02-01
               Hills Landfill
 
(Prior Code, Ch. 24, Schd. L)
SCHEDULE VI. TRUCK RESTRICTIONS.
   (A)   Operation prohibited. It shall be unlawful to operate a commercial
truck upon any street where commercial truck operation is prohibited by this
code of ordinances and where such signs of prohibition are posted, except that
a truck may be driven on such street for not more than the minimum distance
necessary for the purpose of making deliveries or picking up loads.
(Prior Code, § 24-6-10)
   (B)   No semi-trucks. The following street is hereby declared as a no
parking and no travel street for applicable commercial trucks.
 
Street               Location                            Ord. No. Date Passed
North Borders Street From Spring Street to Pinckneyville
                     Road
 
(Prior Code, Ch. 24, Schd. P)
Penalty, see §
10.999
CHAPTER 76: PARKING SCHEDULES
Schedule
      
I.   No parking zones
      
II.   Loading zones
      
III.   Parallel parking zones
      
IV.   Handicapped parking zones
SCHEDULE I. NO PARKING ZONES.
   (A)   Generally. In accordance with the provisions of §
72.003, the following streets are hereby designated as no parking zones.
Street Side Location Ord. No. Date Passed
Street Side                 Location                      Ord. No. Date Passed
                            From handicapped parking
                            spaces located between North
East Fulton Street (north   Grace Street and North
side)                       Hamilton Street west to North 10-06
                            Hamilton Street (15 minute
                            parking only from 7:00 a.m to
                            4:00 p.m.)
East Lyons Street (both     From North Borders Street     06-03
sides)                      west 180 feet
Finger Hill Road (both      From Railroad Street to       600
sides)                      Woodland Acres Subdivision
Fulton Street (south side)  From Borders Avenue to Grace  361
                            Street west 25 feet
Fulton Street (both sides)  From Grace Street west 25     95-7
                            feet
Glenn Street (south side)   From Main Street east 45 feet 97-
Hamilton Avenue (east side) From Lyons Street to Glenn    361
                            Street
Lyons Street (south side)   From Hamilton Street west 50  564
                            feet
Main Street (east side)     From Fulton Street to village 361
                            limits
Main Street (east side)     From White Street to village  361
                            limits
North Borders Street (both  500 Block                     06-03
sides)
North Borders Street (both  From East Lyons Street south  06-03
sides)                      60 feet
North corner of 960 Main    Heading east on First South
Street                      Street to the first telephone 2021-05  9-13-2021
                            pole
Saint Clair Street (north   From Main Street to Borders   361
side)                       Avenue
 
   (B)   Semi-trucks, except for local delivery. It shall be unlawful to park
any semi-trailer or any truck-tractor in combination with a semi-trailer on a
highway within the village, except that a truck-tractor in combination with a
semi-trailer may park temporarily on a street for the purpose of loading and
unloading.
 
Street             Location                            Ord. No. Date Passed
First South Street From North Main Street to North
                   Hamilton
Lyons Street       From Pinckneyville Road to Route 4
Main Street        From North Park Street to South
                   corporate limits
North Park Street  From Route 13 to North Main Street
Pinckneyville Road From North Hamilton Street to Lyons
                   Street
 
(Prior Code, Ch. 24, Schd. F and P)
SCHEDULE II. LOADING ZONES.
   In accordance with the provisions of §
72.003, the following areas are hereby designated as loading zones and parking
shall be restricted therein.
 
Street Side                Location                      Ord. No. Date Passed
Church Street (north side) From a point 107 feet east if 04-06
                           Main Street to the alley
Church Street (south side) From a point 100 feet east of 95-1
                           Main Street to the alley
 
(Prior Code, Ch. 24, Schd. H)
SCHEDULE III. PARALLEL PARKING ZONES.
   In accordance with the provisions of §
72.003, the following street is specifically designated as a parallel parking
street.
 
Street Side Location                           Ord. No. Date Passed
Main Street From White Street to Fulton Street 366
 
(Prior Code, Ch. 24, Schd. I)
SCHEDULE IV. HANDICAPPED PARKING ZONES.
   In accordance with the provisions of §
72.004 , the following areas and/or streets are declared to be handicapped
parking spaces.
 
Street/Area/Side           Location                        Ord. No. Date Passed
                           2 spaces immediately to the
                           west of the alley extending
East Fulton Street (north  from East Fulton Street to East 10-06
side)                      Glenn Street that is situated
                           to the west of North Grace
                           Avenue
East Glenn Street          1 space for the library         08-10
North Church Street (north By Presbyterian Church
side)
 
(Prior Code, Ch. 24, Schd. O)
TITLE IX: GENERAL REGULATIONS
   Chapter
      
90.   ANIMALS
      
91.   NUISANCES
      
92.   PARKS AND RECREATION
      
93.   STREET AND SIDEWALK REGULATIONS
      
94.   FAIR HOUSING
CHAPTER 90: ANIMALS
Section
General Provisions
   
90.001   Short title
   
90.002   Definitions
   
90.003   Animal Control Officer
Care and Keeping of Animals
   
90.015   Injury to property
   
90.016   Manner of keeping; enclosures
   
90.017   Noise nuisance
   
90.018   Animal cruelty
   
90.019   Exhibiting vicious or wild animals
   
90.020   Health hazard
   
90.021   Number of animals kept
   
90.022   Keeping of certain animals
   
90.023   Restraint of dogs
Dog Licensing and Vaccination
   
90.035   Rabies inoculation and tags required
   
90.036   Licensed veterinarian to perform inoculation; certificate
   
90.037   Duration of inoculation
   
90.038   Specifications for tags
Vicious, Dangerous, and Nuisance Dogs
   
90.050   Definitions
   
90.051   Obstructing poundmaster
   
90.052   Impoundment; redemption
   
90.053   Running at large or without license; impoundment
   
90.054   Dog bites; impoundment
   
90.055   Disposition of nuisance dogs
   
90.056   Female dogs
   
90.057   Vicious dogs; unlawful to maintain; impoundment
   
90.058   Dangerous dogs permitted to leave premises
   
90.059   Liability and responsibility of owner
   
90.060   Inspections; right of entry
Livestock
   
90.075   Chickens and coops
   
90.076   Chicken coop licensing
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 90.001 SHORT TITLE.
   This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the “Animal Control Code.”
(Prior Code, § 3-1-1)
Statutory reference:
    Related provisions, see 510 ILCS 5/1
§ 90.002 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ANIMAL. Any animal, other than man, which may be affected by rabies.
(510 ILCS 5/2.02)
   ANIMAL CONTROL OFFICER. Any person appointed by the Mayor and approved by
the Board of Trustees to perform duties enforcing this code or any animal
control official appointed and acting under authority of the County Board.
(510 ILCS 5/2.03)
   AT LARGE. Any animal shall be deemed to be at large when it is off the
property of its owner and not under the control of a responsible person.
   CAT. Any feline, regardless of age or sex.
   CONFINED. Restriction of an animal at all times by the owner, or his or her
agent, to an escape-proof building or other enclosure away from other animals
and the public.
(510 ILCS 5/2.05)
   DANGEROUS DOG. Any individual dog which when either unmuzzled, unleashed, a
or unattended by its owner, or a member of its owner’s family, in a vicious or
terrorizing manner, approaches any person in an apparent attitude of attack
upon streets, sidewalks, or any public grounds or places.
(510 ILCS 5/2.05a)
   DEPARTMENT OF AGRICULTURE. The Department of Agriculture of the State of
Illinois.
(510 ILCS 5/2.06)
   DOG. All members of the family Canidae.
(510 ILCS 5/2.11)
   HAS BEEN BITTEN. Has been seized with the teeth or jaws so that the person
or animal seized has been nipped, gripped, wounded, or pierced, and further
includes contact of saliva with any break or abrasion of the skin.
(510 ILCS 5/2.12)
   INOCULATION AGAINST RABIES. The injection of an anti-rabies vaccine approved
by the St. Clair County Animal Control Department and regulated by the St.
Clair County Veterinary Office.
(510 ILCS 5/2.13)
   LEASH. A cord, rope, strap, or chain which shall be securely fastened to the
collar or harness of a dog or other animal and shall be of sufficient strength
to keep such dog or other animal under control.
(510 ILCS 5/2.14)
   LICENSED VETERINARIAN. A veterinarian licensed by the state in which he or
she engages in the practice of veterinary medicine.
(510 ILCS 5/2.15)
   OWNER. A person having a right of property in an animal or who keeps or
harbors an animal, or who has an animal in his or her care, or who acts as its
custodian, or who knowingly permits an animal to remain on or about any
premises occupied by him or her.
(510 ILCS 5/2.16)
   POUND. Any facility approved by the Administrator and licensed as such by
the Department of Agriculture for the purpose of enforcing this code and used
as a shelter for seized, stray, homeless, abandoned, or unwanted dogs or other
animals.
(510 ILCS 5/2.18)
   REGISTRATION CERTIFICATE. A printed form prescribed by the Department for
the purpose of recording pertinent information as required by the Department
under this chapter.
(510 ILCS 5/2.19)
   RESTRAINT. A dog is under RESTRAINT within the meaning of this Animal
Control Code if he or she is controlled by a leash; at “heel” beside a
responsible person; within a vehicle being driven or parked on the streets; or
within the property limits of his or her owner or keeper.
   SHADE. Protection from the direct rays of the sun during the months of June
through September.
   SHELTER. As it applies to dogs, a moisture-proof structure of suitable size
to accommodate the dog and allow retention of body heat, made of durable
material with a solid floor raised at least two inches from the ground and with
the entrance covered by a flexible, wind-proof material. Such structure shall
be provided with a sufficient quantity of suitable bedding to provide
insulation and protection against cold and dampness.
   UNOWNED STRAY DOG. Any dog not on the premises of the owner or keeper or
under control by leash or other recognized control methods, and which does not,
at that time and place, bear a current rabies inoculation tag issued pursuant
to the provisions of this chapter, by means of which, by reference to records
of current registration certificates, the Administrator or his or her deputies
or assistants may determine the name and address of the owner or keeper
thereof, or some other means of identification from which the Administrator or
his or her deputies or assistants may directly determine the name and address
of the owner or keeper thereof.
   VICIOUS ANIMAL. Any animal which has previously attacked or bitten any
person or which has behaved in such a manner that the person who harbors said
animal knows or should reasonably know that the animal is possessed of
tendencies to attack or bite persons.
   WILD ANIMAL. Any live monkey or ape, raccoon, skunk, fox, snake, or other
reptile, leopard, panther, tiger, lion, lynx, or any other animal or any bird
of prey which can normally be found in the wild state.
(510 ILCS 5/24)
(Prior Code, §§ 3-1-2, 3-2-1) (Ord. 2024-10, passed 11-20-2024)
§ 90.003 ANIMAL CONTROL OFFICER.
   (A)   There is hereby created the position of Animal Control Officer, an
office of the village. The Animal Control Officer shall have the duty of
enforcing all laws relating to keeping animals in the Village; and such other
duties as are assigned from time to time to the Animal Control Officer by this
code of ordinances. He or she shall also be known as the Dog Catcher.
(Prior Code, § 3-5-1)
   (B)   The Animal Control Officer shall be appointed by the Mayor, with the
advice and consent of the Board of Trustees, and shall serve for one year. His
or her salary shall be the amount set for the position by the ordinance
establishing the appropriation for each year.
(Prior Code, § 3-5-2)
   (C)   The Animal Control Officer shall have the assistance of such part-time
and full-time employees as are assigned to the Animal Control Officer by the
Mayor.
(Prior Code, § 3-5-5)
CARE AND KEEPING OF ANIMALS
§ 90.015 INJURY TO PROPERTY.
   (A)   Unlawful. It shall be unlawful for any person owning or possessing a
dog or cat to permit such dog or cat to go upon any sidewalk, parkway, or
private lands or premises without the permission of the owner of such premises
and break, bruise, tear up, crush, or injure any lawn, flowerbed, plant, shrub,
tree, or garden in any manner whatsoever, or to defecate thereon.
   (B)   Waste products accumulations.
      (1)   It shall be unlawful for any person to cause or permit a dog or cat
to be on property, public or private, not owned or possessed by such person
unless such person has in his or her immediate possession an appropriate device
for scooping excrement and an appropriate depository for the transmission of
excrement to a receptacle located upon property owned or possessed by such
person.
      (2)   This division (B) shall not apply to a person who is visually or
physically handicapped.
(Prior Code, § 3-1-3) Penalty, see §
10.999
§ 90.016 MANNER OF KEEPING; ENCLOSURES.
   (A)   Pens, yards, or runs. All pens, yards, runs, or other structures
wherein any animal is kept shall be of such construction so as to be easily
cleaned and kept in good repair.
   (B)   Fences. Fences which are intended as enclosures for any animal shall
be securely constructed, shall be adequate for the purpose, kept in good repair
and shall not be allowed to become unsightly.
(Prior Code, § 3-1-4) Penalty, see §
10.999
§ 90.017 NOISE NUISANCE.
   (A)   Harboring.
      (1)   It shall be unlawful for any person to knowingly keep or harbor any
dog which habitually barks, howls, or yelps, or any cat which habitually cries
or howls to the great discomfort of the peace and quiet of the neighborhood, or
in such manner as to materially disturb or annoy persons in the neighborhood
who are of ordinary sensibilities.
      (2)   Such dogs and cats are hereby declared to be a public nuisance.
   (B)   Petitions of complaint. Whenever any person shall complain to the
Police Department that a dog which habitually barks, howls, or yelps or a cat
which habitually cries or howls is being kept by any person in the village, the
Police Department shall notify the owner of said dog or cat that a complaint
has been received and that the person should take whatever steps are necessary
to alleviate the howling, yelping, or crying.
(Prior Code, § 3-1-5) Penalty, see §
10.999
§ 90.018 ANIMAL CRUELTY.
   (A)   Cruelty to animals prohibited.
      (1)   It shall be unlawful for any person to willfully or maliciously
inflict unnecessary or needless cruelty, torture, abuse, or cruelly beat,
strike, or abuse any animal, or by an act, omission, or neglect, cause or
inflict any unnecessary or unjustifiable pain, suffering, injury, or death to
any animal, whether such animal belongs to such person or to another, except
that reasonable force may be employed to drive away vicious or trespassing
animals.
      (2)   Any unwanted animals should be delivered to the County Animal
Control Facility for proper disposal.
   (B)   Food and shelter. It shall be unlawful for any person in charge of any
animal to fail, refuse, or neglect to provide such animal with food, potable
water, shade, or shelter, or to cruelly or unnecessarily expose any such animal
in hot, stormy, cold, or inclement weather, or to carry any such animal in or
upon any vehicle in a cruel or inhumane manner. The terms used in this section
shall comply with §
90.002.
(Prior Code, § 3-1-6) Penalty, see §
10.999
Statutory reference:
   Related provisions, see 65 ILCS 5/11-5-6
§ 90.019 EXHIBITING VICIOUS OR WILD ANIMALS.
   (A)   (1)   It shall be unlawful for any person to keep or permit to be kept
on his or her premises any wild or vicious animal as described in this chapter
for display or for exhibition purposes, whether gratuitously or for a fee.
      (2)   This section shall not be construed to apply to zoological parks,
performing animal exhibitions, or circuses.
   (B)   It shall be unlawful for any person to keep or permit to be kept any
wild animal as a pet, unless a permit is granted by the Department of Natural
Resources of the state.
   (C)   It shall be unlawful for any person to harbor or keep a vicious animal
within the village. Any animal which is found off the premises of its owner may
be seized by any police officer or humane officer and upon establishment to the
satisfaction of any court of competent jurisdiction of the vicious character of
said animal, it may be killed by a police officer or humane officer; provided,
however, that this section shall not apply to animals under the control of a
law enforcement or military agency, nor to animals which are kept for the
protection of property; provided that such animals are restrained by a leash or
chain, cage, fence, or other adequate means from contact with the general
public or with persons who enter the premises with the actual or implied
permission of the owner or occupant.
   (D)   The licensing authority may issue a temporary permit for the keeping,
care, and protection of any infant animal native to this area which has been
deemed to be homeless.
(Prior Code, § 3-1-7) Penalty, see §
10.999
§ 90.020 HEALTH HAZARD.
   The Mayor shall have the power to issue an order prohibiting the keeping of
any animal, fowl, or bird which is deemed to be a nuisance or pose a health
hazard to the general public.
(Prior Code, § 3-1-8)
§ 90.021 NUMBER OF ANIMALS KEPT.
   (A)   Nuisance. The keeping of an unlimited number of dogs and cats in the
village for a considerable period of time detracts from and, in many instances,
is detrimental to the healthful and comfortable life for which such areas were
created. The keeping of an unlimited number of dogs and cats is, therefore,
declared to be a public nuisance. The terms “dog” and “cat” shall be construed
as provided in §
90.002.
   (B)   Limitation; exception.
      (1)   It shall be unlawful for any person or persons to keep more than
three dogs and/or three cats within the village, with the exception that a
litter of pups, a litter of kittens, or a portion of a litter may be kept for a
period of time not exceeding five months from birth.
      (2)   The provisions of this section shall not apply to any establishment
wherein dogs or cats are kept for breeding, sale, sporting purposes, or
boarding.
   (C)   Kennels. In the areas where kennels are permitted, no kennel shall be
located closer than 20 feet without a variance from the Zoning Board of Appeals
to the boundary of the nearest adjacent residential lot.
(Prior Code, § 3-1-9) Penalty, see §
10.999
§ 90.022 KEEPING OF CERTAIN ANIMALS.
   (A)   Certain prohibitions. Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, no
person shall keep within the village any cattle, cows, horses, sheep, swine,
goats, roosters, ducks, turkeys, geese, rabbits, or other livestock.
   (B)   Exceptions. This section shall not apply in areas of the village that
are zoned agricultural in nature nor shall this section apply to livestock
brought in to the village for the purpose of being shipped out of the village.
   (C)   Powers of Animal Control Officer. The Animal Control Officer shall
have the power to issue an order prohibiting the keeping of any animal, fowl,
or bird which is deemed to pose a health hazard to the general public.
(Prior Code, § 3-1-10) (Ord. 17-01, passed 2-6-2017) Penalty, see §
10.999
Statutory reference:
   Related provisions, see 65 ILCS 5/11-1-1, 5/11-5-6, and 5/11-20-9
§ 90.023 RESTRAINT OF DOGS.
   The owner or keeper of a dog shall keep the dog under restraint at all times
and shall not permit such dog to be at large, off the premises of the property
of the owner or keeper, unless the dog is under complete control as defined in
§
90.002.
(Prior Code, § 3-2-7) Penalty, see §
10.999
Statutory reference:
   Related provisions, see 65 ILCS 5/11-20-9
DOG LICENSING AND VACCINATION
§ 90.035 RABIES INOCULATION AND TAGS REQUIRED.
   (A)   (1)   Each calendar year or at such intervals as may hereafter be
promulgated by the Department of Agriculture, every owner or keeper of a dog
four months or more of age shall cause such dog to be inoculated against
rabies.
      (2)   Such owner or keeper of such dog shall cause a serially numbered
tag evidencing such inoculation to be attached to a collar or harness worn by
the dog.
   (B)   Every owner or keeper of a dog, regardless of age, shall cause the dog
to wear a collar or harness and shall affix thereto a metallic or other
suitable tag inscribed with the name, address, and phone number, if any, of the
owner or keeper of the dog.
(Prior Code, § 3-2-2) Penalty, see §
10.999
§ 90.036 LICENSED VETERINARIAN TO PERFORM INOCULATION; CERTIFICATE.
   (A)   (1)   The inoculation of dogs required by §
90.035(A) shall be performed by a veterinarian duly licensed to practice his or
her profession in this state.
      (2)   Upon performing such inoculation, such veterinarian shall issue to
the owner or keeper a certificate showing such fact and shall also deliver to
the owner or keeper a metallic or other suitable tag to be attached to the
collar or harness of the dog, which tag shall also certify to the fact of the
inoculation against rabies.
(Prior Code, § 3-2-3)
   (B)    At any reasonable time upon request of any member of the Police
Department or village employee, the owner or keeper of any unmuzzled dog shall
exhibit his or her certificate issued under the provisions of division (A)
above, showing the inoculation against rabies of any dog owned or controlled by
him or her.
(Prior Code, § 3-2-6)
§ 90.037 DURATION OF INOCULATION.
   The inoculation performed under the provisions of §
90.036(A) shall be effective until the expiration of the calendar year in which
the vaccination was performed or the expiration of such period of time as may
be promulgated by the Department of Agriculture.
(Prior Code, § 3-2-4)
§ 90.038 SPECIFICATIONS FOR TAGS.
   The tag issued under the provisions of §
90.036(A) shall be in such form as shall be determined by the Department of
Agriculture.
(Prior Code, § 3-2-5)
VICIOUS, DANGEROUS, AND NUISANCE DOGS
§ 90.050 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   DANGEROUS DOG.
      (1)   Any individual dog anywhere other than upon the property of the
owner or custodian of the dog and unmuzzled, unleashed, or unattended by its
owner or custodian that behaves in a manner that a reasonable person would
believe poses a serious and unjustified imminent threat of serious physical
injury or death to a person or a companion animal; or
      (2)   A dog that, without justification, bites a person and does not
cause serious physical injury.
   ENCLOSURE.
      (1)   A fence or structure of at least six feet in height forming or
causing an enclosure suitable to prevent the entry of young children, and
suitable to confine a vicious dog in conjunction with other measures which may
be taken by the owner or keeper, such as tethering of the vicious dog within
the enclosure.
      (2)   The ENCLOSURE shall be securely enclosed and locked and designed
with secure sides, top, and bottom and shall be designed to prevent the animal
from escaping from the enclosure. If the ENCLOSURE is a room within a
residence, it cannot have direct ingress from or egress to the outdoors unless
it leads directly to an enclosure pen and the door must be locked.
      (3)   A vicious dog may be allowed to move freely within the entire
residence if it is muzzled at all times.
   FOUND TO BE VICIOUS DOG.
      (1)   The Animal Control Officer or law enforcement officer has given
notice of the infraction that is the basis of the investigation to the owner,
conducted a thorough investigation, interviewed any witnesses, including the
owner, gathered any existing medical records, veterinary medical records or
behavioral evidence, and made a detailed report recommending a finding that the
dog is a vicious dog and has given the report to the State Attorney’s Office
and the owner.
      (2)   The State Attorney or any citizen of the county in which the dog
exists may file a complaint in the circuit court in the name of the People of
the State to deem a dog a vicious dog. The petitioner must prove the dog is a
vicious dog by clear and convincing evidence.
   IMPOUNDED. Taken into the custody of the public animal control facility in
the village.
   VICIOUS DOG. A dog that, without justification attacks a person and causes
serious physical injury or death or any individual dog that has been found to
be a DANGEROUS DOG upon three separate occasions.
      (1)   A dog may not be declared vicious if it is determined that the
conduct of the dog was justified because:
         (a)   The threat, injury, or death was sustained by a person who at
the time was committing a crime or offense upon the owner or custodian of the
dog, or was committing a willful trespass or other tort upon the premises or
property owned or occupied by the owner of the animal;
         (b)   The injured, threatened, or killed person was abusing,
assaulting, or physically threatening the god or its offspring, or has in the
past abused, assaulted, or physically threatened the dog or its offspring;
         (c)   The dog was responding to pain or injury, or was protecting
itself, its owner, custodian, or member of its household, kennel, or offspring;
or
         (d)   The dog is a professionally trained dog for law enforcement or
guard duties.
      (2)   Vicious dogs shall not be classified in a manner that is specific
as to breed.
(Prior Code, § 3-3-1)
§ 90.051 OBSTRUCTING POUNDMASTER.
   Any person(s) who shall bring any dog into the village for the purpose of
causing the same to be impounded or any person who shall resist, hinder, or
molest the poundmaster or dog catcher or police officer while engaged upon the
duties imposed upon them by this chapter or any person who shall break into the
dog pound and release or deliver any dog therefrom without having first paid
the fees herein specified, or any owner or keeper of any dog who shall permit
any dog to run at large within the corporate limits of the village, upon
conviction of any part of this chapter shall be fined according to §
10.999 of this code of ordinances.
(Prior Code, § 3-2-10) Penalty, see §
10.999
§ 90.052 IMPOUNDMENT; REDEMPTION.
   (A)   Persons charged with the duty of enforcing this chapter may employ any
method found practical and humane in capturing and impounding any dog found
running at large.
(Prior Code, § 3-2-12)
   (B)   The owner of any animal impounded under this chapter may redeem the
same by paying all the costs and charges assessed, if any, that have accrued up
to the time of making redemption and on paying the same; it shall be the duty
of the authorities to release the animal from the pound and deliver it to its
owner, or certify the release thereof to any county authority having possession
of the animal.
(Prior Code, § 3-2-13)
   (C)   The Board of Trustees shall designate a village pound.
(Prior Code, § 3-2-14)
§ 90.053 RUNNING AT LARGE OR WITHOUT LICENSE; IMPOUNDMENT.
   (A)   (1)   It shall be the duty of such employees and officers of the
Police Department as shall be designated for that purpose by the Mayor to take
up and impound in such place as may be designated and set apart for that
purpose, any dog found running at large or unlicensed in the village, contrary
to any of the provisions of this chapter or other regulations of the village.
      (2)   When dogs are found running at large or unlicensed and their
ownership is known to the designated employee(s), such dogs may be impounded at
the discretion of such employee(s), but the employee(s) may cite the owner of
such dog to answer charges of violation of this chapter.
      (3)   Any dog permitted to run at large within the village is hereby
declared to be a nuisance.
      (4)   Any impounded dog which shall not be redeemed within seven days
shall be humanely destroyed or otherwise disposed of by the poundkeeper.
      (5)   The village may establish a reasonable fee by motion for each day
that a dog is housed in the pound.
(Prior Code, § 3-2-8)
   (B)   In case of impounding and where the owner or keeper of such dog is
disclosed by any tax or license tag worn by it or is otherwise known to the
officers impounding the same, the designated official shall make reasonable
attempts to contact the owner, informing him or her of the impounding of his or
her dog and shall cite the owner or keeper of such dog to answer charges of
violation of this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 3-2-9)
Statutory reference:
   Related provisions, 510 ILCS 5/10
§ 90.054 DOG BITES; IMPOUNDMENT.
   (A)   (1)   Any dog which shall have bitten or otherwise injured any person
so as to cause an abrasion of the skin shall be immediately taken, impounded,
and kept separated from other dogs for ten days. If, during that period, such
dog develops symptoms of illness, a veterinarian shall be called to diagnose
its condition. If the symptoms disclosed are such as to indicate the presence
of rabies, such dog shall be destroyed in such a manner, however, as to
preserve intact the head, which shall thereupon be detached and immediately
sent to the diagnostic laboratory of the Department of Agriculture.
      (2)   In case such dog cannot be safely taken up and impounded, it may be
shot, care being taken to preserve the head intact, which shall thereupon be
immediately detached and be delivered to the diagnostic laboratory of the
Department of Agriculture.
   (B)   If, at the expiration of the ten days no symptoms of rabies have
developed in such dog so impounded, the same may be redeemed by the owner upon
payment of the redemption fees and charges specified by this chapter; provided,
however, that in case any dog so impounded for biting a person shall have
previously bitten any person, such dog shall be humanely destroyed by the
poundkeeper. After having been notified that his or her dog has bitten or
otherwise injured any person, the owner or keeper thereof shall not, under any
circumstances, permit such animal to be at large unless securely muzzled.
(Prior Code, § 3-2-11) Penalty, see §
10.999
§ 90.055 DISPOSITION OF NUISANCE DOGS.
   Any dog which may, in any manner, continually disturb the quiet of any
person or neighborhood or shall destroy or in any manner injure any animal,
plant, shrub, or other property not on the premises of its owner or keeper is
hereby declared to be a nuisance, and such dog shall be taken up and impounded
and may be redeemed or disposed of in the manner provided for under this
chapter.
(Prior Code, § 3-2-15)
§ 90.056 FEMALE DOGS.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for the owner or keeper of any fierce or
dangerous dog or of any female dog, while in heat, to run at large within the
limits of the village.
(Prior Code, § 3-2-16)
   (B)   No person in control or possession of a female dog or permitting the
same to remain upon his or her premises, shall permit any such female dog,
while in heat, to consort with any other dog or dogs in an indecent manner in
any place of public view, whether upon his or her own or any other premises.
(Prior Code, § 3-2-17)
Penalty, see §
10.999
Statutory reference:
   Related provisions, see 65 ILCS 5/11-1-1 and 5/11-20-9
§ 90.057 VICIOUS DOGS; UNLAWFUL TO MAINTAIN; IMPOUNDMENT.
   (A)   (1)   It shall be unlawful for any person to keep or maintain any dog
which has been found to be a vicious dog unless the dog is kept in an
enclosure.
      (2)   The only times that a vicious dog may be allowed out of the
enclosure are:
         (a)   If it is necessary for the owner or keeper to obtain veterinary
care for the dog; or
         (b)   In the case of an emergency or natural disaster where the dog’s
life is threatened;
         (c)   To comply with the order of a court of competent jurisdiction;
provided that the dog is securely muzzled and restrained with a leash not
exceeding six feet in length, and shall be under the direct control and
supervision of the owner or keeper of the dog or muzzled in its residence.
   (B)   Any dog which has been found to be a vicious dog and which is not
confined to an enclosure shall be impounded by the Animal Control Officer or
the law enforcement authority having jurisdiction in the area.
(Prior Code, § 3-3-2) Penalty, see §
10.999
§ 90.058 DANGEROUS DOGS PERMITTED TO LEAVE PREMISES.
   (A)   It is unlawful for any person to knowingly or recklessly permit any
dangerous dog to leave the premises of its owner when not under control by
leash or other recognized control methods.
   (B)   Guide dogs for the blind or hearing impaired, support dogs for the
physically handicapped, accelerant detection dogs, and sentry, guard, or
police-owned dogs are exempt from this section; provided, no attack or injury
to a person occurs while the dog is performing duties as expected. To qualify
for exemption under this section, each such dog shall be currently inoculated
against rabies in accordance with § 8 of the Animal Control Act (510 ILCS 5/8).
It shall be the duty of the owner of such exempted dog to notify the Animal
Control Officer of changes of address. In the case of a sentry or guard dog,
the owner shall keep the Animal Control Officer advised of the location where
such dog will be stationed. The Animal Control Officer shall provide police and
fire departments with a categorized list of such exempted dogs, and shall
promptly notify such departments of any address changes reported to him or her.
(Prior Code, § 3-3-4) Penalty, see §
10.999
§ 90.059 LIABILITY AND RESPONSIBILITY OF OWNER.
   (A)   If the owner of the dog has not appealed the impoundment order to the
circuit court in the county in which the animal was impounded within 15 working
days, the dog may be euthanized. A dog found to be vicious shall not be
released to the owner until the Animal Control Officer or law enforcement
approves the enclosure as defined in this subchapter. No owner or keeper of a
vicious dog shall sell or give away the dog.
(Prior Code, § 3-3-3)
   (B)   If a dog or other animal, without provocation, attacks, attempts to
attack, or injures any person who is peaceably conducting himself or herself in
any place where he or she may lawfully be, the owner of such dog or other
animal is liable in civil damages to such person for the full amount of the
injury proximately caused thereby.
(Prior Code, § 3-3-5)
§ 90.060 INSPECTIONS; RIGHT OF ENTRY.
    For the purpose of making inspections hereunder, the Animal Control
Officer, or his or her authorized representative, or any law enforcement
officer may enter upon private premises; provided that the entry shall not be
made into any building that is a person’s residence, to apprehend a straying
dog or other animal, a dangerous or vicious dog or other animal, or an animal
thought to be infested with rabies. If, after request therefor, the owner of
the dog or other animal shall refuse to deliver the dog or other animal to the
officer, the owner shall be in violation of this code.
(Prior Code, § 3-3-6)
LIVESTOCK
§ 90.075 CHICKENS AND COOPS.
   (A)   Number and type of chickens allowed. Chickens, with the exclusion of
roosters and crowing hens, are limited to a maximum of six chickens per
household. Property zoned as Agricultural (A-1) are not subject to this
limitation or the requirements specific to chicken coops and enclosures as
described in division (B) below.
   (B)   Items specific to chicken coops and enclosures.
      (1)   Opening in windows and doors must be covered by wire mesh with one-
half inch or smaller openings to discourage predators. The materials used to
make the coop must be uniform for each element of the structure. For example,
all walls shall be made of the same material. Chicken coops shall be
constructed in a manner to avoid weathering.
      (2)   Chickens must be kept in a coop or fenced enclosure at all times.
      (3)   Coops and enclosures must be kept in a clean, dry, odor free, and
sanitary manner at all times.
         (a)   No person or owner shall keep, or allow to be kept, in a foul,
offensive, nauseous, or filthy condition, any chicken coop or fenced enclosure
containing chickens.
         (b)   Odors from chickens, manure, or related substances shall not be
detectable outside property lines.
         (c)   The chicken owner must provide for the storage and disposal of
chicken waste. Composting of the chicken waste is encouraged. No more than
three cubic feet of chicken waste may be stored. All other chicken waste not
composted must be removed.
      (4)   Coops must provide adequate ventilation, shade, and be resistant to
predators, wild birds, and rodents.
      (5)   Access door(s) to any coop must be latched and secured with
chickens inside during the hours between 9:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m.
      (6)   Coops shall be located to the rear of the residential structure,
and may be allowed in the backyard, but not to the side or front yards.
      (7)   Coops and enclosures must be a minimum of 15 feet from the property
line and the residential structure on the property, and 25 feet from any
neighboring residence, business, church, or other structure occupied by
persons. A coop or enclosure may be maintained five feet from a public alley
adjoining the owner’s property.
      (8)   (a)   Chicken coops are required to have at least four square feet
of coop floor area per chicken and must be well maintained. In no case shall
the floor area of a chicken coop exceed 40 square feet. Chicken coops shall not
exceed eight feet in height.
         (b)   Enclosures must have at least eight square feet of outdoor run
space per chicken. The enclosure must be constructed of wooden slats or wire
fencing and shall be constructed to a minimum height of five feet. The
enclosure musts be adequate to maintain the chickens within the enclosed space.
      (9)   Chickens are to be raised for egg consumption only and shall not be
slaughtered within the village limits. Deceased chickens shall be properly
disposed of.
      (10)   Chicken feed must be stored in a fully enclosed container
resistant to rodents and other animals.
(Prior Code, § 3-6-1) (Ord. 2017-01, passed 2-6-2017) Penalty, see §
10.999
§ 90.076 CHICKEN COOP LICENSING.
   (A)   Required. All chicken coops maintained in accordance with this
subchapter shall be licensed by the village.
   (B)   Conditions. The village’s designee may issue licenses to the owner of
any chicken coop upon meeting all conditions of this section.
      (1)   The application for a chicken coop license shall state the name and
address of the owner, the specific proposed location of the chicken coop, and
all other applicable information requested by the administrative official. A
license will only be issued after the chicken coop and enclosure have been
inspected and have been determined to meet all requirements of this subchapter.
      (2)   The number of licenses for chicken coops within the village shall
not exceed 15 at any one time. The number of licenses may be increased only
upon the Board of Trustees’ approval. Licenses will be issued based on the
order of the applications received.
      (3)   Each chicken coop license shall be renewed on an annual basis. The
license will only be renewed after the chicken coop has been determined to be
in compliance with all provisions of this section.
      (4)   Only property containing one single-family residence, except zero-
lot line townhouses, shall be eligible for a chicken coop license.
      (5)   Only one chicken coop license will be issued per property. A home
site consisting of multiple lots shall be considered one property. Each license
allows one chicken coop.
      (6)   Chicken coop licenses may not be transferred from one individual to
another unless the coop is located on the same lot as the previous license
holder. Individuals will have 30 days to transfer the licenses to the new
occupants of the residence, and the coop will be subject to re-inspection. If a
license is transferred to a new occupant, the original license holder shall
apply for a new license if he or she wishes to continue raising chickens. A
license holder may relocate a chicken coop to a new location upon notifying the
village and passing inspection.
   (C)   Costs for licensing. The costs for licensing a chicken coop shall be
as follows.
      (1)   The fee shall be $25 per new chicken coop license. The fee shall be
paid at the time the application is submitted. An annual renewal fee of $10
shall be assessed for each chicken coop.
      (2)   For transferring of a chicken coop license, the fee shall be $25
per transfer.
   (D)   License term. All licenses issued pursuant to this section shall be
valid for a term not to exceed one year, January 1 to December 31 of the
calendar year.
   (E)   When due. Chicken coop license renewals shall be submitted annually,
prior to December 31. A late fee of $10 shall be charged if the renewal is not
received by December 31. Any renewal fee not received by January 31 shall
render the permit null and void and the license shall become available to
another applicant.
   (F)   Nonrefundable. No refunds shall be made on any chicken coop license or
application.
   (G)   Violation. The owner of any chicken coop, which is subject to
licensing and registration pursuant to division (A) above, but who does not
comply with those provisions, shall be subject to the penalties provided in §
10.999.
   (H)   Cost of administration. The license fees charged pursuant to this
section are charged to defray the administrative costs and are not to be deemed
a penalty or tax. The license fees shall not be construed as relieving the
owner from any penalty imposed for any violation of this subchapter.
   (I)   Animal Control Officer. The village’s Animal Control Officer shall
have the responsibility of and authority to enforce the regulations provided in
this subchapter.
(Prior Code, § 3-6-2) (Ord. 2017-01, passed 2-6-2017; Ord. 24-04, passed 6-3-
2024) Penalty, see §
10.999
CHAPTER 91: NUISANCES
Section
General Provisions
   
91.001   Definitions
   
91.002   Specific nuisances enumerated
Nuisance Abatement Generally
   
91.015   Notice to abate
   
91.016   Hearing
   
91.017   Appeal
   
91.018   Abatement by village
   
91.019   Failure to comply with notice
   
91.020   Liens
Nuisances Detrimental to Health
   
91.035   Nuisances detrimental to health generally
   
91.036   Weeds and vegetation
   
91.037   Garbage and debris
Inoperable Motor Vehicles
   
91.050   Definition
   
91.051   Declaration of nuisance
   
91.052   Notice to remove; hearing
   
91.053   Removal and disposal
   
91.054   Authority to enforce; entry powers
   
91.055   Effect of provisions on traffic obstructions
Vacant Buildings
   
91.070   Definition
   
91.071   Nuisance declared
   
91.072   Nuisance abatement
   
91.073   Charges for abatement; lien
 
   
91.999   Penalty
   
Appendix A: Nuisance violation notices
Statutory reference:
   Related provisions, see 65 ILCS 5/11-60-2 and 720 ILCS 5/47-5, 5/47-10, and
5/47-15
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 91.001 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   DERELICT TRAILERS.
      (1)   Every vehicle without motive power in operation designed for
carrying persons or property and for being drawn by a motor vehicle and so
constructed that no part of its weight rests upon the towing vehicle which, for
a period of at least seven days or any greater period fixed by law, the wheels
or other parts have been altered, damaged, or otherwise so treated that the
trailer is incapable of being drawn by a motor vehicle.
      (2)   DERELICT TRAILERS shall not include a trailer which has been
rendered temporarily incapable of being drawn by a motor vehicle in order to
perform ordinary service or repair operations.
   DERELICT RECREATIONAL VEHICLE.
      (1)   Every camping trailer, motor home, mini motor home, travel trailer,
truck camper, or van camper used primarily for recreational purposes which, for
a period of at least seven days or any greater period fixed by law, the engine,
wheels, or other parts have been removed; or in which the engine, wheels, or
other parts have been altered, damaged, or otherwise so treated that the
recreational vehicle is incapable of being driven under its own motor power or
drawn by a motor vehicle.
      (2)   DERELICT RECREATIONAL VEHICLES shall not include a recreational
vehicle which has been rendered temporarily incapable of being driven under its
own motor power or drawn by a motor vehicle in order to perform ordinary
service or repair operations.
   DERELICT WATERCRAFT.
      (1)   Every description of watercraft used or capable of being used as a
means of transportation on water which, for a period of at least seven days or
any greater period fixed by law, the engine, or other parts have been removed;
or in which the engine, or other parts have been altered, damaged, or otherwise
so treated that the watercraft is incapable of being propelled under its own
motor power or by sail or other means.
      (2)   DERELICT WATERCRAFT shall not include a watercraft which has been
rendered temporarily incapable of being propelled under its own motor power or
by sail or other means in order to perform ordinary service or repair
operations.
(Prior Code, § 25-1-1)
§ 91.002 SPECIFIC NUISANCES ENUMERATED.
   (A)   It is hereby declared to be a nuisance and to be against the health,
peace, and comfort of the village, for any person, firm, or corporation within
the limits of the village to permit the following; but the enumeration of the
following nuisances shall not be deemed to be exclusive:
      (1)   To cause or suffer the carcass of any animal or any offal, filth,
or noisome substance to be collected, deposited or to remain in any place, to
the prejudice of others;
      (2)   To throw or deposit any offal or other offensive matter, or the
carcass of any dead animal in any water course, lake, pond, spring, well, or
common sewer, street, or public highway;
      (3)   To corrupt or render unwholesome or impure the water of any spring,
river, stream, pond, lake, or well, public or private, to the injury or
prejudice of others;
      (4)   To obstruct or encroach upon public highways, private ways,
streets, alleys, commons, landing places, and ways to burying places;
      (5)   To carry on the business of manufacturing gunpowder,
nitroglycerine, or other highly explosive substances, or mixing or grinding the
materials therefor, in any building within 300 feet of any valuable building
erected at the time such business may be commenced;
      (6)   To establish powder magazines near incorporated towns, at a point
different from that appointed according to law by the corporate authorities of
the town, or within 800 feet of any occupied dwelling house;
      (7)   To erect, continue or use any building or other place for the
exercise of any trade, employment, or manufacture, which, by occasioning
noxious exhalations, offensive smells or otherwise, is offensive or dangerous
to the health of individuals, or of the public;
      (8)   To advertise wares or occupations by painting notices of the same
on, or affixing them to fences or other private property, or on rocks or other
natural objects without the consent of the owner, or if in the highway or other
public place, without permission of the proper authorities;
      (9)   To permit any well drilled for oil, gas, salt water disposal, or
any other purpose in connection with the production of oil and gas, to remain
unplugged after such well is no longer used for the purpose for which it was
drilled;
      (10)   To construct or operate any salt water pit or oil field refuse
pit, commonly called a “burn-out pit” so that salt water, brine, or oil field
refuse or other waste liquids may escape therefrom in any manner except by the
evaporation of such salt water or brine or by the burning of such oil field
waste or refuse;
      (11)   To permit concrete bases, discarded machinery, and materials to
remain around any oil or gas well or to fail to fill any holes, cellars, slush
pits, and other excavations made in connection with any such well or to restore
the surface of the lands surrounding any such well to its condition before the
drilling of any such well, upon abandonment of any such oil or gas well;
      (12)   To permit any salt water, oil, gas, or other wastes from any well
drilled for oil, gas, or exploratory purposes to escape to the surface, or into
a mine or coal seam, or into any underground fresh water supply or from one
underground stratum to another;
      (13)   To harass, intimidate, or threaten any person who is about to sell
or lease or has sold or leased a residence or other real property, or is about
to buy or lease, or has bought or leased a residence or other real property,
when the harassment, intimidation, or threat relates to a person’s attempt to
sell, buy, or lease a residence, or other real property, or refers to a
person’s sale, purchase, or lease of a residence or other real property;
      (14)   To establish, maintain, and carry on any offensive or unwholesome
business or establishment within the limits of the village or within one and
one-half miles of the village limits;
      (15)   To keep or suffer to be kept any chicken coop, cow barn, stable,
cellar, vault, drain, privy, sewer, or sink upon any premises belonging to or
occupied by any person, or any railroad car, building, yard, grounds, and
premises belonging to or occupied by any person;
      (16)   To expectorate on any public sidewalk or street, or other public
building or floor or walk of any public vehicle or hall;
      (17)   It shall be unlawful for any person to deposit or allow trash,
paper, cardboard, wire, dirt, rock, stone, glass, brick, lumber, wood or litter
of material objects of any size or description to fall upon the streets of the
village from any moving vehicle, or to be thrown from a moving vehicle, or to
throw from a moving vehicle and to remain thereon;
      (18)   To deposit or pile up any rags, old rope, paper, iron, brass,
copper, tin, aluminum, used lumber, derelict trailers, derelict recreational
vehicle, derelict watercraft, appliances, construction materials, demolition
debris, ashes, garbage, refuse, plastic, brush, litter, weeds, slush, lead,
glass bottles, or broken glass upon any residential home lot, piece or parcel
of land, or upon any public or private alley, street, or public way within the
village;
      (19)   To cause or permit any condition or situation to exist that shall
attract, harbor, or encourage the infestation of rodents;
      (20)   To bring into the village or keep therein for sale or otherwise,
either for food or for any other purpose, any dead or live animal or any
matter, substance, or thing which shall be a nuisance or which shall occasion a
nuisance in the village, or which may or shall be dangerous or detrimental to
health;
      (21)   To keep nauseous, foul, or putrid liquid or substance or any
liquid or substance likely to become nauseous, foul, offensive, or putrid, nor
permit any such liquid to be discharged, placed, thrown, or to flow from or out
of any premises into or upon any adjacent premises or any public street or
alley, nor permit the same to be done by any person connected with the
premises;
      (22)   To cause or permit the emission of dense smoke from any fire,
chimney, engine, oil burner, or any other agency in the village so as to cause
annoyance or discomfort to the residents thereof;
      (23)   To keep any scrap tires, either mounted or dismounted, in open
view, or so as to allow such tires to accumulate stagnant water so as to
provide a breeding ground for mosquitoes and other pests;
      (24)   To operate motor vehicle transport engines in the nighttime
between the hours of 8:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m. in any place in which a majority
of the buildings within a radius of 400 feet are used exclusively for residence
purposes, excluding state and federal highways;
      (25)   To store, dump, or permit the accumulation of debris, refuse,
garbage, trash, tires, buckets, cans, wheelbarrows, garbage cans, or other
containers in a manner that may harbor mosquitoes, flies, insects, rodents,
nuisance birds, or other animal pests that are offensive, injurious, or
dangerous to the health of individuals or the public; and
      (26)   To commit any act which is a nuisance according to the common law
of the land or made such by statute of the state.
   (B)   Nothing in this section shall be construed to prevent the corporate
authorities of this village from declaring what shall be nuisances and abating
them within the village limits.
(Prior Code, § 25-1-2)
Statutory reference:
   Related provisions, see 720 ILCS 5/47-5
NUISANCE ABATEMENT GENERALLY
§ 91.015 NOTICE TO ABATE.
   (A)   Whenever the Superintendent, Mayor, or Chief of Police finds that a
nuisance exists, he or she shall direct the Village Clerk to mail (certified)
to the party responsible for the nuisance and to the party on whose property
the nuisance exists a written notice ordering that the nuisance be abated
within a reasonable time.
   (B)   The notice to abate shall contain:
      (1)   A description of what constitutes the nuisance;
      (2)   The location of the nuisance;
      (3)   A statement of what condition or state of affairs must be achieved
in order for the nuisance to be deemed abated;
      (4)   The date by which abatement must be completed;
      (5)   The date by which a request for a hearing must be filed and a
statement of the procedure for so filing;
      (6)   A statement that the responsible party has a right to appeal the
abatement order to the Board of Trustees; and
      (7)   A statement indicating that if the nuisance is not abated by the
date prescribed and/or if no request for hearing is made within the time
prescribed, the village will abate the nuisance and assess the costs against
the property and/or impose a fine.
(Prior Code, § 25-1-4)
§ 91.016 HEARING.
   Any person ordered to abate a nuisance may have a hearing with the Chief of
Police or his or her designated representative ordering the abatement. A
request for a hearing must be made in writing and delivered to the Village
Clerk within the time stated in the notice; otherwise, it will be presumed that
a nuisance exists, and that such nuisance must be abated as ordered. The
hearing shall not be a formal trial-type proceeding, but appropriate procedural
safeguards shall be observed to ensure fairness. At the conclusion of the
hearing, the Chief of Police or his or her designated representative shall
render his or her decision and the reasons therefor in writing. If he or she
finds that a nuisance exists, he or she shall order it abated within an
additional time which must be reasonable under the circumstances.
(Prior Code, § 25-1-5)
§ 91.017 APPEAL.
   Any party aggrieved by the decision of the Chief of Police may appeal to the
Board of Trustees. Such appeal shall be taken by filing with the Village Clerk
within five days of such decision a written statement indicating the basis for
the appeal. The appeal shall be heard by the Board of Trustees at the next
regular or special meeting after such filing. Its findings shall be conclusive
and if a nuisance is found to exist, it shall be ordered abated within a time
reasonable under the circumstances.
(Prior Code, § 25-1-6)
§ 91.018 ABATEMENT BY VILLAGE.
   If the person ordered to abate a nuisance fails to do so, or if the nuisance
poses an emergency, this village may perform the required action to abate. Any
village official who is authorized to abate any nuisance as defined in this
subchapter shall have authority to engage the necessary assistance and to incur
the necessary expenses therefor. The official who abates a nuisance shall keep
an accurate account of the expenses incurred. The itemized expense shall be
filed with the Village Clerk who shall pay such expenses on behalf of the
village.
(Prior Code, § 25-1-7)
Statutory reference:
   Related provisions, see 65 ILCS 5/11-60-2
§ 91.019 FAILURE TO COMPLY WITH NOTICE.
   If the person notified to abate a nuisance shall neglect or refuse to comply
with the requirements of such notice by abating such nuisance within the time
specified, such person shall be guilty of a violation of this code of
ordinances. The village shall not be required to issue another notice where the
condition or violation is at first abated, but later resumed and/or repeated.
(Prior Code, § 25-1-8) Penalty, see §
91.999
§ 91.020 LIENS.
   (A)   If the village elects to incur a removal cost under this code, then
that cost is a lien upon the underlying parcel. To perfect such a lien, the
village must, within one year after the removal cost is incurred, file notice
of lien in the office of the recorder in the county in which the underlying
parcel is located or, if the underlying parcel is registered under the Torrens
system, in the office of the Registrar of Titles of that county. The notice
must consist of a sworn statement setting out:
      (1)   A description of the underlying parcel that sufficiently identifies
the parcel;
      (2)   The amount of the removal cost; and
      (3)   The date or dates when the removal cost was incurred by the
village. If, for any one parcel, the village engaged in any removal activity on
more than one occasion during the course of one year, then the village may
combine any or all of the costs of each of those activities into a single
notice of lien.
   (B)   (1)   The removal cost is not a lien on the underlying parcel unless a
notice is personally served on, or sent by certified mail to, the person to
whom was sent the tax bill for the general taxes on the property for the
taxable year immediately preceding the removal activities.
      (2)   The notice must be delivered or sent after the removal activities
have been performed, and it must:
         (a)   State the substance of this section and the substance of any
ordinance of the municipality implementing this section;
         (b)   Identify the underlying parcel, by common description; and
         (c)   Describe the removal activity.
   (C)   Upon payment of the lien cost by the owner of the underlying parcel
after notice of lien has been filed, the village (or its agent) shall release
the lien, and the release may be filed of record by the owner at his or her
sole expense as in the case of filing notice of lien.
   (D)   The provisions of the Illinois Municipal Code, 65 ILCS 11-20-15, shall
be followed and shall apply to all liens filed hereunder.
   (E)   A lien under this section may be enforced by proceedings to foreclose
as in case of mortgages or mechanics’ liens. An action to foreclose a lien
under this section must be commenced within two years after the date of filing
notice of lien.
(Prior Code, § 25-5-1)
NUISANCES DETRIMENTAL TO HEALTH
§ 91.035 NUISANCES DETRIMENTAL TO HEALTH GENERALLY.
   No building, vehicle, structure, receptacle, yard, lot, premises, or part
thereof shall be made, used, kept, maintained, or operated in the village if
such use, keeping, or maintaining shall be dangerous or detrimental to health.
(Prior Code, § 25-1-3) Penalty, see §
91.999
§ 91.036 WEEDS AND VEGETATION.
   (A)   Definition. WEEDS, as used in this chapter shall include, but not be
limited to, the following: Burdock; Rag Weed (giant); Rag Weed (Common);
Thistle; Cocklebur; Jimson; Blue Vervain; Common Milk Weed; Wild Carrot; Poison
Ivy; Wild Mustard; Rough Pigweed; Lambsquarter; Wild Lettuce; Curled Dock;
Smartweeds (all varieties); Poison Hemlock; Wild Hemp; Johnson Grass; and grass
and all other noxious weeds as defined by the statutes of the state.
(Prior Code, § 25-2-1)
   (B)   Height. It shall be unlawful for anyone to permit any weeds, grass, or
plants, other than trees, bushes, flowers, or other ornamental plants, to grow
to a height exceeding eight inches anywhere in the village. Any such plants,
weeds, or grass exceeding such height are hereby declared to be a nuisance.
(Prior Code, § 25-2-2)
   (C)   Notice. The Police Department, or any other person so designated by
the Mayor, may issue a written notice for removal of weeds or grass. Such weeds
or grass shall be cut by the owner or occupant within five days after such
notice has been duly served.
(Prior Code, § 25-2-3)
   (D)   Service of notice. Service of the notice provided for herein may be
effected by handing the same to the owner, occupant, or lessee of the premises,
or to any member of his or her household of the age of 17 years or older found
on the premises or by mailing such notice to the last known residence address
of the owner; provided, that if the premises are unoccupied and the owner’s
address cannot be obtained, then the notice may be served by posting the same
upon the premises.
(Prior Code, § 25-2-4)
   (E)   Abatement. If the person so served does not abate the nuisance within
five days, the village may proceed to abate and such expense shall be charged
and paid by such owner or occupant, and such owner shall be charged as per §
91.999.
(Prior Code, § 25-2-5)
   (F)   Lien. Charges for such weed or grass removal shall be a lien upon the
premises. A bill representing the cost and expense incurred or payable for the
service shall be presented to the owner. If this bill is not paid within 30
days of submission of the bill, a notice of lien of the cost and expenses
thereof incurred by the village shall be recorded in the following manner:
      (1)   A description of the real estate sufficient for identification
thereof;
      (2)   The amount of money representing the cost and expense incurred or
payable for the service; and
      (3)   The date or dates when said cost and expense was incurred by the
village and shall be filed within 60 days after the cost and expense is
incurred.
(Prior Code, § 25-2-6)
   (G)   Payment. Notice of such lien claim shall be mailed to the owner of the
premises, if his or her address is known. Upon payment of the cost and expense
after notice of lien has been filed, the lien shall be released by the village
or person in whose name the lien has been filed and the release shall be filed
of record in the same manner as filing notice of the lien. All lien and release
filing fees shall be paid by the owner of the property.
(Prior Code, § 25-2-7)
   (H)   Foreclosure of lien.
      (1)   Property subject to a lien for unpaid weed cutting charges shall be
sold for non-payment of the same and the proceeds of such sale shall be applied
to pay the charges after deducting costs, as is the case in the foreclosure of
statutory liens.
      (2)   Such foreclosure shall be in the name of the village after the lien
is in effect for 60 days.
(Prior Code, § 25-2-8)
Penalty, see §
91.999
Statutory reference:
   Related provisions, see 65 ILCS 5/11-20-6 and 5/11-20-7
§ 91.037 GARBAGE AND DEBRIS.
   (A)   Accumulation prohibited. No person shall permit any garbage or trash
to accumulate on his or her premises or private property. It is hereby declared
to be a nuisance and it shall be unlawful for the owner or occupant of real
estate to refuse or neglect to remove the garbage or debris.
(Prior Code, § 25-3-1)
   (B)   Notice to person. The Chief of Police or a designated representative
may issue a written notice for removal of garbage or debris. Such garbage or
debris shall be removed by the owner or occupant within five days after such
notice has been duly served.
(Prior Code, § 25-3-2)
   (C)   Service of notice. Service of notice provided for herein may be
effected by handing of the same to the owner, occupant, or lessee of the
premises, or to any member of his or her household of the age of 15 years or
older found on the premises or by mailing such notice to the last known
residence address of the owner; provided that if the premises are unoccupied
and the owner’s address cannot be obtained, then the notice may be served by
posting the same upon the premises.
(Prior Code, § 25-3-3)
   (D)   Abatement. If the person so served does not abate the nuisance within
five days, the Chief of Police or a designated representative may proceed to
abate such nuisance, keeping an account of the expense of the abatement and
such expense shall be charged and paid by such owner or occupant.
(Prior Code, § 25-3-4)
   (E)   Lien. Charges for such removal shall be a lien upon the premises. A
bill representing the cost and expense incurred or payable for the service
shall be presented to the owner. If this bill is not paid within 30 days of
submission of the bill, a notice of lien of the cost and expenses thereof
incurred by the village shall be recorded in the following manner:
      (1)   A description of the real estate sufficient for identification
thereof;
      (2)   The amount of money representing the cost and expense incurred or
payable for the service; and
      (3)   The date or dates when said cost and expense was incurred by the
village and shall be filed within 60 days after the cost and expense is
incurred.
(Prior Code, § 25-3-5)
   (F)   Payment. Notice of such lien claim shall be mailed to the owner of the
premises if his or her address is known. Upon payment of the cost and expense
after notice of lien has been filed, the lien shall be released by the village
or person in whose name the lien has been filed, and the release shall be filed
of record in the same manner as filing notice of the lien.
(Prior Code, § 25-3-6)
   (G)   Foreclosure of lien. Property subject to a lien for unpaid charges
shall be sold non-payment of the same, and the proceeds of such sale shall be
applied to pay the charges after deducting costs, as is the case in the
foreclosure of statutory liens. Such foreclosure shall be in the name of the
village, after lien is in effect for 60 days. Suit to foreclose this lien shall
be commenced within two years after the date of filing notice of lien.
(Prior Code, § 25-3-7)
(Ord. 327, passed - -1987) Penalty, see §
91.999
Statutory reference:
   Related provisions, see 65 ILCS 5/11-20-13 and 720 ILCS 5/47-10
INOPERABLE MOTOR VEHICLES
§ 91.050 DEFINITION.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   INOPERABLE MOTOR VEHICLE.
      (1)   Any motor vehicle which, for a period of at least seven days,
wheels, or other parts have been removed; or on which the engine, wheels, or
other parts have been altered, damaged, or otherwise so treated that the
vehicle is incapable of being driven under its own motor power.
      (2)   INOPERABLE MOTOR VEHICLES shall not include:
         (a)   Motor vehicles which have been rendered temporarily incapable of
being driven under its own motor power in order to perform ordinary service or
repairs;
         (b)   Motor vehicles that are kept within a building when not in use;
         (c)   Motor vehicles displayed for sale by persons engaged in the
business of selling new or used vehicles within a B-1 or B-2 Business District;
or
         (d)   Motor vehicles on the premises of a place of business engaged in
the wrecking or junking of motor vehicles.
   OPERABLE HISTORIC VEHICLE. A vehicle over 25 years of age which is capable
of being driven under its own motor power and which is licensed in accordance
with the applicable state statutes.
(Prior Code, § 25-4-1) (Ord. 2018-02, passed 2-5-2018; Ord. 2024-14, passed 11-
20-2024)
§ 91.051 DECLARATION OF NUISANCE.
   The location or presence of any inoperable motor vehicle on any lot, tract,
parcel of land, or portion thereof, occupied or unoccupied, improved or
unimproved, within the village shall be deemed a public nuisance; and it shall
be unlawful for any person to cause or maintain such public nuisance by
wrecking, dismantling, rendering inoperable, abandoning, or discarding his or
her vehicle or vehicles on the property of another or to suffer, permit, or
allow the same to be placed, located, maintained, or to exist upon his or her
own real property or any premises leased or occupied by him or her; provided,
that this section shall not apply to:
   (A)   A vehicle or part thereof which is completely enclosed within a
building in a lawful manner, where it is not visible from the street or other
public or private property;
   (B)   A vehicle or part thereof which is stored or parked in a lawful manner
on private property in connection with the business of a licensed vehicle
dealer, or a vehicle on the premises of a licensed business engaged in wrecking
or junking of vehicles, if such businesses are otherwise permitted by the
ordinances of the village; or
   (C)   Operable historic vehicles.
(Prior Code, § 25-4-2) (Ord. 2018-02, passed 2-5-2018)
§ 91.052 NOTICE TO REMOVE; HEARING.
   (A)   Notice to remove.
      (1)   Vehicle on private property.
         (a)   Whenever such public nuisance exists in the village in violation
hereof, the village and/or its agents shall give not less than ten days’ notice
to the owner, occupant, or lessee of the premises whereon such public nuisance
exists to abate or remove the same, stating the nature of the public nuisance,
that it must be removed and abated within ten days and, further, that a request
for a hearing must be made by the aggrieved person before the expiration of
said ten-day period.
         (b)   Such notice shall be personally served or mailed by certified or
registered mail with a five day return receipt requested and by regular mail,
to the owner, occupant, or lessee of the private premises whereupon such public
nuisance exists. If notice by mail is returned undelivered, official action to
abate said nuisance shall be continued to a date not less than ten days from
the date of such return.
      (2)   Vehicle on public property. Whenever such public nuisance exists in
the village in violation hereof, the village and/or its agents shall give not
less than a ten-day notice, stating the nature of the public nuisance on the
public property or on a public right of way, that it must be removed and abated
within ten days and that a request for a hearing must be made before the
expiration of said ten-day period. Such notice shall be personally served or
mailed by certified or registered mail with a five-day return receipt
requested, to the owner, occupant, or lessee of the public premises or to the
owner, occupant, or lessee of the premises adjacent to the public right of way
whereupon such public nuisance exists. If notice by mail is returned
undeliverable, official action to abate said nuisance shall be continued to a
date not less than ten days from the date of such return.
   (B)   Hearing prior to removal.
      (1)   Any public hearing prior to the removal of the vehicle or part
thereof is to be held before a person designated by the village.
      (2)   When such a hearing is requested by the owner, occupant, or lessee
of the public or private premises or by the owner, occupant, or lessee of the
premises adjacent to the public right of way on which said vehicle is located,
within ten days after service of notice to abate the nuisance, any resolution
or order requiring the removal of a vehicle or part thereof shall include a
description of the vehicle and the correct identification number and license
number of the vehicle, if available at the site.
(Prior Code, § 25-4-3) (Ord. 2018-02, passed 2-5-2018)
§ 91.053 REMOVAL AND DISPOSAL.
   (A)   If, within ten days after receipt of notice from the village and/or
its agents to abate the nuisance, the owner, occupant, or lessee of the
premises gives his or her written permission to the village for removal of the
inoperable motor vehicle from the premises, the removal shall be at the expense
of said owner. The giving of such permission shall be considered compliance
with the provisions of this subchapter.
(Prior Code, § 25-4-4)
   (B)   If such public nuisance is not abated by the owner, occupant, or
lessee after notice is given in accordance with this subchapter, official
action shall be taken by the village to abate such nuisance at the expense of
the owner, occupant, or lessee. Inoperable vehicles or parts thereof may be
disposed of by removal to a scrapyard or demolisher for processing as scrap or
salvage.
(Prior Code, § 25-4-5)
(Ord. 2018-02, passed 2-5-2018)
§ 91.054 AUTHORITY TO ENFORCE; ENTRY POWERS.
   The Chief of Police and/or his or her employees or agents may enter upon
private property for the purposes specified in this subchapter to examine
vehicles or parts thereof, obtain information as to the identity of the
vehicles, and to remove or cause the removal of a vehicle or parts thereof
declared to be a nuisance pursuant to this subchapter, but shall comply with
the Fourth Amendment of the United States Constitution.
(Prior Code, § 25-4-6) (Ord. 2018-02, passed 2-5-2018)
§ 91.055 EFFECT OF PROVISIONS ON TRAFFIC OBSTRUCTIONS.
   Nothing in this subchapter shall affect statutes or ordinances that permit
immediate removal of a vehicle left on public property which constitutes an
obstruction to traffic.
(Prior Code, § 25-4-7) (Ord. 2018-02, passed 2-5-2018)
VACANT BUILDINGS
§ 91.070 DEFINITION.
   A vacant building is a building or portion of a building which is:
   (A)   Unoccupied and unsecured;
   (B)   Unoccupied and secured by boarding or other similar means;
   (C)   Unoccupied and a dangerous structure;
   (D)   Unoccupied and condemned by the village pursuant to applicable
provisions of this code of ordinances;
   (E)   Unoccupied and has multiple code violations;
   (F)   Unoccupied and the building or its premises has been the site of
unlawful activity within the previous six months;
   (G)   Condemned by the village and unlawfully occupied;
   (H)   Unoccupied for over 180 days and during which time the Village
Administrator or his or her designee has issued an order to correct public
nuisance conditions and same have not been corrected in a code compliant
manner;
   (I)   Unoccupied for over two years; or
   (J)   Defined in 65 ILCS 5/11-20-15.1 as an abandoned residential property
being a residential dwelling unit that has been unoccupied by any lawful
occupant or occupants for at least 90 days, and for which after such 90 day
period the village has made good faith efforts to contact the legal owner or
owners of the property or, if known, the agent of the owner, and no contact has
been made; but not including, unoccupied buildings which are undergoing
construction, renovation, or rehabilitation and which are in compliance with
all applicable ordinances, codes, legislation, and regulations, and for which
construction, renovation, or rehabilitation is proceeding diligently to
completion.
(Prior Code, § 25-5-2)
§ 91.071 NUISANCE DECLARED.
   Vacant buildings that are indefinitely vacant and in a state of disrepair or
boarded are public nuisances in that they contribute to the decrease in value
of surrounding properties, precipitate disinvestment by neighboring owners,
provide a location for criminal activity, undermine the aesthetic character of
the neighborhood and village, and have other undesirable effects.
(Prior Code, § 25-5-3)
§ 91.072 NUISANCE ABATEMENT.
   The village is authorized to perform or provide for property maintenance
activities to abate the nuisance caused by a vacant or occupied building,
including the following:
   (A)   Cutting and removal of neglected weeds, grass, trees, and bushes, as
authorized by 65 ILCS 5/11-20-7;
   (B)   Pest control activities, as authorized by 65 ILCS 5/11-20-8;
   (C)   Removal of infected trees, as authorized by 65 ILCS 5/11-20-12;
   (D)   Removal of garbage, debris, and graffiti, as authorized by 65 ILCS 5./
11-20-13
   (E)   Removal, securing, and enclosing abandoned residential properties, as
authorized by 65 ILCS 5/11-31-1.01.
(Prior Code, § 25-5-4)
§ 91.073 CHARGES FOR ABATEMENT; LIEN.
   (A)   Authority. The village shall have the authority to collect from the
property owner the costs incurred in performing the property maintenance
activities to abate the nuisances described in the this code of ordinances. The
village shall send a bill for the cost to the property owner, his or her agent,
legal representative, or occupant in legal possession or control of the
premises.
   (B)   Traditional lien procedure. If a bill sent pursuant to division (A)
above is not paid in full within 30 days of the date of the bill, the village
shall have the authority to file and record a lien against the property,
pursuant to 65 ILCS 5/11-20-15, and as set forth within this code of
ordinances. If any specific procedure is otherwise set forth in this code of
ordiancnes for the activity, said procedure is hereby repealed and the
following procedure shall apply.
      (1)   Notice of lien.
         (a)   The village, or the person performing the service by authority
of the village in its, his or her own name, may file a notice of lien in the
office of the recorder of deeds in the county in which the real estate is
located. The notice of lien shall be filed within one year after the cost and
expense is incurred. If, for any one property, the village engaged in any
nuisance abatement activity described in this chapter on more than one occasion
during the course of one year, then the village may combine any or all of the
costs of those activities into a single notice of lien. The notice of lien
shall consist of a sworn statement setting forth:
            1.   A description of the real estate that sufficiently describes
the parcel;
            2.   The amount of the cost and expense incurred or payable for the
activities; and
            3.   The date or dates when such cost and expense was incurred by
the village or someone working on behalf of the village.
         (b)   After recording, the notice of lien shall be sent by certified
mail to the property owner, his or her agent or legal representative or
occupant in legal possession or control of the premises and, if different, to
the person who received the tax bill for the preceding year.
      (2)   Release of lien. Upon payment of the cost after the notice of lien
has been filed as provided herein, the lien shall be released by the village or
person in whose name the lien has been filed, and the release shall be recorded
of record in the same manner as recording the notice of lien.
      (3)   Foreclosure of lien. Subsequent to the filing of the above
described lien, the village may cause to be filed a complaint for foreclosure
of such lien, or upon becoming a defendant in a pending lawsuit affecting the
premises or real estate, by answer to the complaint or in the nature of an
intervening petition or cross-complaint the village may proceed in its
corporate name to foreclose such lien. An action to foreclose a lien under this
section must be commenced within two years after the date of filing notice of
lien. The property subject to a lien arising under this subchapter shall be
sold for nonpayment of the same, and the proceeds of such sale shall be applied
to pay the monies owing the village.
   (C)   Priority lien procedures. The priority lien procedure described in
this division (C) shall apply to costs incurred for activities performed on
abandoned residential properties, as defined in 65 ILCS 5/11-20-15.1, and is an
alternative to the traditional lien as authorized herein. If a bill sent
pursuant to division (A) above is not paid in full within 30 days of the date
of the bill, the village shall have the authority to file and record a priority
lien against the property, pursuant to 65 ILCS 5/11-20-15.1, in the following
manner.
      (1)   Notice of lien. The village or the person performing the service by
authority of the village, in its his or her own name, may file a notice of a
priority lien in the office of the Recorder of Deeds in the county in which the
real estate is located. The notice of lien shall be filed within one year after
the cost and expense is incurred. If, for any one property, the village engaged
in any nuisance abatement activity described in this chapter on more than one
occasion during the course of one year, then the village may combine any or all
of the costs of those activities into a single notice of lien. The notice of
lien shall consist of a sworn statement setting forth:
         (a)   A description of the abandoned residential property that
sufficiently describes the parcel;
         (b)   The amount of the cost incurred or payable for the activities;
         (c)   The date or dates when such cost was incurred by the village or
someone working on behalf of the village; and
         (d)   1.   A statement that the lien has been filed pursuant to one or
more of the property maintenance activities described in this chapter and
authorized by 65 ILCS 5/11-20-7(d), 65 ILCS 5/11-20-8(d), 65 ILCS 5/11-20-12
(d), 65 ILCS 5/11-20-13(e), or 65 ILCS 5/11-31-1.01, as applicable. After
recording, the notice of lien shall be sent by certified mail to the property
owner, his or her agent, legal representative, or occupant in legal possession
or control of the premises and, if different, to the person who received the
tax bill for the preceding year.
            2.   The village may not file a lien if the lender has provided
notice to the village that the lender has performed, or will perform, remedial
actions; provided, however, that the remedial actions must be performed or
initiated in good faith within 30 days of the lender’s notice to the village.
      (2)   Recordkeeping. To enforce a lien pursuant to this division (C), the
village must maintain contemporaneous records that include, at a minimum:
         (a)   A dated statement of a finding by the village that the property
has become abandoned residential property;
         (b)   The date when the property was first observed to be unoccupied
by any lawful occupant;
         (c)   A description of the actions taken by the village to contact the
legal owner of the property, or if known, any agent of the owner;
         (d)   A statement that no contacts were made with the legal owner or,
if known, any agent of the owner;
         (e)   A dated certification by a village official of the necessity and
specific nature of the work performed;
         (f)   A copy of the agreement with the person or company performing
the work and the rates and estimated cost of the work, if applicable;
         (g)   Detailed invoices and payment vouchers for the work; and
         (h)   A statement whether the work was competitively bid, and if so, a
copy of all proposals submitted by the bidders.
      (3)   Release of lien. Upon payment of the cost after the notice of lien
has been filed as provided herein, the lien shall be released by the village or
person in whose name the lien has been filed, and the release shall be recorded
of record in the same manner as recording the notice of lien.
      (4)   Enforcement of lien. A lien under this division (C) is enforceable
by the village, or entity or person who performs work on behalf of the village,
at the hearing for confirmation of the foreclosure sale of the abandoned
residential property and is limited to a claim of interest in the proceeds of
the sale. The priority lien is superior to all other liens and encumbrances,
except tax liens.
(Prior Code, § 25-5-5) (Ord. 12-08, passed 6-18-2012)
§ 91.999 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which no
specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to §
10.999 of this code of ordinances.
   (B)    As described in §
91.036(E) if the person so served does not abate the nuisance within five days,
the village may proceed to abate and such expense shall be charged and paid by
such owner or occupant, and such owner shall be charged a minimum of $100 for
said abatement for the first offense. The village may increase the fee by $25
for each subsequent offense.
(Prior Code, § 25-2-5)
APPENDIX A: NUISANCE VIOLATION NOTICES
VILLAGE OF MARISSA
111 N. Main. St.
Marissa, IL 62257
NUISANCE VIOLATION NOTICE
TO: _____________
    _____________
    _____________
   You are hereby notified that the Chief of Police or his or her
representatives has determined that the property owned by you (and/or occupied
by you, as the case may be) located at ___________________
__________________________________________________________________________________
located within the municipality contains an unlawful nuisance(s) as defined by
§
91.001 of this code of ordinances as follows:
__________________________________________________________________________________
__________________________________________________________________________________
__________________________________________________________________________________
   You are required pursuant to §
91.035 to abate and remove any nuisance(s) within five (5) days from the date
of this notice as follows:
__________________________________________________________________________________
__________________________________________________________________________________
__________________________________________________________________________________
   If you wish to appeal this notice, then the appeal shall be made to the
Village Hall by: _______________________________.
   If the nuisance is not abated by the date prescribed and/or if no request
for hearing is made within the time prescribed, the Chief of Police or his or
her representative will abate the nuisance and assess the costs against the
property and/or impose a fine as provided by Chapter 91 of this code of
ordinances.
Dated this ________ day of ________________, 20_____.
                                          ________________________________
                                          CHIEF OF POLICE
                                          VILLAGE OF MARISSA
NOTE:      The penalty for failure to abate said nuisance(s) may be as high as
$750.00 per violation plus the cost of the clean-up.
VILLAGE OF MARISSA
111 N. Main. St.
Marissa, IL 62257
N O T I C E
UNLAWFUL WEED GROWTH
TO: _____________
    _____________
    _____________
   You are hereby notified
that________________________________________________________
has determined that property owned by you (and/or occupied by you, as the case
may be) at ______________________________________________________________,
located within the village limits contains unlawful weed growth as defined by
Chapter 91 of this code of ordinances.
   You are required to remove all growth within five (5) days from the date of
this notice.
   If you refuse or neglect to remove such growth, the authorities of this
municipality may provide for the removal thereof. The cost of such growth
removal shall be paid by you.
                                          ________________________________
                                          CODE ENFORCEMENT OFFICER
                                          VILLAGE OF MARISSA
   Dated this ________ day of ________________________________, 20_____.
VILLAGE OF MARISSA
111 N. Main. St.
Marissa, IL 62257
N O T I C E
UNLAWFUL GARBAGE AND/OR DEBRIS
TO: _____________
    _____________
    _____________
   You are hereby notified that
the____________________________________________________
_________________________________________________________________________________
has determined that property owned by you (and/or occupied by you, as the case
may be) located at ___________________________________________________________,
located withing the village limits contains garbage and/or debris as defined by
Chapter 91, specifically §
91.037, of this code of ordinances.
   You are required to remove all growth within five (5) days from the date of
this notice.
   If you refuse or neglect to remove such garbage and/or debris, the corporate
authorities of this municipality may provide for the removal thereof. The cost
of such garbage and/or debris removal shall be paid by you.
                                          ________________________________
                                          CODE ENFORCEMENT OFFICER
                                          VILLAGE OF MARISSA
   Dated this ________ day of ______________________________, 20_____.
VILLAGE OF MARISSA
111 N. Main. St.
Marissa, IL 62257
N O T I C E
UNLAWFUL GARBAGE AND/OR DEBRIS
TO: _____________
    _____________
    _____________
   You are hereby notified that the Police Department has determined that an
“inoperable vehicle(s)” owned by you (and/or stored by you, as the case may be)
located at __________________________
______________________________________________, located within the corporate
limits of this Municipality contains an inoperable vehicle(s), as defined by
Chapter 91, specifically §§
91.050 through
91.055, of this code of ordinances.
   You are required to abate and remove any and all inoperable vehicles within
seven (7) days from the date of this notice.
   If you wish to appeal said notice, then the appeal shall be made to the
corporate authorities within five (5) days of this notice.
   If you refuse or neglect to remove and dispose of the specified inoperable
vehicle(s), the Health Officer or Chief of Police of this municipality may
provide for the removal and abatement thereof. The cost of such removal and
abatement shall be paid by you.
                                          ________________________________
                                          CODE ENFORCEMENT OFFICER
                                          VILLAGE OF MARISSA
   Dated this ________ day of ______________________________, 20_____.
VILLAGE OF MARISSA
111 N. Main. St.
Marissa, IL 62257
LETTER OF NOTICE
DANGEROUS AND UNSAFE BUILDING
TO: _____________
    _____________
    _____________
   You , as owner(s) of the property lawfully described below, are hereby
notified by the undersigned Village of Marissa, Illinois that said property has
upon it a building which is:
         [ ]   Dangerous and/or unsafe
         [ ]   Uncompleted and/or abandoned
The lawful property shall be described as
________________________________________________
__________________________________________________________________________________
__________________________________________________________________________________
(legal description)
located
at__________________________________________________________________________
(address)
   Unless such building is put into safe condition or demolished within ninety
(90) days of the receipt of this notice, the village shall apply to the Circuit
Court for an order authorizing such action to be taken by the village with
respect to the above described building. Any costs incurred by the village to
restore the building to a safe condition or to demolish the building shall be
recovered from the owner(s) of the above described property pursuant to 65 ILCS
5/11-31-1.
                                          ________________________________
   Dated at __________________________________________________________, this
________________day of, ________________________________ 20_______.
                                          ________________________________
                                          CHIEF OF POLICE
                                          VILLAGE OF MARISSA
(SEAL)
(Prior Code, Ch. 25, App. A)
CHAPTER 92: PARKS AND RECREATION
Section
   
92.001   Destruction of park property
   
92.002   Littering and pollution
   
92.003   Fires in parks
   
92.004   Picnics
   
92.005   Erection of structures
   
92.006   Signs
   
92.007   Animals
   
92.008   Motor vehicles prohibited
   
92.009   Sales; amusements for gain
   
92.010   Group activities
   
92.012   Park use request
   
92.013   Hours
   
Appendix A: Park information request
   
Appendix B: Park reservation application
§ 92.001 DESTRUCTION OF PARK PROPERTY.
   Within the municipal parks, no person except park personnel on official
business shall:
   (A)   Cut, break, injure, destroy, take, or remove any tree, shrub, timber,
plant, or natural object;
   (B)   Kill, cause to be killed, or pursue with intent to kill any bird or
animal except in areas where the village has authorized hunting; or
   (C)   Willfully mutilate, injure, or destroy any building, bridge, table,
bench, fireplace, guidepost, notice, tablet, fence, monument, or other park
property or appurtenances.
(Prior Code, § 28-1-1) Penalty, see §
10.999
§ 92.002 LITTERING AND POLLUTION.
   (A)   No person shall deposit any trash within the municipal parks except in
proper receptacles where these are provided. Where receptacles are not
provided, all trash shall be carried away from the parks by the person
responsible for its presence and shall be properly disposed of elsewhere.
   (B)   No person shall discharge or otherwise place or cause to be placed in
the waters of any fountain, lake, stream, or other body of water in or adjacent
to any park or in any tributary, stream, storm sewer, or drain flowing into
such waters any substance or thing, liquid, or solid which will or may result
in the pollution of the waters.
(Prior Code, § 28-1-2) Penalty, see §
10.999
§ 92.003 FIRES IN PARKS.
   (A)   No person shall light or use any unenclosed picnic fire within the
municipal parks. Fires may be built only in fireplaces or on grills constructed
for that purpose in designated areas.
   (B)   In camping areas, no person shall leave any campfire unattended by a
competent person.
   (C)   Every person who has lighted or used any fire in a municipal park
shall extinguish such fire before leaving the park.
(Prior Code, § 28-1-3) Penalty, see §
10.999
§ 92.004 PICNICS.
    No person shall picnic in the municipal parks except in areas designated
for that purpose. Park personnel are hereby authorized to regulate the
activities in such areas when necessary to prevent congestion or to secure the
maximum use, comfort, and convenience of all. Visitors shall comply with any
directions given to achieve this end.
(Prior Code, § 28-1-4) Penalty, see §
10.999
§ 92.005 ERECTION OF STRUCTURES.
   No person shall build or place any tent, building, booth, stand, or other
structure in or upon any municipal park or other recreational facility unless
he or she has obtained a permit to do so from the village.
(Prior Code, § 28-1-5) Penalty, see §
10.999
§ 92.006 SIGNS.
   No person shall place within any municipal park or affix to any object
therein any sign or device designated to advertise any business, profession,
exhibition, event, or thing unless he or she has obtained a permit to do so
from the village.
(Prior Code, § 28-1-6) Penalty, see §
10.999
§ 92.007 ANIMALS.
   No person shall:
   (A)   Bring any dangerous animal into any municipal park;
   (B)   Permit any dog to be in any park unless such dog is on a leash; or
   (C)   Ride or lead any horse in any municipal park or recreational area
except upon paths or other ways expressly provided and posted for that purpose.
(Prior Code, § 28-1-7) Penalty, see §
10.999
§ 92.008 MOTOR VEHICLES PROHIBITED.
   No person other than municipal personnel on official business shall drive or
park any motor vehicle, including snowmobiles, in any municipal park except on
a roadway or parking lot.
(Prior Code, § 28-1-8) Penalty, see §
10.999
§ 92.009 SALES; AMUSEMENTS FOR GAIN.
   Within the parks of this municipality, no person shall, without having first
obtained a permit from the village:
   (A)   Sell or offer for sale any goods or services; or
   (B)   Conduct any amusement for gain or for which a charge is made.
(Prior Code, § 28-1-9) Penalty, see §
10.999
§ 92.010 GROUP ACTIVITIES.
   Whenever any group or organization desires to use municipal park facilities
for a particular purpose such as picnics, parties, exhibitions, or
performances, a representative of the group shall obtain permission for such
activity from the Board of Trustees.
(Prior Code, § 28-1-10)
§ 92.012 PARK USE REQUEST.
   The request to use the park will be granted on a first come, first serve
basis provided the following conditions are met:
   (A)   The proposed activity or use of the park will not unreasonably
interfere with or detract from the general public enjoyment of the park;
   (B)   The facilities desired have not been reserved for other use at the day
and hour requested in the application;
   (C)   The conduct of such activity will not substantially interrupt the safe
and orderly movement of traffic;
   (D)   The proper policing of such activity will not require the diversion of
so great a number of police officers as to prevent normal protection to the
remainder of this municipality; and
   (E)   The conduct of such activity is not reasonably likely to cause injury
to persons or property or to incite violence, crime, or disorderly conduct.
(Prior Code, § 28-1-11)
§ 92.013 HOURS.
   The Board of Trustees shall establish the hours of operation of the
municipal parks. No one shall be in the parks without the Mayor’s permission
after the established hours. The parks will be open from sunrise to sunset,
except for scheduled events.
(Prior Code, § 28-1-12) Penalty, see §
10.999
APPENDIX A: PARK INFORMATION REQUEST
ORGANIZATION: _________________________________________________________________
CHAIR OF EVENT: ___________________________________________________________
PRESIDENT OF ORGANIZATION: ___________________________________________________
DATE OF EVENT:
_________________________________________________________________
TYPE OF EVENT:
_________________________________________________________________
STATE CHARTER FOR NOT-FOR-PROFIT ISSUED:      YES _______       NO _______
EXPLAIN NEEDS OF EVENT AND HOW THE PARK FACILITY WILL BE USED:
__________________________________________________________________________________
__________________________________________________________________________________
__________________________________________________________________________________
__________________________________________________________________________________
CERTIFICATE OF INSURANCE REQUIRED:      YES _______       NO _______
LIQUOR LIABILITY REQUIRED:                YES _______       NO _______
COPIES OF THESE CERTIFICATES MUST BE SUBMITTED TO THE MUNICIPAL CLERK PRIOR TO
THE EVENT (IF REQUIRED). THE EVENT WILL BE STOPPED IF THEY ARE NOT FILED PRIOR
TO THE EVENT.
SPECIAL CONDITIONS FOR THE PARK
1.   SHELTER AND AREA MUST BE CLEARED BEFORE YOU LEAVE OR CLEANUP CHARGES WILL
BE ASSESSED.
2.   ______________________________________________________________________________
3.   ______________________________________________________________________________
4.   ______________________________________________________________________________
5.   ______________________________________________________________________________
SIGNED:                           APPROVED:
____________________________________   __________________________________________
ORGANIZATION CHAIR            MAYOR
DATE: ______________________________   DATE:
___________________________________
(Prior Code, Ch. 28)
APPENDIX B: PARK RESERVATION APPLICATION
NAME:   _______________________________________________________________________
ADDRESS:
   _______________________________________________________________________
CITY:
   ___________________________________________________________________________
TELEPHONE NO:
   ________________________________________________________________
DATE REQUESTED:   ____________________________________________________________
TYPE OF FUNCTION:
   ____________________________________________________________
HOURS:
   _______________________________________________________________________
ESTIMATED ATTENDANCE:   _____________________________________________________
SPECIAL CONDITIONS
1.   ______________________________________________________________________________
2.   ______________________________________________________________________________
3.   ______________________________________________________________________________
FEE: $__________
SIGNED:                              APPROVED:
____________________________________      _______________________________________
APPLICANT                           PARK BOARD CHAIR
DATE: _____________________________      DATE: ________________________________
REQUIREMENTS
1.   THIS APPLICATION MUST BE APPROVED BY THE MAYOR.
2.   A COPY OF THE APPLICATION WILL BE MAILED AFTER ITS APPROVED.
3.   APPLICANT SHALL DISPLAY THIS APPLICATION THE NIGHT BEFORE THE FUNCTION.
SHELTER AND AREA SHALL BE CLEANED BEFORE YOU LEAVE OR CLEANUP CHARGES WILL BE
ASSESSED.
(Prior Code, Ch. 28)
CHAPTER 93: STREET AND SIDEWALK REGULATIONS
Section
General Provisions
   
93.001   Enforcement; Street Department
   
93.002   Undermining
   
93.003   Repairing sidewalks
   
93.004   Stairways and railings
   
93.005   Closing street
   
93.006   Signs and bills on streets and poles
   
93.007   Rainwater drains
   
93.008   Merchandise on public streets
   
93.009   Injury to new pavements
   
93.010   Barbed-wire fences
   
93.011   Burning on public streets
   
93.012   Grass mowing
   
93.013   Open doors
Obstructing the Public Way
   
93.025   Vehicles on sidewalks
   
93.026   Deposits on sidewalks
   
93.027   Obstructing streets
   
93.028   Building materials in streets
   
93.029   Encroachments
Trees and Vegetation
   
93.040   Planting
   
93.041   Planting in the rights-of-way
   
93.042   Removal or injury
   
93.043   Advertisements or notice
   
93.044   Dangerous trees; certain trees prohibited
   
93.045   Wires
   
93.046   Gas pipes
Construction of Utilities in the Rights-of-Way
   
93.060   Purpose and scope
   
93.061   Definitions
   
93.062   Annual registration required
   
93.063   Permit required; application; fees
   
93.064   Action on permit applications
   
93.065   Effect of permit
   
93.066   Revised permit drawings
   
93.067   Insurance
   
93.068   Indemnification
   
93.069   Security
   
93.070   Permit suspension and revocation
   
93.071   Change of ownership, identity, or legal status
   
93.072   General construction standards
   
93.073   Traffic control
   
93.074   Location of facilities
   
93.075   Construction methods and materials
   
93.076   Vegetation control
   
93.077   Removal, relocation, or modification of utility facilities
   
93.078   Cleanup and restoration
   
93.079   Maintenance and emergency maintenance
   
93.080   Variances
   
93.081   Violations and enforcement
Street Improvements
   
93.095   Sidewalks
   
93.096   Curbs and gutters
   
93.097   Storm sewers
Culverts
   
93.110   Obstruction of drain or storm sewer
   
93.111   Permit; application and termination
   
93.112   Type of culvert
   
93.113   Costs and fees
Driveways
   
93.125   Permit required; fee
   
93.126   Grade surface
   
93.127   Specifications
   
93.128   Permit for breaking curb
   
93.129   Repair
Snow Removal
   
93.140   Definitions
   
93.141   Snow and ice to be removed by private persons
   
93.142   Depositing of snow and ice restricted
   
93.143   Mayor’s authority
   
Appendix A: Excavation permit
   
Appendix B: Application for culvert/driveway permit
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 93.001 ENFORCEMENT; STREET DEPARTMENT.
   (A)   There is hereby established a department of the municipal government
which shall be known as the Street Department. It shall embrace the Street
Committee, the Street Superintendent, and the employees. The Village Engineer
shall serve as ex-officio officer.
(Prior Code, § 33-1-1)
   (B)   The Village Board Standing Committee on Streets shall exercise a
general supervision over the affairs of the Street Department. It shall
ascertain the needs and conditions thereof and shall, from time to time, report
the same to the Mayor and to the Board of Trustees.
(Prior Code, § 33-1-2)
§ 93.002 UNDERMINING.
   No person shall undermine in any manner any street or any other ground or
real estate situated in the village or belonging to any private person.
(Prior Code, § 33-2-1) Penalty, see §
10.999
§ 93.003 REPAIRING SIDEWALKS.
    Whenever any sidewalk, pavement, or cellar door on the same becomes worn
out or out of repair, or is torn up or broken and uneven, it shall be the duty
of the Street Superintendent to immediately report such fact to the Mayor or
Street and Alley Committee, and upon verbal or written order from either of
them, to give notice to the party owning the adjoining property to repair such
sidewalk or cellar door without delay.
(Prior Code, § 33-2-3)
§ 93.004 STAIRWAYS AND RAILINGS.
   Steps or stairways leading into any building shall not extend from the wall
of such building onto any pavement or sidewalk, and, in such case, the person
making or causing to be made such passage shall erect a railing on the side of
the stairs toward the street to prevent persons from falling into the street.
(Prior Code, § 33-2-4)
§ 93.005 CLOSING STREET.
   (A)   Whenever public safety or the improvement or repair of any street,
alley, or public place requires it, the Mayor may order any street, alley, or
public place temporarily closed to traffic and the placing of signs indicating
that the street, alley, or public place is closed by order of the Mayor.
   (B)   Whenever such signs are so placed, no person shall ride or drive upon
or cross such street, alley, or public place, or in any manner destroy, deface,
or remove any such sign.
(Prior Code, § 33-2-5) Penalty, see §
10.999
§ 93.006 SIGNS AND BILLS ON STREETS AND POLES.
   (A)   No person shall place any sign, advertisement, or banner over any or
across any street, alley, or sidewalk in the village, unless he or she has
written approval of the Board of Trustees.
(Prior Code, § 33-2-6)
   (B)   No person shall nail, tack, paste, paint, or fasten, or cause to be
nailed, tacked, painted, or fastened, any sign or any other foreign substance
or material onto any telephone, telegraph, electric light, police and/or fire
alarm pole or post, or any street or traffic sign located on any sidewalk,
street, alley, or public grounds, or injure or deface any such pole or post.
(Prior Code, § 33-2-15)
Penalty, see §
10.999
Statutory reference:
   Related provisions, see 65 ILCS 5/11-80-17
§ 93.007 RAINWATER DRAINS.
   (A)   (1)   It shall be unlawful to construct or permit the construction of
any storm water drain or any drainage pipe in either a natural or human-made
ditch without having first obtained a permit therefor.
      (2)   Applications for such permits shall be made to the Village Clerk
and shall be accompanied by a statement as to the purpose of such drainage
pipe, the premises to be served and the specification of such pipe to be
installed.
      (3)   Such application shall be referred to the Street Superintendent,
and no such permit shall be issued unless he or she shall have found that this
code of ordinances would be complied with by the installation of such storm
water drain or drainage pipe and that the installation of such storm water
drain or drainage pipe would not interfere with, overload, obstruct, or
otherwise adversely affect the existing storm water drainage system within the
village.
   (B)   It shall be unlawful to construct or permit the construction of any
storm water drain which discharges water onto any sidewalk in the village and
it shall be unlawful to construct or permit the maintenance of any such drain
which discharges into any public street or alley at a height greater than 18
inches above the ground or pavement.
(Prior Code, § 33-2-10) Penalty, see §
10.999
§ 93.008 MERCHANDISE ON PUBLIC STREETS.
   It shall be unlawful for any person, firm, or corporation to use any street,
sidewalk, or other public place as space for the display of goods or
merchandise for sale; or to write or make any signs or advertisements on any
such pavements, unless permission is granted by the Board of Trustees.
(Prior Code, § 33-2-12) Penalty, see §
10.999
§ 93.009 INJURY TO NEW PAVEMENTS.
   It shall be unlawful to walk upon or drive any vehicle or animal upon or
destroy any newly-laid sidewalk pavement while the same is guarded by a warning
sign or barricade, or to knowingly injure any soft, newly-laid pavement.
(Prior Code, § 33-2-16) Penalty, see §
10.999
§ 93.010 BARBED-WIRE FENCES.
   It shall be unlawful to maintain or construct any fence composed in whole or
in part of barbed wire, or with any similar material designed to cause injury
to persons, or any wire charged with electrical current, anywhere within 50
feet of any public street, sidewalk, alley, park, or other public way or place,
unless such barbs or charged wire are at least six feet above the level of such
public place.
(Prior Code, § 33-2-17) Penalty, see §
10.999
§ 93.011 BURNING ON PUBLIC STREETS.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to burn any leaves, paper, rubbish, or
other substances upon any of the public streets, sidewalks, or alleys in the
village.
(Prior Code, § 33-2-18) Penalty, see §
10.999
§ 93.012 GRASS MOWING.
   (A)   Property owners and/or their tenants shall be jointly and separately
responsible for mowing the grass or weeds between the property lines and the
adjoining street surfaces.
   (B)   The height of the grass or weeds shall not exceed eight inches.
(Prior Code, § 33-2-19) Penalty, see §
10.999
§ 93.013 OPEN DOORS.
   No person shall open or allow to remain open any door, gate, or the grating
of any vault belonging to the premises occupied by him or her on any street,
alley, or sidewalk in the village for any purpose, except the taking in and
removing goods; and any person allowing such grating to remain open shall warn
passersby of the danger.
(Prior Code, § 33-2-2) Penalty, see §
10.999
OBSTRUCTING THE PUBLIC WAY
§ 93.025 VEHICLES ON SIDEWALKS.
   No person shall operate any bicycle or vehicle over any sidewalk, except in
crossing the same to go into a yard or parking lot.
(Prior Code, § 33-2-7) Penalty, see §
10.999
§ 93.026 DEPOSITS ON SIDEWALKS.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful to deposit on any public sidewalk, any material
which may be harmful to the pavement thereof, or any waste material, or any
glass or other articles which might cause injury to persons, animals, or
property.
   (B)   Merchandise or other articles may be deposited on sidewalks
preparatory to delivery, provided that the usable width is not thereby reduced
to less than four feet; and provided that no such article shall remain on such
walk for more than 30 minutes.
(Prior Code, § 33-2-8) Penalty, see §
10.999
§ 93.027 OBSTRUCTING STREETS.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful to deposit any material on any street which may
be harmful to the pavement thereof, or any waste material, or any grass
clippings, or to cause a lawn mower to blow grass clippings onto a street or
any other articles such as glass which may cause injury to any person, animal,
or property.
   (B)   No person shall place or cause to be placed or erected on any public
ground, or in any public street, alley, or sidewalk in the village, any debris,
materials, or obstruction, except as may be permitted by this code of
ordinances.
   (C)   It shall be the duty of the Police Department to exercise a vigilant
supervision over such places and to notify any person found making such deposit
or responsible for same to remove the offending matter at once.
(Prior Code, § 33-2-9) Penalty, see §
10.999
§ 93.028 BUILDING MATERIALS IN STREETS.
   The Street Superintendent may move any obstruction on any street or sidewalk
of the village, but before doing so, he or she shall notify the person
responsible therefor to remove such obstruction within a reasonable time after
being notified. Any person engaged in erecting a building or fence or improving
any lot on such street may deposit materials thereon and contiguous to such
length of time as may be necessary for the work. The obstruction shall not
extend to more than one-half of the width of the sidewalk, street, or alley
adjacent to such improvement, and the gutter shall always be left free and
unobstructed. At night, such person shall keep an illuminated warning light on
such material.
(Prior Code, § 33-2-11) Penalty, see §
10.999
§ 93.029 ENCROACHMENTS.
   It shall be unlawful to erect or maintain any building or structure which
encroaches upon any public street or property.
(Prior Code, § 33-2-13) Penalty, see §
10.999
TREES AND VEGETATION
§ 93.040 PLANTING.
   It shall be unlawful to plant any tree or bush in any public street or
parkway or other public place without having first secured a permit therefor.
Applications for such permits shall be made to the Street Superintendent and
shall be referred by him or her to the Board of Trustees. All trees and shrubs
so planted shall be placed subject to the directions and approval of the Board
of Trustees.
(Prior Code, § 33-3-1) Penalty, see §
10.999
§ 93.041 PLANTING IN THE RIGHTS-OF-WAY.
   It shall be unlawful to plant any bushes, trees, shrubs, or other plants on
the right-of-way of any public street, including the space on the right-of-way
between the sidewalk and the adjacent street pavement.
(Prior Code, § 33-3-2) Penalty, see §
10.999
§ 93.042 REMOVAL OR INJURY.
   (A)   (1)   It shall be unlawful to remove or cut down any tree or shrub or
portion thereof in any street, parkway, or other public place without having
first secured a permit therefor.
      (2)   Applications for such permits shall be made to the Street
Superintendent and shall be referred by him or her to the Board of Trustees
before permission shall be granted.
(Prior Code, § 33-3-3)
   (B)   It shall be unlawful to injure any tree or shrub planted in such
public place.
(Prior Code, § 33-3-4)
Penalty, see §
10.999
§ 93.043 ADVERTISEMENTS OR NOTICE.
   It shall be unlawful to attach any sign, advertisement, or notice to any
tree or shrub in any street, parkway, or other public place.
(Prior Code, § 33-3-5) Penalty, see §
10.999
§ 93.044 DANGEROUS TREES; CERTAIN TREES PROHIBITED.
   (A)   Any tree or shrub which overhangs any sidewalk, street, or other
public place in the village at a height less than eight feet or in such a way
as to impede or interfere with traffic or travel on such public place shall be
trimmed by the owner of the abutting premises or of the premises on which such
tree or shrub grows so that the obstruction shall cease.
(Prior Code, § 33-3-6)
   (B)   It shall be unlawful for any person or persons, firm, or corporation
to plant or cause to be planted in any of the public streets, alleys,
sidewalks, parkways, and other public places in the village, any trees of any
of the following varieties: Cottonwood, Poplar, and/or Willow.
(Prior Code, § 33-3-9)
Penalty, see §
10.999
§ 93.045 WIRES.
   It shall be unlawful to attach any wires or rope to any tree or shrub in any
public street, parkway, or other public place without the permission of the
Board of Trustees. Any person or company given the right to maintain the poles
and wires in the streets, alleys, or other public places in the municipality
shall, in the absence of provision in the franchise concerning the subject,
keep such wires and poles free from and away from any trees or shrubs in such
places so far as may be possible and shall keep all such trees and shrubs
properly trimmed, subject to the supervision of the Street Superintendent so
that no injury shall be done either to the poles or wires or the shrubs and
trees by their conduct.
(Prior Code, § 33-3-7)
Penalty, see §
10.999
§ 93.046 GAS PIPES.
   Any person or company maintaining any gas pipe in the village shall, in the
absence of provision in the franchise concerning the subject, keep such pipes
free from leaks so that no injury shall be done to any trees or shrubs.
(Prior Code, § 33-3-8)
CONSTRUCTION OF UTILITIES IN THE RIGHTS-OF-WAY
§ 93.060 PURPOSE AND SCOPE.
   (A)   Purpose. The purpose of this subchapter is to establish policies and
procedures for constructing facilities on rights-of-way within the village’s
jurisdiction, which will provide public benefit consistent with the
preservation of the integrity, safe usage, and visual qualities of the village
rights-of-way and the village as a whole.
   (B)   Intent. In enacting this subchapter, the village intends to exercise
its authority over the rights-of-way in the village and, in particular, the use
of the public ways and property by utilities, by establishing uniform standards
to address issues presented by utility facilities, including, without
limitation:
      (1)   Prevent interference with the use of streets, sidewalks, alleys,
parkways, and other public ways and places;
      (2)   Prevent the creation of visual and physical obstructions and other
conditions that are hazardous to vehicular and pedestrian traffic;
      (3)   Prevent interference with the facilities and operations of the
village’s utilities and of other utilities lawfully located in rights-of-way or
public property;
      (4)   Protect against environmental damage, including damage to trees,
from the installation of utility facilities;
      (5)   Protect against increased storm water run-off due to structures and
materials that increase impermeable surfaces;
      (6)   Preserve the character of the neighborhoods in which facilities are
installed;
      (7)   Preserve open space, particularly the tree-lined parkways that
characterize the village’s residential neighborhoods;
      (8)   Prevent visual blight from the proliferation of facilities in the
rights-of-way; and
      (9)   Assure the continued safe use and enjoyment of private properties
adjacent to utility facilities locations.
   (C)   Facilities subject to this subchapter. This subchapter applies to all
facilities on, over, above, along, upon, under, across, or within the rights-
of-way within the jurisdiction of the village. A facility lawfully established
prior to the effective date of this subchapter may continue to be maintained,
repaired, and operated by the utility as presently constructed and located,
except as may be otherwise provided in any applicable franchise, license, or
similar agreement.
   (D)   Franchises, licenses, or similar agreements. The village, in its
discretion and as limited by law, may require utilities to enter into a
franchise, license, or similar agreement for the privilege of locating their
facilities on, over, above, along, upon, under, across, or within the village
rights-of-way. Utilities that are not required by law to enter into such an
agreement may request that the village enter into such an agreement. In such an
agreement, the village may provide for terms and conditions inconsistent with
this subchapter.
   (E)   Effect of franchises, licenses, or similar agreements. In the event
that a utility other than a telecommunications provider has a franchise,
license, or similar agreement with the village, such franchise, license, or
similar agreement shall govern and control during the term of such agreement
and any lawful renewal or extension thereof. In the event of any conflict with,
or inconsistency between, the provisions of this subchapter and the provisions
of any franchise, license, or similar agreement between the village and any
telecommunications provider, the provisions of such franchise, license, or
similar agreement shall govern and control during the term of such agreement
and any lawful renewal or extension thereof.
   (F)   Conflicts with other subchapters or chapters. This subchapter
supersedes all subchapters or chapters or parts of subchapters or chapters
adopted prior hereto that are in conflict herewith, to the extent of such
conflict.
   (G)   Conflicts with state and federal laws. In the event that applicable
federal or state laws or regulations conflict with the requirements of this
subchapter, the utility shall comply with the requirements of this subchapter
to the maximum extent possible without violating federal or state laws or
regulations.
   (H)   Sound engineering judgment. The village shall use sound engineering
judgment when administering this subchapter and may vary the standards,
conditions, and requirements expressed in this subchapter when the village so
determines. Nothing herein shall be construed to limit the ability of the
village to regulate its rights-of-way for the protection of the public health,
safety, and welfare.
(Prior Code, § 33-4-1)
§ 93.061 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning. Any term
not defined in this section shall have the meaning ascribed to it in 92 Ill.
Adm. Code § 520.20, unless the context clearly requires otherwise.
   AASHTO. American Association of State Highway and Transportation Officials.
   ANSI. American National Standards Institute.
   APPLICANT. A person applying for a permit under this subchapter.
   ASTM. American Society for Testing Materials.
   BACK-FILL. The methods or materials for replacing excavated material in a
trench or pit.
   BORE or BORINA. To excavate an underground cylindrical cavity for the
insertion of a pipe or electrical conductor.
   CABLE OPERATOR. That term as defined in 47 U.S.C. § 522(5).
   CABLE SERVICE. That tern as defined in 47 U.S.C. § 522(6).
   CABLE SYSTEM. That term as defined in 47 U.S.C. § 522(7).
   CARRIER PIPE. The pipe enclosing the liquid, gas, or slurry to be
transported.
   CASINO. A structural protective enclosure for transmittal devises such as:
carrier pipes, electrical conductors, and fiber optic devices.
   CLEAR ZONE. The total roadside border area, starting at the edge of the
pavement, available for safe use by errant vehicles. This area may consist of a
shoulder, a recoverable slope, a non-recoverable slope, and a clear run-out
area. The desired width is dependent upon the traffic volumes and speeds, and
on the roadside geometry. Distances are specified in the AASHTO Roadside Design
Guide.
   COATING. Protective wrapping or mastic cover applied to buried pipe for
protection against external corrosion.
   CONDUCTOR. Wire-carrying electric current.
   CONDUIT. A casing or encasement for wires or cables.
   CONSTRUCTION or CONSTRUCT. The installation, repair, maintenance, placement,
alteration, enlargement, demolition, modification, or abandonment in place of
facilities.
   COVER. The depth of earth or back-fill over buried utility pipe or
conductor.
   CROSSING FACILITY. A facility that crosses one or more right-of-way lines of
a right-of-way.
   DISRUPT THE RIGHT-OF-WAY. For the purposes of this subchapter, any work that
obstructs the right-of-way or causes a material adverse affect on the use of
the right-of-way for its intended use. Such work may include, without
limitation, the following: excavating or other cutting; placement (whether
temporary or permanent) of materials, equipment, devises, or structures; damage
to vegetation; and compaction or loosening of the soil. Such work shall not
include the parking of vehicles or equipment in a manner that does not
materially obstruct the flow of traffic on a highway.
   EMERGENCY. Any immediate maintenance to the facility required of the safety
of the public using or in the vicinity of the right-of-way or immediate
maintenance required for the health and safety of the general public served by
the utility.
   ENCASEMENT. Provision of a protective casing.
   ENGINEER. The Village Engineer or his or her designee.
   EQUIPMENT. Materials, tools, implements, supplies, and/or other items used
to facilitate construction of facilities.
   EXCAVATION. The making of a hole or cavity by removing material, or laying
bare by digging.
   EXTRA HEAVY PIPE. Pipe meeting ASTM standards for this pipe designation.
   FACILITY. All structures, devises, objects, and materials (including, but
not limited to, track and rails, wires, ducts, fiber optic cable, antennas,
vaults, boxes, equipment enclosures, cabinets, pedestals, poles, conduits,
grates, covers, pipes, cables, and appurtenances thereto) located on, over,
above, along, upon, under, across, or within rights-of-way under this
subchapter. For purposes of this subchapter, the term FACILITY shall not
include any facility owned or operated by the village.
   FREESTANDING FACILITY. A facility that is not a crossing facility or a
parallel facility, such as an antenna, transformer, pump, or meter station.
   FRONTAGE ROAD. Roadway, usually parallel, providing access to land adjacent
to the highway where it is precluded by control of access on highway.
   HAZARDOUS MATERIALS. Any substance or material which, due to its quantity,
form, concentration, location, or other characteristics, is determined by the
Village Engineer or Superintendent to pose an unreasonable and imminent risk to
the life, health, or safety of persons or property or to the ecological balance
of the environment, including, but not limited to explosives, radioactive
materials, petroleum, or petroleum products or gases, poisons, etiology
(biological) agents, flammables, corrosives, or any substance determined to be
hazardous or toxic under any federal or state law, statute, or regulation.
   HIGHWAY CODE. The Illinois Highway Code, 605 ILCS 5/1-101 et seq., as
amended from time to time.
   HIGHWAY. A specific type of right-of-way used for vehicular traffic
including rural or urban roads, alleys, or streets. HIGHWAY includes all
highway land and improvements, including roadways, ditches and embankments,
bridges, drainage structures, sign, guardrails, protective structures, and
appurtenances necessary or convenient for vehicle traffic.
   HOLDER. A person or entity that has received authorization to offer or
provide cable or video service from the ICC pursuant to the Illinois Cable and
Video Competition Law, 220 ILCS 5/21-401.
   IDOT. Illinois Department of Transportation.
   ICC. Illinois Commerce Commission.
   JACKING. Pushing a pipe horizontally under a roadway by mechanical means
with or without boring.
   JETTING. Pushing a pipe through the earth using water under pressure to
create a cavity ahead of the pipe.
   JOINT USE. The use of pole lines, trenches, or other facilities by two or
more utilities.
   MAJOR INTERSECTION. The intersection of two or more major arterial highways.
   OCCUPANCY. The presence of facilities on, over, or under the right-of-way.
   PARALLEL FACILITY. A facility that is generally parallel or longitudinal to
the centerline of a right-of-way.
   PARKWAY. Any portion of the right-of-way not improved by street or sidewalk.
   PAYEMENT CUT. The removal of an area of pavement for access to facility or
for the construction of a facility.
   PERMITTEE. That entity to which a permit has been issued pursuant to §§
93.063 and
93.064.
   PRACTICABLE. That which is performable, feasible, or possible, rather than
that which is simply convenient.
   PRESSURE. The internal force acting radically against the walls of a carrier
pipe expressed in pounds per square inch gauge (psig).
   PETROLEUM PRODUCTS PIPELINES. Pipelines carrying crude or refined liquid
petroleum products including, but not limited to, gasoline, distillates,
propane, butane, or coalslurry.
   PROMPT. That which is done within a period of time specified by the village.
If no time period is specified, the period shall be 30 days.
   PUBLIC ENTITY. A legal entity that constitutes or is part of the government,
whether at local, state, or federal level.
   RESTORATION. The repair of a right-of-way, highway, roadway, or other area
disrupted by the construction of a facility.
   RIGHT-OF-WAY or RIGHTS-OF-WAY. Any street, alley, other land, or waterway
dedicated or commonly used for pedestrian or vehicular traffic or other similar
purposes, including utility easements, in which the village has the right and
authority to authorize, regulate, or permit the location of facilities other
than those of the village. RIGHT-OF-WAY or RIGHTS-OF-WAY shall not include any
real or personal village property that is not specifically described in the
previous two sentences and shall not include village buildings, fixtures, and
other structures or improvements, regardless of whether they are situated in
the RIGHT-OF-WAY.
   ROADWAY. Thae part of the highway that includes the pavement and shoulders.
   SALE OF TELECOMMUNICATIONS AT RETAIL. The transmitting, supplying, or
furnishing of telecommunications and all services rendered in connection
therewith for a consideration, other than between a parent corporation and its
wholly owned subsidiaries or between wholly owned subsidiaries, when the gross
charge made by one such corporation to another such corporation is not greater
than the gross charge paid to the retailer for their use or consumption and not
for sale.
   SECURITY FUND. The amount of security required pursuant to §
93.069.
   SHOULDER. A width of roadway adjacent to the pavement, providing lateral
support to the pavement edge and providing an area for emergency vehicular
stops and storage of snow removed from the pavement.
   SOUND ENGINEERING JUDGMENT. A decision(s) consistent with generally accepted
engineering principles, practices, and experience.
   SUPERINTENDENT OF PUBLIC WORKS. The Superintendent of Public Works or his or
her designee, hereinafter referred to as SUPERINTENDENT.
   TELECOMMUNICATIONS. This term includes, but is not limited to, messages or
information transmitted through use of local, toll, and wide-area telephone
service, channel services, telegraph services, teletypewriter service, computer
exchange service, private line services, mobile radio services, cellular mobile
telecommunications services, stationary two-way radio, paging service, and any
other form of mobile or portable one-way or two-way communications, and any
other transmission of messages or information by electronic or similar means,
between or among points by wire, cable, fiber optics, laser, microwave, radio,
satellite, or similar facilities.
      (1)   PRIVATE LINE means a dedicated non-traffic sensitive service for a
single customer that entitles the customer to exclusive or priority use of a
communications channel, or a group of such channels, from one or more specified
location to one or more other specified location.
      (2)   TELECOMMUNICATIONS shall not include value added services in which
computer processing applications are used to act on the form, content, code,
and protocol of the information for purposes other than transmission.
      (3)   TELECOMMUNICATIONS shall not include purchase of telecommunications
by a telecommunications service provider for use as a component part of the
service provided by such provider to the ultimate retail consumer who
originates or terminates the end-to-end communications.
      (4)   TELECOMMUNICATIONS shall not include the provision of cable
services through a cable system as defined in the Cable Communications Act of
1984 (being 47 U.S.C. §§ 521 et seq.), as now or hereafter amended, or cable or
other programming services subject to an open video system fee payable to the
village through an open video system as defined in the rules of the Federal
Communications Commission (being 47 C.F.R. §§ 76.1500 et seq.), as now or
hereafter amended.
   TELECOMMUNICATIONS PROVIDER. Any person that installs, owns, operates, or
controls facilities in the right-of-way used or designed to be used to transmit
telecommunications in any form.
   TELECOMMUNICATIONS RETAILER. Includes every person engaged in making sales
of telecommunication at retail, as defined herein.
   TRENCH. A relatively narrow, open excavation for the installation of an
underground facility.
   UTILITY. The individual or entity owning or operating any facility as
defined in this subchapter.
   VENT. A pipe to allow the dissipation into the atmosphere of gases or vapors
from an underground casing.
   VIDEO SERVICE. That term as defined in § 21-201(v) of the Illinois Cable and
Video Competition Law of 2007, 220 ILCS 5/21-201(v).
   VILLAGE. The Village of Marissa.
   WATER LINES. Pipelines carrying raw or potable water.
   WET BORING. Boring using water under pressure at the cutting auger to soften
the earth and to provide a sluice for the excavated material.
(Prior Code, § 33-4-2)
§ 93.062 ANNUAL REGISTRATION REQUIRED.
   Every utility that occupies right-of-way within the village shall register
on January 1 of each year with the Superintendent, providing the utility’s
name, address, and regular business telephone and telecopy numbers, the name of
one or more contact persons who can act on behalf of the utility in connection
with emergencies involving the utility’s facilities in the right-of-way and a
24-hour telephone number for each such person, and evidence of insurance as
required in §
93.068, in the form of a certificate of insurance.
(Prior Code, § 33-4-3)
§ 93.063 PERMIT REQUIRED; APPLICATION; FEES.
   (A)   Permit required.
      (1)   No person shall construct (as defined in this subchapter) any
facility on, over, above, along, upon, under, across, or within any village
right-of-way which:
         (a)   Changes the location of the facility;
         (b)   Adds a new facility;
         (c)   Disrupts the right-of-way (as defined in this subchapter); or
         (d)   Materially increases the amount of area or space occupied by the
facility on, over, above, along, under, across, or within the right-of-way,
without first filing an application with the Superintendent and obtaining a
permit from the village therefor, except as otherwise provided in this
subchapter.
      (2)   No permit shall be required for installation and maintenance of
service connections to customers’ premises where there will be no disruption of
the right-of-way.
   (B)   Permit application. All applications for permits pursuant to this
subchapter shall be filed on a form provided by the village and shall be filed
in such number of duplicate copies as the village may designate. The applicant
may designate those portions of its application materials that it reasonably
believes contain proprietary or confidential information as “proprietary” or
“confidential” by clearly marking each page of such materials accordingly.
   (C)   Minimum general application requirements. The application shall be
made by the utility or its duly authorized representative and shall contain, at
a minimum, the following:
      (1)   The utility’s name, address, and telephone and telecopy numbers;
      (2)   The applicant’s name and address, if different than the utility,
and its telephone and telecopy numbers, e-mail address, and its interest in the
work;
      (3)   The names, addresses and telephone and telecopy numbers, and e-mail
addresses of all professional consultants, if any, advising the applicant with
respect to the application;
      (4)   A general description of the proposed work and the purposes and
intent of the facility and the uses to which the facility will be put. The
scope and detail of such description shall be appropriate to the nature and
character of the work to be performed, with special emphasis on those matters
likely to be affected or impacted by the work proposed;
      (5)   Evidence that the utility has placed on file with the village:
         (a)   A written traffic control plan demonstrating the protective
measures and devices that will comply with the State Manual on Uniform Traffic
Control Devices, to prevent injury or damage to persons or property and to
minimize disruptions to efficient pedestrian and vehicular traffic; and
         (b)   An emergency contingency plan which shall specify the nature of
potential emergencies, including, without limitation, construction and
hazardous materials emergencies, and the intended response by the applicant.
         (c)   The intended response shall include notification to the village
and shall promote protection of the safety and convenience of the public.
Compliance with ICC regulations for emergency contingency plans constitutes
compliance with this section unless the village finds that additional
information or assurances are needed;
      (6)   Drawings, plans, and specifications showing the work proposed,
including the certification of an engineer that such drawings, plans, and
specifications comply with applicable codes, rules, and regulations;
      (7)   Evidence of insurance as required in §
93.067;
      (8)   Evidence of posting of the security fund as required in §
93.069;
      (9)   Any request for a variance from one or more provisions of this
subchapter (see §
93.080); and
      (10)   Such additional information as may be reasonably required by the
village.
   (D)   Supplemental application requirements for specific types of utilities.
In addition to the requirements of division (C) above, the permit application
shall include the following items, as applicable to the specific utility that
is the subject of the permit application:
      (1)   In the case of the installation of a new electric power,
communications, telecommunications, cable television service, video service, or
natural gas distribution system, evidence that any certificate of public
convenience and necessity or other regulatory authorization that the applicant
is required by law to obtain, or that the applicant has elected to obtain, has
been issued by the ICC or other jurisdictional authority;
      (2)   In the case of natural gas systems, state the proposed pipe size,
design, construction class, and operating pressures;
      (3)   In the case of water lines, indicate that all requirements of the
State Environmental Protection Agency, Division of Public Water Supplies, have
been satisfied;
      (4)   In the case of sewer line installations, indicate that the land and
water pollution requirements of the State Environmental Protection Agency,
Division of Water Pollution Control, have been satisfied; and/or
      (5)   In the case of petroleum products pipelines, state the type or
types of petroleum products, pipe size, maximum working pressure, and the
design standard to be followed.
   (E)   Applicant’s duty to update information. Throughout the entire permit
application review period and the construction period authorized by the permit,
any amendments to information contained in a permit application shall be
submitted by the utility in writing to the village within 30 days after the
change necessitating the amendment.
   (F)   Application fees.
      (1)   Unless otherwise provided by franchise, license, or similar
agreement, all applications for permits pursuant to this subchapter shall be
accompanied by a base fee in the amount of $100. Additional application review
costs will vary with the complexity of the project and will be determined on a
case-by- case basis and shall be paid prior to issuance of final permit.
      (2)   No application fee is required to be paid by any electricity
utility that is paying the municipal electricity infrastructure maintenance fee
pursuant to the Electricity Infrastructure Maintenance Fee Law, being 35 ILCS
645/5-1 et seq.
(Prior Code, § 33-4-4)
§ 93.064 ACTION ON PERMIT APPLICATIONS.
   (A)   Village review of permit applications. Completed permit applications,
containing all required documentation, shall be examined by the Superintendent
within a reasonable time after filing. If the application does not conform to
the requirements of all applicable ordinances, codes, laws, rules, and
regulations, the Superintendent shall reject such application in writing,
stating the reasons therefor. If the Superintendent is satisfied that the
proposed work conforms to the requirements of this subchapter and all
applicable ordinances, codes, laws, rules, and regulations, the Superintendent
shall issue a permit therefor as soon as practicable. In all instances, it
shall be the duty of the applicant to demonstrate, to the satisfaction of the
Superintendent, that the construction proposed under the application shall be
in full compliance with the requirements of this subchapter.
   (B)   Additional village review of applications of telecommunications
retailers.
      (1)   Pursuant to § 4 of the Telephone Company Act, 220 ILCS 65/4, a
telecommunications retailer shall notify the village that it intends to
commence work governed by this subchapter for the provision of
telecommunications services. Such notice shall consist of plans,
specifications, and other documentation sufficient to demonstrate the purpose
and intent of the facilities, and shall be provided by the telecommunications
retailer to the village not less than ten days prior to the commencement of
work requiring no excavation, and not less than 30 days prior to the
commencement of work requiring excavation. The Superintendent shall specify the
portion of the right-of-way upon which the facility may be placed, used, or
constructed.
      (2)   In the event that the Superintendent fails to provide such
specification of location to the telecommunications retailer within either ten
days after service of notice to the village by the telecommunications retailer
in the case of work not involving excavation for new construction, or 25 days
after service of notice by the telecommunications retailer in the case of work
involving excavation for new construction, the telecommunications retailer may
commence work without obtaining a permit under this subchapter.
      (3)   Upon the provision of such specification by the village, where a
permit is required for work pursuant to §
93.063, the telecommunications retailer shall submit to the village an
application for a permit and any and all plans, specifications, and
documentation available regarding the facility to be constructed. Such
application shall be subject to the requirements of division (A) above.
   (C)   Additional village review of applications of holders of state
authorization under the Cable and Video Competition Law of 2007. Applications
by a utility that is a holder of a state-issued authorization under the Cable
and Video Competition Law of 2007, being 220 ILCS 5/21-100 et seq., shall be
deemed granted 45 days after submission to the village, unless otherwise acted
upon by the village, provided the holder has complied with applicable village
codes, ordinances, and regulations.
(Prior Code, § 33-4-5)
§ 93.065 EFFECT OF PERMIT.
   (A)   Authority granted; no property right or other interest created. A
permit from the village authorizes a permittee to undertake only certain
activities in accordance with this subchapter on village rights-of-way, and
does not create a property right or grant authority to the permittee to impinge
upon the rights of others who may have an interest in the public rights-of-way.
   (B)   Duration. No permit issued under this subchapter shall be valid for a
period longer than six months unless construction is actually begun within that
period and is thereafter diligently pursued to completion.
   (C)   Pre-construction meeting required.
      (1)   No construction shall begin pursuant to a permit issued under this
subchapter prior to attendance by the permittee and all major contractors and
subcontractors who will perform any work under the permit at a preconstruction
meeting.
      (2)   The pre-construction meeting shall be held at a date, time, and
place designated by the village with such village representatives in attendance
as the village deems necessary. The meeting shall be for the purpose of
reviewing the work under the permit, and reviewing special considerations
necessary in the areas where work will occur, including, without limitation,
presence or absence of other utility facilities in the area and their
locations, procedures to avoid disruption of other utilities, use of rights-of-
way by the public during construction, and access and egress by adjacent
property owners.
   (D)   Compliance with all laws required. The issuance of a permit by the
village does not excuse the permittee from complying with other requirements of
the village and applicable statutes, laws, ordinances, rules, and regulations.
(Prior Code, § 33-4-6)
§ 93.066 REVISED PERMIT DRAWINGS.
   (A)   In the event that the actual locations of any facilities deviate in
any material respect from the locations identified in the plans, drawings, and
specifications submitted with the permit application, the permittee shall
submit a revised set of drawings or plans to the village within 90 days after
the completion of the permitted work.
   (B)   The revised drawings or plans shall specifically identify where the
locations of the actual facilities deviate from the locations approved in the
permit. If any deviation from the permit also deviates from the requirements of
this subchapter, it shall be treated as a request for variance in accordance
with §
93.080. If the village denies the request for a variance, then the permittee
shall either remove the facility from the right-of-way or modify the facility
so that it conforms to the permit and submit revised drawings or plans
therefor.
(Prior Code, § 33-4-7)
§ 93.067 INSURANCE.
   (A)   Required coverages and limits.
      (1)   Unless otherwise provided by franchise, license, or similar
agreement, each utility occupying right-of-way or constructing any facility in
the right-of-way shall secure and maintain the following liability insurance
policies insuring the utility as named insured and naming the village and its
elected and appointed officers, officials, agents, and employees as additional
insureds on the policies listed in divisions (A)(1)(a)1. and (A)(1)(a)2. below:
         (a)   Commercial general liability insurance, including premises-
operations, explosion, collapse, and underground hazard (commonly referred as
“X,” “C,” and “U” coverages) and products-completed operations coverage with
limits not less than:
            1.   Five million dollars for bodily injury or death to each
person;
            2.   Five million dollars for property damage resulting from any
one accident; and
            3.   Five million dollars for all other types of liability.
         (b)   Automobile liability for owned, non-owned and hired vehicles
with a combined single limit of $1,000,000 for personal injury and property
damage for each accident;
         (c)   Workers’ compensation with statutory limits; and
         (d)   Employers’ liability insurance with limits of not less than
$1,000,000 per employee and per accident.
      (2)   If the utility is not providing such insurance to protect the
contractors and subcontractors performing the work, then such contractors and
subcontractors shall comply with this section.
   (B)   Excess or umbrella policies. The coverages required by this section
may be in any combination of primary, excess, and umbrella policies. Any excess
or umbrella policy must provide excess coverage over underlying insurance on a
following-form basis such that when any loss covered by the primary policy
exceeds the limits under the primary policy, the excess or umbrella policy
becomes effective to cover such loss.
   (C)   Copies required. The utility shall provide copies of any of the
policies required by this section to the village within ten days following
receipt of a written request therefor from the village.
   (D)   Maintenance and renewal of required coverages.
      (1)   The insurance policies required by this section shall contain the
following endorsement:
“It is hereby understood and agreed that this policy may not be canceled nor
the intention not to renew be stated until thirty (30) days after receipt by
the Village, by registered mail or certified mail, return receipt requested, of
a written notice addressed to the Village Administrator of such intent to
cancel or not to renew.”
      (2)   Within ten days after receipt by the village of said notice, and in
no event later than ten days prior to said cancellation, the utility shall
obtain and furnish to the village evidence of replacement insurance policies
meeting the requirements of this section.
   (E)   Self-insurance.
      (1)   A utility may self-insure all or a portion of the insurance
coverage and limit requirements required by division (A) above. A utility that
self-insures is not required, to the extent of such self-insurance, to comply
with the requirement for the naming of additional insureds under division (A)
above, or the requirements of divisions (B), (C), and (D) above.
      (2)   A utility that elects to self-insure shall provide to the village
evidence sufficient to demonstrate its financial ability to self-insure the
insurance coverage and limit requirements required under division (A) above,
such as evidence that the utility is a private self-insurer under the Workers’
Compensation Act, being 820 ILCS 305/1 et seq.
   (F)   Effect of insurance and self-insurance on utility’s liability. The
legal liability of the utility to the village and any person for any of the
matters that are the subject of the insurance policies or self-insurance
required by this section shall not be limited by such insurance policies or
self-insurance or by the recovery of any amounts thereunder.
   (G)   Insurance companies. All insurance provided pursuant to this section
shall be effected under valid and enforceable policies, issued by insurers
legally able to conduct business with the licensee in the state. All insurance
carriers and surplus line carriers shall be rated “A-“ or better and of a class
size “X” or higher by A.M. Best Company.
(Prior Code, § 33-4-8)
§ 93.068 INDEMNIFICATION.
   By occupying or constructing facilities in the right-of-way, a utility shall
be deemed to agree to defend, indemnify, and hold the village and its elected
and appointed officials and officers, employees, agents, and representatives
harmless from and against any and all injuries, claims, demands, judgments,
damages, losses, and expenses, including reasonable attorney’s fees and costs
of suit or defense, arising out of, resulting from, or alleged to arise out of
or result from the negligent, careless, or wrongful acts, omissions, failures
to act, or misconduct of the utility or its affiliates, officers, employees,
agents, contractors, or subcontractors in the construction of facilities or
occupancy of the rights-of-way, and in providing or offering service over the
facilities, whether such acts or omissions are authorized, allowed or
prohibited by this subchapter or by a franchise, license, or similar agreement;
provided, however, that the utility’s indemnity obligations hereunder shall not
apply to any injuries, claims, demands, judgments, damages, losses, or expenses
arising out of or resulting from the negligence, misconduct, or breach of this
subchapter by the village, its officials, officers, employees, agents, or
representatives.
(Prior Code, § 33-4-9)
§ 93.069 SECURITY.
   (A)   Purpose. The permittee shall establish a security fund in a form and
in an amount as set forth in this section. The Security Fund shall be
continuously maintained in accordance with this section at the permittee’s sole
cost and expense until the completion of the work authorized under the permit.
The Security Fund shall serve a security for:
      (1)   The faithful performance by the permittee of all the requirements
of this subchapter;
      (2)   Any expenditure, damage, or loss incurred by the village occasioned
by the permittee’s failure to comply with any codes, rules, regulations,
orders, permits, and other directives of the village issued pursuant to this
subchapter; and
      (3)   The payment by permittee of all liens and all damages, claims,
costs, or expenses that the village may pay or incur by reason of any action or
non-performance by permittee in violation of this subchapter including, without
limitation, any damage to public property or restoration work the permittee is
required by this subchapter to perform that the village must perform itself or
have completed as a consequence solely of the permittee’s failure to perform or
complete, and all other payments due the village from the permittee pursuant to
this subchapter or any other applicable law.
   (B)   Form. The permittee shall provide the Security Fund to the village in
the form, at the permittee’s election, of cash, a surety bond in a form
acceptable to the village, or an unconditional letter of credit in a form
acceptable to the village. Any surety bond or letter of credit provided
pursuant to this paragraph shall, at a minimum:
      (1)   Provide that it will not be canceled without prior notice to the
village and the permittee;
      (2)   Not require the consent of the permittee prior to the collection by
the village of any amounts covered by it; and
      (3)   Shall provide a location convenient to the village and within the
state at which it can be drawn.
   (C)   Amount.
      (1)   The dollar amount of the Security Fund shall be sufficient to
provide for the reasonably estimated cost to restore the right-of-way to at
least as good a condition as that existing prior to the construction under the
permit, as determined by the Superintendent, and may also include reasonable,
directly-related costs that the village estimates are likely to be incurred if
the permittee fails to perform such restoration.
      (2)   Where the construction of facilities proposed under the permit will
be performed in phases in multiple locations in the village, with each phase
consisting of construction of facilities in one location or related group of
locations, and where construction in another phase will not be undertaken prior
to substantial completion of restoration in the previous phase or phases, the
Superintendent may, in the exercise of sound discretion, allow the permittee to
post a single-amount of security, which shall be applicable to each phase of
the construction under the permit. The amount of the Security Fund for phased
construction shall be equal to the greatest amount that would have been
required under the provisions of this division (C) for any single phase.
   (D)   Withdrawals. The village, upon 14 days’ advance written notice clearly
stating the reason for, and its intention to exercise withdrawal rights under
this division (D), may withdraw an amount from the Security Fund; provided that
the permittee has not reimbursed the village for such amount within the 14-day
notice period. Withdrawals may be made if the permittee:
      (1)   Fails to make any payment required to be made by the permittee
hereunder;
      (2)   Fails to pay any liens relating to the facilities that are due and
unpaid;
      (3)   Fails to reimburse the village for any damages, claims, costs, or
expenses which the village has been compelled to pay or incur by reason of any
action or non-performance by the permittee; or
      (4)   Fails to comply with any provision of this subchapter that the
village determines can be remedied by an expenditure of an amount in the
Security Fund.
   (E)   Replenishment. Within 14 days after receipt of written notice from the
village that any amount has been withdrawn from the Security Fund, the
permittee shall restore the Security Fund to the amount specified in division
(C) above.
   (F)   Interest. The permittee may request that any and all interest accrued
on the amount in the Security Fund; be returned to the permittee by the
village, upon written request for said withdrawal to the village, provided that
any such withdrawal does not reduce the Security Fund below the minimum balance
required in division (C) above.
   (G)   Closing and return of Security Fund.
      (1)   Upon completion of the work authorized under the permit, the
permittee shall be entitled to the return of the Security Fund, or such portion
thereof as remains on deposit, within a reasonable time after account is taken
for all offsets necessary to compensate the village for failure by the
permittee to comply with any provisions of this subchapter or other applicable
law.
      (2)   In the event of any revocation of the permit, the Security Fund,
and any and all accrued interest therein, shall become the property of the
village to the extent necessary to cover any reasonable costs, loss or damage
incurred by the village as a result of said revocation; provided that any
amounts in excess of said costs, loss, or damage shall be refunded to the
permittee.
   (H)   Rights not limited. The rights reserved to the village with respect to
the Security Fund are in addition to all other rights of the village, whether
reserved by this subchapter or otherwise authorized by law, and no action,
proceeding, or exercise of right with respect to said Security Fund shall
affect any other right the village may have. Notwithstanding the foregoing, the
village shall not be entitled to a double monetary recovery with respect to any
of its rights which may be infringed or otherwise violated.
(Prior Code, § 33-4-10)
§ 93.070 PERMIT SUSPENSION AND REVOCATION.
   (A)   Village right to revoke permit. The village may revoke or suspend a
permit issued pursuant to this subchapter for one or more of the following
reasons:
      (1)   Fraudulent, false, misrepresenting, or materially incomplete
statements in the permit application;
      (2)   Noncompliance with this subchapter;
      (3)   The permittee’s physical presence or presence of permittee’s
facilities on, over, above, along, upon, under, across, or within the rights-
of-way presents a direct or imminent threat to the public health, safety, or
welfare; or
      (4)   The permittee’s failure to construct the facilities substantially
in accordance with the permit and approved plans.
   (B)   Notice of revocation or suspension. The village shall send written
notice of its intent to revoke or suspend a permit issued pursuant to this
subchapter stating the reason or reasons for the revocation or suspension and
the alternatives available to permittee under this section.
   (C)   Permittee alternatives upon receipt of notice of revocation or
suspension.
      (1)   Upon receipt of a written notice of revocation or suspension from
the village, the permittee shall have the following options:
         (a)   Immediately provide the village with evidence that no cause
exists for the revocation or suspension;
         (b)   Immediately correct, to the satisfaction of the village, the
deficiencies stated in the written notice, providing written-proof of such
correction to the village within five working days after receipt of the written
notice of revocation; or
         (c)   Immediately remove the facilities located on, over, above,
along, upon, under, across, or within the rights-of-way and restore the rights-
of-way to the satisfaction of the village providing written-proof of such
removal to the village within ten days after receipt of the written notice of
revocation.
      (2)   The village may, in its discretion, for good cause shown, extend
the time periods provided in this division (C).
   (D)   Stop work order. In addition to the issuance of a notice of revocation
or suspension, the village may issue a stop work order immediately upon
discovery of any of the reasons for revocation set forth within division (A)
above.
   (E)   Failure or refusal of the permittee to comply. If the permittee fails
to comply with the provisions of division (C) above, the village or its
designee may, at the option of the village:
      (1)   Correct the deficiencies;
      (2)   Upon not less than 20 days’ notice to the permittee, remove the
subject facilities or equipment; or
      (3)   After not less than 30 days’ notice to the permittee of failure to
cure the noncompliance, deem them abandoned and property of the village. The
permittee shall be liable in all events to the village for all costs of
removal.
(Prior Code, § 33-4-11)
§ 93.071 CHANGE OF OWNERSHIP, IDENTITY, OR LEGAL STATUS.
   (A)   Notification of change. A utility shall notify the village no less
than 30 days prior to the transfer of ownership of any facility in the right-
of-way or change in identity of the utility. The new owner of the utility or
the facility shall have all the obligations and privileges enjoyed by the
former owner under the permit, if any, and all applicable laws, ordinances,
rules, and regulations, including this subchapter, with respect to the work and
facilities in the rights-of-way.
   (B)   Amended permit. A new owner shall request that any current permit be
amended to show current ownership. If the new owner fails to have a new or
amended permit issued in its name, the new owner shall be presumed to have
accepted, and agreed to be bound by, the terms and conditions of the permit, if
the new owner uses the facility or allows it to remain on the village’s rights-
of-way.
   (C)   Insurance and bonding. All required insurance coverage or bonding must
be changed to reflect the name of the new owner upon transfer.
(Prior Code, § 33-4-12)
§ 93.072 GENERAL CONSTRUCTION STANDARDS.
   (A)   Standards and principles. All construction in the right-of-way shall
be consistent with applicable ordinances, codes, laws, rules, and regulations,
and commonly recognized and accepted traffic control and construction
principles, sound engineering judgment, and, where applicable, the principles
and standards set forth in the following IDOT publications, as amended from
time to time:
      (1)   Standard Specifications for Road and Bridge Construction;
      (2)   Supplemental Specifications and Recurring Special Provisions;
      (3)   Highway Design Manual;
      (4)   Highway Standards Manual;
      (5)   Standard Specifications for Traffic   Control Items;
      (6)   Illinois Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices;
      (7)   Flagger’s Handbook; and
      (8)   Work Site Protection Manual for Daylight Maintenance Operations.
   (B)   Interpretation of municipal standards and principles.
      (1)   If a discrepancy exists between or among differing principles and
standards required by this subchapter, the Superintendent shall determine, in
the exercise of sound engineering judgment, which principles apply and such
decision shall be final.
      (2)   If requested, the Superintendent shall state which standard or
principle will apply to the construction, maintenance, or operation of a
facility in the future.
(Prior Code, § 33-4-13)
§ 93.073 TRAFFIC CONTROL.
   (A)   Minimum requirements. The village’s minimum requirements for traffic
protection are contained in IDOT’s Illinois Manual on Uniform Traffic Control
Devices and this code of ordinances.
   (B)   Warning signs, protective devices, and flaggers. The utility is
responsible for providing and installing warning signs, protective devices, and
flaggers, when necessary, meeting all applicable federal, state, and local
requirements for protection of the public and the utility’s workers when
performing any work on the public rights-of-way.
   (C)   Interference with traffic. All work shall be phased so that there is
minimum interference with pedestrian and vehicular traffic.
   (D)   Notice when access is blocked. At least 48 hours prior to beginning
work that will partially or completely block access to any residence, business,
or institution, the utility shall notify the resident, business or institution
of the approximate beginning time and duration of such work; provided, however,
that in cases involving emergency repairs pursuant to §
93.079, the utility shall provide such notice as is practicable under the
circumstances.
   (E)   Compliance. The utility shall take immediate action to correct any
deficiencies in traffic protection requirements that are brought to the
utility’s attention by the village.
(Prior Code, § 33-4-14)
§ 93.074 LOCATION OF FACILITIES.
   (A)   General requirements. In addition to location requirements applicable
to specific types of utility facilities, all utility facilities, regardless of
type, shall be subject to the general location requirements of this section.
      (1)   No interference with village facilities. No utility facilities
shall be placed in any location if the Superintendent determines that the
proposed location will require the relocation or displacement of any of the
village’s utility facilities or will otherwise interfere with the operation or
maintenance of any of the village’s utility facilities.
      (2)   Minimum interference and impact. The proposed location shall cause
only the minimum possible interference with the use of the right-of-way and
shall cause only the minimum possible impact upon, and interference with the
rights and reasonable convenience of property owners who adjoin said right-of-
way.
      (3)   No interference with travel. No utility facility shall be placed in
any location that interferes with the usual travel on such right-of-way.
      (4)   No limitations on visibility. No utility facility shall be placed
in any location so as to limit visibility of or by users of the right-of-way.
      (5)   Size of utility facilities. The proposed installation shall use the
smallest suitable vaults, boxes, equipment enclosures, power pedestals, and/or
cabinets then in use by the facility owner, regardless of location, for the
particular application.
   (B)   Parallel facilities located within highways.
      (1)   Overhead parallel facilities. An overhead parallel facility may be
located within the right-of-way lines of a highway only if:
         (a)   Lines are located as near as practicable to the right-of-way
line and as nearly parallel to the right-of-way line as reasonable pole
alignment will permit;
         (b)   Where pavement is curbed, poles are as remote as practicable
from the curb with a minimum distance of two feet (0.6 meters) behind the face
of the curb, where available;
         (c)   Where pavement is uncurbed, poles are as remote from pavement
edge as practicable with minimum distance of four feet (1.2 meters) outside the
outer shoulder line of the roadway and are not within the clear zone;
         (d)   No pole is located in the ditch line of a highway; and
         (e)   Any ground-mounted appurtenance is located within one foot (0.3
meters) of the right-of-way line, or as near as possible to the right-of-way
line.
      (2)   Underground parallel facilities. An underground parallel facility
may be located within the right-of-way lines of a highway only if:
         (a)   The facility is located as near the right-of-way line as
practicable and not more than eight feet (2.4 meters) from and parallel to the
right-of-way line;
         (b)   A new facility may be located under the paved portion of a
highway only if other locations are impracticable or inconsistent with sound
engineering judgment (e.g., a new cable may be installed in existing conduit
without disrupting the pavement); and
         (c)   In the case of an underground power or communications line, the
facility shall be located as near the right-of-way line as practicable and not
more than five feet (1.5 meters) from the right-of-way line, and any
abovegrounded appurtenance shall be located within one foot (0.3 meters) of the
right-of-way line or as near as practicable.
   (C)   Facilities crossing highways.
      (1)   No future disruption. The construction and design of crossing
facilities installed between the ditch lines or curb lines of village highways
may require the incorporation of materials and protections (such as encasement
or additional cover) to avoid settlement or future repairs to the roadbed
resulting from the installation of such crossing facilities.
      (2)   Cattle passes, culverts, or drainage facilities. Crossing
facilities shall not be located in cattle passes, culverts, or drainage
facilities.
      (3)   Ninety-degree crossing required. Crossing facilities shall cross at
or as near to a 90-degree angle to the centerline as practicable.
      (4)   Overhead power or communication facility. An overhead power or
communication facility may cross a highway only if:
         (a)   It has a minimum vertical line clearance as required by ICC’s
rules entitled, “Construction of Electric Power and Communication Lines” (83
III. Adm. Code 305);
         (b)   Poles are located within one foot (0.3 meters) of the right-of-
way line of the highway and outside of the clear zone; and
         (c)   Overhead crossings at major intersections are avoided.
      (5)   Underground power or communication facility. An underground power
or communication facility may cross a highway only if:
         (a)   The design materials and construction methods will provide
maximum maintenance-free service life; and
         (b)   Capacity for the utility’s foreseeable future expansion needs is
provided in the initial installation.
      (6)   Markers. The village may require the utility to provide a marker at
each right-of-way line where an underground facility other than a power or
communication facility crosses a highway. Each marker shall identify the type
of facility, the utility, and an emergency phone number. Markers may also be
eliminated as provided in current federal regulations (49 C.F.R. § 192.707).
   (D)   Facilities to be located within particular rights-of-way. The village
may require that facilities be located within particular rights-of-way that are
not highways, rather than within particular highways.
   (E)   Freestanding facilities.
      (1)   Location restricted. The village may restrict the location and size
of any freestanding facility located within a right-of-way.
      (2)   Screening. The village may require any freestanding facility
located within a right-of-way to be screened from view.
   (F)   Facilities installed aboveground. Aboveground facilities may be
installed only if:
      (1)   Individual. No other existing facilities in the area are located
underground;
      (2)   Tactically feasible. New underground installation is not
technically feasible; and
      (3)   Suitable design. The proposed installation will be made at a
location, and will employ suitable design and materials, to provide the
greatest protection of aesthetic qualities of the area being traversed without
adversely affecting safety. Suitable designs include, but are not limited to,
self-supporting, armless, single-pole construction with vertical configuration
of conductors and cable. Existing utility poles and light standards shall be
used wherever practicable; the installation of additional utility poles is
strongly discouraged.
   (G)   Facility attachments to bridges or roadway structures.
      (1)   Installation risk. Facilities may be installed as attachments to
bridges or roadway structures only where the utility has demonstrated that all
other means of accommodating the facility are not practicable. Other means
shall include, but are not limited to, underground, underwater, independent
poles, cable supports, and tower supports, all of which are completely
separated from the bridge or roadway structure. Facilities transmitting
commodities that are volatile, flammable, corrosive, or energized, especially
those under significant pressure or potential, present high degrees of risk,
and such installations are not permitted.
      (2)   Approval or disapproval. A utility shall include in its request to
accommodate a facility installation on a bridge or roadway structure supporting
data demonstrating the impracticability of alternate routing. Approval or
disapproval of an application for facility attachment to a bridge or roadway
structure will be based upon the following considerations:
         (a)   The type, volume, pressure, or voltage of the commodity to be
transmitted and an evaluation of the resulting risk to persons and property in
the event of damage to or failure of the facility;
         (b)   The type, length, value, and relative importance of the highway
structure in the transportation system;
         (c)   The alternative routings available to the utility and their
comparative practicability;
         (d)   The proposed method of attachment;
         (e)   The ability of the structure to bear the increased load of the
proposed facility;
         (f)   The degree of interference with bridge maintenance and painting;
         (g)   The effect on the visual quality of the structure; and
         (h)   The public benefit expected from the utility service as compared
to the risk involved.
   (H)   Appearance standards. The village may prohibit the installation of
facilities in particular locations in order to preserve visual quality. A
facility may be constructed only if its construction does not require extensive
removal or alteration of trees or terrain features visible to the right-of-way
user or to adjacent residents and property owners, and if it does not impair
the aesthetic quality of the lands being traversed.
(Prior Code, § 33-4-15)
§ 93.075 CONSTRUCTION METHODS AND MATERIALS.
   (A)   Standards and requirements for particular types of construction
methods.
      (1)   Boring or jacking.
         (a)   Boring and jacking under rights-of-way shall be accomplished
from pits located at a minimum distance specified by the Superintendent from
the edge of the pavement. Pits for boring or jacking shall be excavated no more
than 48 hours in advance of boring or jacking operations, and back- filled
within 48 hours after boring or jacking operations are completed. While pits
are open, they shall be clearly marked and protected by barricades. Shoring
shall be designed, erected, supported, braced, and maintained so that it will
safely support all vertical and lateral loads that may be imposed upon it
during the boring or jacking operation.
         (b)   Wet boring or jetting shall not be permitted under the roadway.
         (c)   Borings over six inches (0.15 meters) in diameter shall be
accomplished with an auger and following pipe, and the diameter of the auger
shall not exceed the outside diameter of the following pipe by more than one
inch (25 millimeters).
         (d)   Borings of six inches or less in diameter may be accomplished by
either jacking, guided with auger, or auger and following pipe-method.
         (e)   Any facility located within the drip line of any tree designed
by the village to be preserved shall be bored under or around the root system.
      (2)   Trenching. Trenching for facility installation, repair, or
maintenance on rights-of-way shall be done in accord with them applicable
portions of § 603 of IDOT’s Standard Specifications for Road and Bridge
Construction.
         (a)   The length of open trench shall be kept to the practicable
minimum consistent with requirements for pipe-line testing. Only one-half of
any intersection may have an open trench at any time, unless special permission
is obtained from the Superintendent.
         (b)   Open trench and wind rowed excavated material shall be protected
as required by Chapter 6 of the Illinois Manual on Uniform Traffic Control
Devices. Where practicable, the excavated material shall be deposited between
the roadway and the trench as added protection. Excavated material shall not be
allowed to remain on the paved portion of the roadway. Where right-of-way width
does not allow for wind rowing excavated material off the paved portion of the
roadway, excavated material shall be hauled to an off-road location.
         (c)   The utility shall not trench within the drip line of any tree
designated by the village to be preserved.
      (3)   Back-filling.
         (a)   Any pit, trench, or excavation created during the installation
of facilities shall be back- filled for its full width, depth, and length using
methods and materials in accordance with IDOT’s Standard Specifications for
Road and Bridge Construction. When excavated material is hauled away or is
unsuitable for back-fill, suitable granular back-fill shall be used.
         (b)   For a period of three years from the date construction of a
facility is completed, the utility shall be responsible to remove and restore
any back-filled area that has settled due to construction of the facility. If
so ordered by the Superintendent, the utility, at its expense, shall remove any
pavement and back-fill material to the top of the installed facility, place and
properly compact new back-fill material, and restore new pavement, sidewalk,
curbs, and driveways to the proper grades, as determined by the Superintendent.
      (4)   Pavement cuts. Pavement cuts for facility installation or repair
shall be discouraged, but may be permitted only upon location specific approval
by the Superintendent, and only if that portion of the roadway is closed to
traffic.
         (a)   Any excavation under pavements shall be back-filled and
compacted as soon as practicable with granular material of CA-6 or CA-10
gradation, as designated by the Superintendent.
         (b)   Restoration of pavement, in kind, shall be accomplished as soon
as practicable, and temporary repair with bituminous mixture shall be provided
immediately. Any subsequent failure of either the temporary repair or the
restoration shall be rebuilt upon notification by the village.
         (c)   All saw cuts shall be full depth.
         (d)   For all rights-of-way which have been reconstructed with a
concrete surface/base in the last seven years, or resurfaced in the last three
years, permits shall not be issued unless such work is determined to be an
emergency repair or other work considered necessary and unforeseen before the
time of the reconstruction or unless a pavement cut is necessary for a Common
Ground Alliance locate.
      (5)   Encasement.
         (a)   Casing pipe shall be designed to withstand the load of the
highway and any other superimposed loads. The casing shall be continuous either
by one-piece fabrication or by welding or jointed installation approved by the
village.
         (b)   The venting, if any, of any encasement shall extend within one
foot (0.3 meters) of the right-of-way line. No aboveground vent pipes shall be
located in the area established as clear zone for that particular section of
the highway.
         (c)   In the case of water main or service crossing, encasement shall
be furnished between bore pits unless continuous pipe or village approved
jointed pipe is used under the roadway. Casing may be omitted only if pipe is
installed prior to highway construction and carrier pipe is continuous or
mechanical joints are of a type approved by the village. Bell and spigot type
pipe shall be encased regardless of installation method.
         (d)   In the case of gas pipelines of 60 psig or less, encasement may
be eliminated.
         (e)   In the case of gas pipelines or petroleum products pipelines
with installations of more than 60 psig, encasement may be eliminated only if:
            1.   Extra heavy pipe is used that precludes future maintenance or
repair; and
            2.   Cathodic protection of the pipe is provided.
         (f)   If encasement is eliminated for a gas or petroleum products
pipeline, the facility shall be located so as to provide that construction does
not disrupt the right-of-way.
      (6)   Minimum cover of underground facilities. Cover shall be provided
and maintained at least in the amount specified in the following table for
minimum cover for the type of facility:
 
Type of Facility                         Minimum Cover
Communication, cable, or video service   8 to 24 inches (0.6 meters) (as
lines                                    determined by the village)
Electric lines                           30 inches (0.8 meters)
Gas or petroleum products                30 inches (0.8 meters)
Sanitary sewer, storm sewer, or drainage Sufficient cover to provide freeze
line                                     protection
Water line                               Sufficient cover to provide freeze
                                         protection
 
   (B)   Standards and requirements for particular types of facilities.
      (1)   Electric power or communication lines.
         (a)   Electric power or communications facilities within village
rights-of-way shall be constructed, operated, and maintained in conformity with
the provisions of 83 III. Adm. Code 305 (formerly General Order 160 of the
State Commerce Commission), entitled “Rules for Construction of Electric Power
and Communications Lines,” and the National Electrical Safety Code.
         (b)   Overhead power or communication facilities shall use single pole
construction and, where practicable, joint use of poles shall be used.
Utilities shall make every reasonable effort to design the installation so guys
and braces will not be needed. Variances may be allowed if there is no feasible
alternative and if guy wires are equipped with guy guards for maximum
visibility.
         (c)   For underground facilities, cable may be installed by trenching
or plowing; provided that special consideration is given to boring in order to
minimize damage when crossing improved entrances and side roads.
            1.   If a crossing is installed by boring or jacking, encasement
shall be provided between jacking or bore pits. Encasement may be eliminated
only if:
               a.   The crossing is installed by the use of moles, whip augers,
or other approved method which compress the earth to make the opening for cable
installation; or
               b.   The installation is by the open trench-method which is only
permitted prior to roadway construction.
            2.   Cable shall be grounded in accordance with the National
Electrical Safety Code.
            3.   All temporary service drops placed between November 1 of the
prior year and March 15 of the current year, also known as snowdrops, shall be
buried by May 31 of the current year, weather permitting, unless otherwise
permitted by the village. Weather permitting, utilities shall bury all
temporary drops, excluding snowdrops, within ten business days after placement.
      (2)   Underground facilities other than electric power or communication
lines. Underground facilities other than electric power or communication lines
may be installed by:
         (a)   The use of moles, whip augers, or other approved methods which
compress the earth to move the opening for the pipe;
         (b)   Jacking or boring with vented encasement provided between the
ditch lines or toes of slopes of the highway;
         (c)   Open trench with vented encasement between ultimate ditch lines
or toes of slopes, but only if prior to roadway construction; or
         (d)   Tunneling with vented encasement, but only if installation is
not possible by other means.
      (3)   Gas transmission, distribution, and service. Gas pipelines within
the rights-of-way shall be constructed, maintained, and operated in a village
approved manner and in conformance with the Federal Code of the Office of
Pipeline Safety Operations, Department of Transportation, Part 192 -
Transportation of Natural and Other Gas by Pipeline: Minimum Federal Safety
Standards (49 C.F.R. pt. 192), IDOT’s Standard Specifications for Road and
Bridge Construction, and all other applicable laws, rules, and regulations.
      (4)   Petroleum products pipelines. Petroleum products pipelines within
rights-of-way shall conform to the applicable sections of ANSI Standard Code
for Pressure Piping (Liquid Petroleum Transportation Piping Systems ANSI-
B 31.4).
      (5)   Waterlines, sanitary sewer lines, storm water sewer lines, or
drainage lines. Water lines, sanitary sewer lines, storm sewer lines, and
drainage lines within rights-of-way shall meet or exceed the recommendations of
the current Standard Specifications for Water and Sewer Main Construction in
Illinois.
      (6)   Ground-mounted appurtenances. Ground-mounted appurtenances to
overhead or underground facilities, when permitted within a right-of-way, shall
be provided with a vegetation-free area extending one foot (305 milimeters) in
width beyond the appurtenance in all directions. The vegetation-free area may
be provided by an extension of the mounting pad, or by heavy-duty plastic or
similar material approved by the Superintendent; shrubbery surrounding the
appurtenance may be used in place of vegetation-free area. The housing for
ground-mounted appurtenances shall be painted a neutral color to blend with the
surroundings.
   (C)   Materials.
      (1)   General standards. The materials used in constructing facilities
within rights-of-way shall be those meeting the accepted standards of the
appropriate industry, the applicable portions of IDOT’s Standard Specifications
for Road and Bridge Construction, the requirements of the State Commerce
Commission, or the standards established by other official regulatory agencies
for the appropriate industry.
      (2)   Material storage on right-of-way. No material shall be stored on
the rights-of-way without the prior written approval of the Superintendent.
When such storage is permitted, all pipe, conduit, wire, poles, cross arms, or
other materials shall be distributed along the rights-of-way prior to and
during installation in a manner to minimize hazards to the public, an obstacle
to rights-of-way maintenance, or damage to the right-of-way and other property.
If material is to be stored on rights-of-way, prior approval must be obtained
from the village.
      (3)   Hazardous materials. The plans submitted by the utility to the
village shall identify any hazardous materials that may be involved in the
construction of the new facilities or removal of any existing facilities.
   (D)   Operational restrictions. Construction operations on rights-of-way
may, at the discretion of the village, be required to be discontinued when such
operations would create hazards to traffic or the public health, safety, and
welfare. Such operations may also be required to be discontinued or restricted
when conditions are such that construction would result in extensive damage to
the right-of-way or other property. These restrictions may be waived by the
Superintendent when emergency work is required to restore vital utility
services. Unless otherwise permitted by the village, the hours of construction
are from 6:00 a.m. to 6:00 p.m.
   (E)   Location of existing facilities.
      (1)   Any utility proposing to construct facilities in the village shall
contact Common Ground Alliance and ascertain the presence and location of
existing aboveground and underground facilities within the rights-of-way to be
occupied by its proposed facilities.
      (2)   The village will make its permit record available to a utility for
the purpose of identifying possible facilities. When notified of an excavation
or when requested by the village or by Common Ground Alliance, a utility shall
locate and physically mark its underground facilities within 48 hours,
excluding weekends and holidays, in accordance with the State Underground
Facilities Damage Prevention Act (220 ILCS 50/1 et seq.).
(Prior Code, § 33-4-16) Penalty, see §
10.999
§ 93.076 VEGETATION CONTROL.
   (A)   Electric utilities; compliance with state laws and regulations. An
electric utility shall conduct all tree-trimming and vegetation control
activities in the right-of-way in accordance with applicable state laws and
regulations, and, additionally, with such local franchise or other agreement
with the village as permitted by law.
   (B)   Other utilities; tree trimming permit required. Tree trimming that is
done by any other utility with facilities in the right-of-way and that is not
performed pursuant to applicable state laws and regulations specifically
governing the same shall not be considered a normal maintenance operation, but
shall require the application for, and the issuance of, a permit, in addition
to any other permit required under this subchapter.
      (1)   Application for tree trimming permit. Applications for tree
trimming permits shall include assurance that the work will be accomplished by
competent workers, with supervision, who are experienced in accepted tree
pruning practices. Tree trimming permits shall designate an expiration date in
the interest of assuring that the work will be expeditiously accomplished.
      (2)   Damage to trees. Poor pruning practices resulting in damaged or
misshapen trees will not be tolerated, and shall be grounds for cancellation of
the tree trimming permit and for assessment of damages. The village will
require compensation for trees extensively damaged and for trees removed
without authorization. The formula developed by the International Society of
Arboriculture will be used as a basis for determining the compensation for
damaged trees or unauthorized removal of trees. The village may require the
removal and replacement of trees if trimming or radical pruning would leave
them in an unacceptable condition.
   (C)   Specimen trees or trees of special significance. The village may
require that special measures be taken to preserve specimen trees or trees of
special significance. The required measures may consist of higher poles, side-
arm extensions, covered wire, or other means.
   (D)   Chemical use. Except as provided in §
93.077, no utility shall spray, inject, or pour any chemicals on or near any
trees, shrubs, or vegetation in the village for any purpose, including the
control of growth, insects, or disease. Spraying of any type of brush-killing
chemicals will not be permitted on rights-of-way, unless the utility
demonstrates, to the satisfaction of the Superintendent that such spraying is
the only practicable method of vegetation control.
(Prior Code, § 33-4-17) Penalty, see §
10.999
§ 93.077 REMOVAL, RELOCATION, OR MODIFICATION OF UTILITY FACILITIES.
   (A)   Notice. Within 90 days following written notice from the village, a
utility shall, at its own expense, protect, support, temporarily or permanently
disconnect, remove, relocate, change, or alter the position of any utility
facilities within the rights-of-way whenever the corporate authorities have
determined that such removal, relocation, change, or alteration is reasonably
necessary for the construction, repair, maintenance, or installation of any
village improvement in or upon, or the operations of the village in or upon,
the rights-of-way.
   (B)   Removal of unauthorized facilities. Within 30 days following written
notice from the village, any utility that owns, controls, or maintains any
unauthorized facility or related appurtenances within the rights-of-way shall,
at its own expense, remove all or any part of such facilities or appurtenances
from the rights-of-way. A facility is unauthorized and subject to removal in
the following circumstances:
      (1)   Upon expiration or termination of the permittee’s license or
franchise, unless otherwise permitted by applicable law;
      (2)   If the facility was constructed or installed without the prior
grant of a license or franchise, if required;
      (3)   If the facility was constructed or installed without prior issuance
of a required permit in violation of this subchapter; or
      (4)   If the facility was constructed or installed at a location not
permitted by the permittee’s license or franchise.
   (C)   Emergency removal or relocation of facilities. The village retains the
right and privilege to cut or move any facilities located within the rights-of-
way of the village, as the village may determine to be necessary, appropriate,
or useful in response to any public health or safety emergency. If
circumstances permit, the municipality shall attempt to notify the utility, if
known, prior to cutting or removing a facility, and shall notify the utility,
if known, after cutting or removing a facility.
   (D)   Abandonment of facilities.
      (1)   Upon abandonment of a facility within the rights-of-way of the
village, the utility shall notify the village within 90 days.
      (2)   Following receipt of such notice, the village may direct the
utility to remove all or any portion of the facility, if the Superintendent
determines that such removal will be in the best interest of the public health,
safety, and welfare.
      (3)   In the event that the village does not direct the utility that
abandoned the facility to remove it by giving notice of abandonment to the
village, the abandoning utility shall be deemed to consent to the alteration or
removal of all or any portion of the facility by another utility or person.
(Prior Code, § 33-4-18)
§ 93.078 CLEANUP AND RESTORATION.
   The utility shall remove all excess material and restore all turf and
terrain and other property within ten days after any portion of the rights-of-
way are disturbed, damaged, or destroyed due to construction or maintenance by
the utility, all to the satisfaction of the village. This includes restoration
of entrances and side roads. Restoration of roadway surfaces shall be made
using materials and methods approved by the Superintendent. Such cleanup and
repair may be required to consist of back-filling, regrading, reseeding,
resodding, or any other requirement to restore the right-of-way to a condition
substantially equivalent to that which existed prior to the commencement of the
project. The time period provided in this section may be extended by the
Superintendent for good cause shown.
(Prior Code, § 33-4-19)
§ 93.079 MAINTENANCE AND EMERGENCY MAINTENANCE.
   (A)   General. Facilities on, over, above, along, upon, under, across, or
within rights-of-way are to be maintained by or for the utility in a manner
satisfactory to the village and at the utility’s expense.
   (B)   Emergency maintenance procedures. Emergencies may justify
noncompliance with normal procedures for securing a permit:
      (1)   If an emergency creates a hazard on the traveled portion of the
right-of-way, the utility shall take immediate steps to provide all necessary
protection for traffic on the highway or the public on the right-of-way
including the use of signs, lights, barricades, or flags. If a hazard does not
exist on the traveled way, but the nature of the emergency is such as to
require the parking on the shoulder of equipment required in repair operations,
adequate signs and lights shall be provided. Parking on the shoulder in such an
emergency will only be permitted when no other means of access to the facility
are available.
      (2)   In an emergency, the utility shall, as soon as possible, notify the
Superintendent or his or her duly authorized agent of the emergency, informing
him or her as to what steps have been taken for protection of the traveling
public and what will be required to make the necessary repairs. If the nature
of the emergency is such as to interfere with the free movement of traffic, the
village police shall be notified immediately.
      (3)   In an emergency, the utility shall use all means at hand to
complete repairs as rapidly as practicable and with the least inconvenience to
the traveling public.
   (C)   Emergency repairs. The utility must file, in writing, with the village
a description of the repairs undertaken in the right-of-way within 48 hours
after an emergency repair.
(Prior Code, § 33-4-20)
§ 93.080 VARIANCES.
   (A)   Request for variance. A utility requesting a variance from one or more
of the provisions of this subchapter must do so in writing to the
Superintendent as a part of the permit application. The request shall identify
each provision of this subchapter from which a variance is requested and the
reasons why a variance should be granted.
   (B)   Authority to grant variances. The Superintendent shall decide whether
a variance is authorized for each provision of this subchapter identified in
the variance request on an individual basis.
   (C)   Conditions for granting of variance. The Superintendent may authorize
a variance only if the utility requesting the variance has demonstrated that:
      (1)   One or more conditions not under the control of the utility (such
as terrain features or an irregular right-of-way line) create a special
hardship that would make enforcement of the provision unreasonable, given the
public purposes to be achieved by the provision; and
      (2)   All other designs, methods, materials, locations, or facilities
that would conform with the provision from which a variance is requested are
impracticable in relation to the requested approach.
   (D)   Additional conditions for granting of a variance. As a condition for
authorizing a variance, the Superintendent may require the utility requesting
the variance to meet reasonable standards and conditions that may or may not be
expressly contained within this subchapter, but which carry out the purposes of
this subchapter.
   (E)   Right to appeal.
      (1)   Any utility aggrieved by any order, requirement, decision, or
determination, including denial of a variance, made by the Superintendent under
the provisions of this subchapter shall have the right to appeal to the Board
of Trustees, or such other board or commission as it may designate. The
application for appeal shall be submitted, in writing, to the Village Clerk
within 30 days after the date of such order, requirement, decision, or
determination.
      (2)   The Board of Trustees shall commence its consideration of the
appeal at the Board of Trustees’ next regularly scheduled meeting occurring at
least seven days after the filing of the appeal. The Board of Trustees shall
timely decide the appeal.
(Prior Code, § 33-4-21)
§ 93.081 VIOLATIONS AND ENFORCEMENT.
   (A)   (1)   Any person who violates, disobeys, omits, neglects, or refuses
to comply with any of the provisions of this subchapter shall be subject to a
fine in accordance with the penalty provisions of this code of ordinances.
There may be times when the village will incur delay or other costs, including
third party claims, because the utility will not or cannot perform its duties
under its permit and this subchapter.
      (2)   Unless the utility shows that another allocation of the cost of
undertaking the requested action is appropriate, the utility shall bear the
village’s costs of damages and its costs of installing, maintaining, modifying,
relocating, or removing the facility that is the subject of the permit.
      (3)   No other administrative agency or commission may review or overrule
a permit related cost apportionment of the village. Sanctions may be imposed
upon a utility that does not pay the costs apportioned to it. See §
10.999 for additional penalties.
(Prior Code, § 33-4-22)
   (B)   Nothing in this subchapter shall be construed as limiting any
additional or further remedies that the village may have for enforcement of
this subchapter.
(Prior Code, § 33-4-23) Penalty, see §
10.999
STREET IMPROVEMENTS
§ 93.095 SIDEWALKS.
   (A)   Grade. No sidewalk shall be built above or below the established grade
of the village, and in all cases where no grade is established, any person
building a sidewalk shall build the same according to the instructions of the
Street Superintendent and the Board of Trustees.
   (B)   Permit.   It shall be unlawful for any person to build, lay, or
construct any sidewalk along any property in the village or along any of the
streets, alleys, or public highways thereon without first filing an application
for a permit with the Village Clerk and approved by the Board of Trustees.
   (C)   Cost to owner. If the funds are available and the Board of Trustees
approves the request, the property owner shall pay the cost of the concrete,
and thereafter, the sidewalk shall be constructed by the village. After
construction, the sidewalk shall be maintained by the village.
   (D)   Subdivisions. This section is not applicable to new subdivisions.
(Prior Code, § 33-5-1)
Statutory reference:
   Related provisions, see 65 ILCS 5/11-80-13
§ 93.096 CURBS AND GUTTERS.
   (A)   Request in writing. Any person owning property within the village who
desires to have new curbs and gutters constructed along the street adjoining
his or her premises shall file a request with the Street Superintendent, giving
the location of the property and the length of the curbs and gutters requested.
   (B)   Cost to owner. If the funds are available and the Board of Trustees
approves the request, the property owner shall pay one-half of the cost of the
construction, including engineering fees, and thereafter, the curb and gutter
shall be maintained by the village.
   (C)   Approval by Board of Trustees. The approval of the request for
construction of curbs and gutters by the Board of Trustees shall be dependent
upon the approval of funds, priority of projects, and continuity of
construction for the best benefit of the village as determined by the Board of
Trustees.
   (D)   Subdivisions. This section is not applicable to new subdivisions.
(Prior Code, § 33-5-2)
Statutory reference:
   Related provisions, see 65 ILCS 5/11-80-13
§ 93.097 STORM SEWERS.
   (A)   Description of storm water sewers. Storm water sewers shall be any
pipe or sewer used for the carrying of surface drains, ground water, roof
leaders, or storm waters, rain waters, or other waters other than sanitary
sewage.
   (B)   Supervision. The Superintendent of the Water and Sewer Departments
shall supervise all connections made to the public storm sewer system or
excavations for the purposes of installing or repairing the same.
   (C)   Permits. Before any connection is made to the public storm water
sewers, a permit shall be applied for and approved by the Superintendent or his
or her designated representative.
   (D)   Requirements; use of storm water sewers.
      (1)   Where a storm water sewer is accessible in a street, alley, or
easement to a building or premises abutting thereon, the surface drains, ground
waters, roof leaders, or storm waters shall be discharged into the storm water
sewer unless otherwise authorized by the village.
      (2)   Under no conditions shall sanitary sewage or wastes or any
substance other than surface waters, ground waters, roof waters, or storm
waters be permitted to flow into or be connected to the storm water sewer; and
no sanitary sewer shall be connected to the storm water sewer system.
(Prior Code, § 33-5-3)
CULVERTS
§ 93.110 OBSTRUCTION OF DRAIN OR STORM SEWER.
   It shall be unlawful to obstruct any drain or storm sewer in any public
street or property.
(Prior Code, § 33-6-1) Penalty, see §
10.999
§ 93.111 PERMIT; APPLICATION AND TERMINATION.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful to install any culvert or replace any culvert
without first obtaining a permit from the Village Clerk.
(Prior Code, § 33-6-2)
   (B)   Any person desiring a permit to install or replace any culvert shall
file an application therefor with the Village Clerk upon a form to be provided
for that purpose. The application and the permit issued pursuant thereto shall
be on the same form which shall be substantially as outlined in
Appendix B of this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 33-6-3)
   (C)   All such permits shall terminate upon the expiration of one year
following the date of issue.
(Prior Code, § 33-6-4)
§ 93.112 TYPE OF CULVERT.
   Culverts shall be installed where driveways or walkways cross open ditches.
The material used for the construction of the culverts shall be reinforced
concrete, corrugated steel culvert pipe with a minimum wall thickness of 16-
gauge, corrugated aluminum alloy culvert pipe with a minimum wall thickness of
16-gauge, double-walled plastic culvert, or of such other material as
determined by the Street Department, depending upon the conditions existing.
The culverts shall be of such size, installed at the grade, and constructed
with couplings as determined by the Street Superintendent. The person desiring
the culvert shall purchase a culvert as provided herein and shall have it
delivered on the site. The village shall install the culvert.
(Prior Code, § 33-6-5)
§ 93.113 COSTS AND FEES.
   (A)   Any person installing or replacing a culvert shall pay a $25
installation fee to the village.
(Prior Code, § 33-6-6)
   (B)   (1)   Any person installing or replacing a culvert(s) shall pay the
actual cost of the backfill material provided by the village.
      (2)   A SECTION of culvert, for purposes of this section, shall be
defined as any culvert up to 20 feet in length.
(Prior Code, § 33-6-7)
   (C)   (1)   The expense of replacing any culvert shall be borne by the
person making application for the permit to install the same.
      (2)   The applicant shall be given credit for the back-fill cost of $50.
(Prior Code, § 33-6-8)
(Ord. 2016-04, passed 2-1-2016; Ord. 2024-17, passed 11-20-2024)
DRIVEWAYS
§ 93.125 PERMIT REQUIRED; FEE.
   (A)   (1)    No person shall construct a driveway for vehicles or animals
across any sidewalk in the village without having first obtained a permit
therefor.
      (2)   Applications for such permits shall be made to the Village Clerk
and shall be accompanied by the fee required.
      (3)   No permit for construction of a driveway for commercial use, or for
the habitual use of other than the owner or occupant of the premises served
shall be issued except upon the order of the Village Clerk.
(Prior Code, § 33-7-1)
   (B)   The fee for all such construction permit shall be $25.
(Prior Code, § 33-7-2)
§ 93.126 GRADE SURFACE.
   (A)   No driveway shall be so constructed or graded as to leave a step,
sharp depression, or other obstruction in the sidewalk. The grade shall be as
nearly as possible the same as that of the adjoining sidewalk.
   (B)   It shall be unlawful to have the surface finish of any driveway where
the same crosses the sidewalk constructed of such materials as to render it
slippery and hazardous to pedestrians, or to have the grade of such portion
vary from the grade of the sidewalk or be other than level.
(Prior Code, § 33-7-3) Penalty, see §
10.999
§ 93.127 SPECIFICATIONS.
   Driveways across sidewalks shall be constructed in compliance with the
specifications required by the Street Superintendent.
(Prior Code, § 33-7-4)
§ 93.128 PERMIT FOR BREAKING CURB.
   Before a permit can be issued to break a curb in the village for the
installation of a driveway or any other purpose, cash deposit in the amount of
$100 is required to be posted with the Village Clerk. The deposit will be
returned to the applicant after the Village Superintendent inspects and
approves the installation.
(Prior Code, § 33-7-5)
§ 93.129 REPAIR.
    It shall be the duty of the person maintaining the driveway to keep the
same in good repair where it crosses the sidewalk and free from obstruction and
openings.
(Prior Code, § 33-7-6)
SNOW REMOVAL
§ 93.140 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires another meaning.
   BUSINESS DAY. Any day not a Sunday or a national holiday.
   BUSINESS DISTRICT. Includes all those areas zoned for business, commercial,
and industrial purposes in the Zoning Code and accompanying map, as amended, or
other applicable regulations.
   BUSINESS HOURS. The hours between 8:00 a.m. and 5:00 p.m. on any business
day.
   ROADWAY. The portion of a street or highway improved, designed, or
ordinarily used for vehicular travel, exclusive of the berm or shoulder.
   SIDEWALK. The portion of a street between the curb lines or the lateral
lines of a roadway and the adjacent property lines intended for the use of
pedestrians.
   STREET or HIGHWAY. The entire width between the boundary lines of every way
publicly maintained when any part thereof is open to the use of the public for
purposes of vehicular travel.
(Prior Code, § 33-8-1)
§ 93.141 SNOW AND ICE TO BE REMOVED BY PRIVATE PERSONS.
   (A)   Every person in charge or control of any building or lot of land
within the village fronting or abutting on a paved sidewalk, whether as owner,
tenant, occupant, lessee, or otherwise, shall remove and clear away, or cause
to be removed and cleared away, snow and ice from a path from so much of a
sidewalk as is in front or abuts on said building or lot of land. Snow and ice
shall be so removed from sidewalks in all business districts within the village
by 24 hours after cessation of any fall of snow, sleet, or freezing rain. The
path required to be cleared in the Business District shall be six feet in
width, or the whole width of the sidewalk, whichever is smaller.
   (B)   However, in the event snow and ice on a sidewalk has become so hard
that it cannot be removed without likelihood of damage to the sidewalk, the
person charged with its removal shall, within the time mentioned in division
(A) above, cause enough sand, cinders, or other abrasive to be put on the
sidewalk to make travel thereon reasonably safe; and shall then, as soon
thereafter as weather permits, cause a path on said sidewalk of at least six
feet in width to be thoroughly cleaned.
(Prior Code, § 33-8-2)
Penalty, see §
10.999
§ 93.142 DEPOSITING OF SNOW AND ICE RESTRICTED.
   No person shall deposit or cause to be deposited any snow and ice on or
against a fire hydrant or on any sidewalk, roadway, or loading or unloading
areas of a public transportation system, except that snow and ice may be
windrowed on curbs incident to the cleaning of sidewalks in business districts.
(Prior Code, § 33-8-3) Penalty, see §
10.999
§ 93.143 MAYOR’S AUTHORITY.
   The Mayor is hereby authorized on behalf of the village to cause sidewalks
to be cleared upon the request of the person or entity charged with snow and
ice removal. Any person or entity whose sidewalk is cleared pursuant to this
section shall reimburse the village for the costs of such clearing.
(Prior Code, § 33-8-4)
APPENDIX A: EXCAVATION PERMIT
VILLAGE OF MARISSA
212 N Main St
Marissa, IL 62257
EXCAVATION PERMIT
NAME____________________________________________________________________________
FIRM NAME
______________________________________________________________________
ADDRESS _______________________________________________________________________
CITY/VILLAGE ___________________________   STATE ________   PHONE______________
LOCATION OF PROPOSED EXCAVATION ____________________________________________
__________________________________________________________________________________
__________________________________________________________________________________
NATURE OF EXCAVATION _________________________________________________________
__________________________________________________________________________________
__________________________________________________________________________________
BONDING COMPANY:
NAME____________________________________________________________________________
ADDRESS_________________________________________________________________________
CITY/VILLAGE ___________________________   STATE ________   PHONE______________
AMOUNT OF BOND $ ______________________________________________________________
PREVIOUS EXPERIENCE (LIST CITIES AND/OR VILLAGES)
      CITY/VILLAGE                     CITY/VILLAGE OFFICIAL
1.   ____________________________      ______________________________________________
2.   ____________________________      ______________________________________________
3.   ____________________________      ______________________________________________
4.   ____________________________      ______________________________________________
   I have read the municipal law with regard to excavations and my firm or
company intends to fully comply with the Street Regulations Code provisions.
                                    ________________________________________
                                       (Applicants Signature)
(Prior Code, Ch. 33, Ch. 25)
APPENDIX B: APPLICATION FOR CULVERT/DRIVEWAY PERMIT
VILLAGE OF MARISSA
212 N Main St
Marissa, IL 62257
APPLICATION FOR CULVERT/DRIVEWAY PERMIT
   I, _______________________________________, do hereby request permission and
authority to construct a culvert/driveway on the right-of-way of the Village in
accordance with the information provided on this application and the
accompanying sketch. (Applicant must prepare a sketch showing location, length
and pertinent details.)
ADDRESS:
________________________________________________________________________
Pipe material will be:
_________________________________________________________________
Wall thickness or gauge will be:
________________________________________________________
Type of joint will be:
_________________________________________________________________
DATED: _____________________, 20_______      SIGNED:
______________________________
                                                   (APPLICANT)
CULVERT/DRIVEWAY PERMIT
APPLICATION            Approved ( )               Disapproved ( )
If disapproved, state reasons:
__________________________________________________________________________________
__________________________________________________________________________________
__________________________________________________________________________________
DATED: _____________________, 20_______      SIGNED:
______________________________
CERTIFICATION
   The undersigned has inspected the construction and installation set forth
above and finds that the same (is) (is not) in accordance with the permit.
DATED: _____________________, 20_______      SIGNED:
______________________________
(Prior Code, Ch. 33, Ch. 25)
CHAPTER 94: FAIR HOUSING
Section
   
94.001   Declaration of policy
   
94.002   Definitions
   
94.003   Prohibited acts
 
   
94.999   Penalty
§ 94.001 DECLARATION OF POLICY.
   (A)   In furthering the policy of the state as expressed in its constitution
and other laws; in order that the safety and general welfare, peace, and health
of all the inhabitants of the village may be ensured, it is hereby declared the
policy of the village to assure equal opportunity to all residents, regardless
of race, color, religion, national origin, or ancestry, sex, creed, or physical
disability to live in decent, sanitary, healthful, standard living quarters.
   (B)   It is the policy of the village that no owner, lessee, sub-lessee,
assignee, managing agent, or other person, firm, or corporation having the
right to sell, rent, lease, or otherwise control any housing accommodation and/
or real property within the village, or any agent of these shall refuse to
sell, rent, lease, or otherwise deny to or withhold from any person or group of
persons such housing accommodations and/or real property because of race,
color, religion, national origin, or ancestry, sex, creed, or disability of
such person or persons or discriminate against any person or persons because of
race, color, religion, national origin or ancestry, sex, creed, or disability
in the conditions, terms, privileges of the sale, rental, or lease of any
housing accommodation and/or real property or in the furnishing of facilities
and/or services in connection therewith.
   (C)   Relocation shall be carried out in a manner that, will promote maximum
choice within the community’s total housing supply; lessen racial, ethnic, and
economic concentrations; and facilitate desegregation and racially inclusive
patterns of occupancy and use of public and private facilities.
(Prior Code, § 22-6-1)
§ 94.002 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   DECENT, SANITARY, HEALTHFUL STANDARD LIVING QUARTERS. Housing which is in
sound, clean, and weather-tight condition in conformance with applicable local,
state, and national codes.
   DISCRIMINATE or DISCRIMINATION. Any difference expressed in any way toward a
person or persons in the terms of the sale, exchange, lease, rental, or
financing for housing accommodation and/or real property in regard to such
sale, exchange, rental, lease, or finance because of race, color, religion,
national origin, ancestry, sex, creed, or disability of such person.
   FINANCIAL INSTITUTION. Any person, institution, or business entity of any
kind which loans money to persons and receives as security for said loans a
secured interest of any kind in the real property of the borrower.
   HOUSING ACCOMMODATION. Any building, structure, or portion thereof which is
used or occupied, maintained, arranged, or designed to be used or occupied as a
home, residence, or sleeping place of one or more human beings, or any real
estate so used, designed, or intended for such use.
   OWNER. Any person/persons who hold legal or equitable title to, or own any
beneficial interest in, any real property or who hold legal or equitable title
to shares of, or hold any beneficial interest in any real estate cooperative
which owns any real property and/or housing accommodations.
   REAL ESTATE BROKER. Any person, partnership, association, corporation, and/
or agent thereof, who for a fee or other valuable consideration offers, sells,
purchases, exchanges, or rents or negotiates for the sale, purchase, exchange,
or rental of a housing accommodation and/or real property of another, or
collects rental for the use of housing accommodation and/or real property of
another.
   REAL PROPERTY. Any real estate, vacant land, building, structure, or housing
accommodations within the corporate limits of the village.
(Prior Code, § 22-6-2)
§ 94.003 PROHIBITED ACTS.
   (A)   It shall be an unlawful for any owner of real estate, lessee, sub-
lessee, real estate broker, or salesperson, financial institution, or employee
of the financial institution, advertiser, or agent of any or all of the
foregoing, to discriminate against any person or persons because of their race,
color, religion, national origin or ancestry, sex, creed, or disability with
regard to the sale, exchange, or rental, or any dealing concerning any housing
accommodation and/or real property.
   (B)   In addition to the foregoing, it shall also be unlawful for any real
estate broker or employee thereof, owner or other person, or financial
institution dealing with housing or real property of the village:
      (1)   To discriminate against any person in the availability of or the
price, terms, conditions, or privileges of any kind relating to the sale,
rental, lease, or occupancy of any housing accommodation or real property in
the village or in furnishing of any facilities or services in connection
therewith;
      (2)   To publish or circulate or cause to be published or circulated any
notice, statement, or advertisement, or to announce a policy, or to use any
form of application, for the purchase, lease, rental, or financing of real
property, or to make any record of inquiry in connection with the prospective
purchase, rental, or lease of such real estate, which expresses directly or
indirectly any discrimination as to race, color, religion, national origin, or
ancestry, sex, creed, or disability of any person;
      (3)   To discriminate in connection with lending money, guaranteeing
loans, accepting mortgages, or otherwise obtaining or making available funds
for the purchase, acquisition, construction, rehabilitation, repair, or
maintenance of any housing accommodation and/or real property;
      (4)   To solicit for sale, lease, or listing for the sale or lease of any
housing accommodation and/or real property on the grounds of loss of value
because of the present or prospective entry into any neighborhood of any person
or persons of any particular race, color, religion, national origin, ancestry,
sex, creed, or disability;
      (5)   To distribute or cause to be distributed written material or
statements designed to induce any owner of any housing accommodation and/or
real property to sell or lease his or her property because of any present or
prospective change in the race, color, religion, national origin, ancestry,
sex, creed, or disability of persons in the neighborhood;
      (6)   To make any misrepresentations concerning the listing for sale or
the anticipated listing for sale or the sale of any housing accommodation and/
or real property for the purpose of inducing or attempting to induce the sale
or listing for sale of any housing accommodation and/or real property by
representing that the presence or anticipated presence of persons of any
particular race, color, religion, national origin, ancestry, sex, creed, or
disability in the area will or may result in the lowering of property values in
the block, neighborhood, or area in which the property is located;
      (7)   For an owner to solicit any real estate broker to sell, rent, or
otherwise deal with such owner’s housing accommodations and/or real property
with any limitation on its sale based on race, color, religion, national
origin, ancestry, sex, creed, or disability; or
      (8)   For an owner to refuse to sell, rent, or otherwise deal with any
housing accommodation and/or real property because of race, color, religion,
national origin, or ancestry, sex, creed, or disability of the proposed buyer
or tenant.
(Prior Code, § 22-6-3) Penalty, see §
94.999
§ 94.999 PENALTY.
   Any person convicted of violating any of the provisions of this chapter
shall be punished by a fine of not less than $100, nor more than $750. Each day
a violation continues shall constitute a separate violation. This section shall
in no way abrogate or impair the right of the village to specifically enforce,
by any legal means, any of the provisions of this policy.
(Prior Code, § 22-6-4)
TITLE XI: BUSINESS REGULATIONS
   Chapter
      
110.   GENERAL LICENSING PROVISIONS
      
111.   PEDDLERS AND SOLICITORS
      
112.   AMUSEMENTS
      
113.   PROPERTY, YARD, AND JUNK SALES
      
114.   ADULT ENTERTAINMENT ESTABLISHMENTS
      
115.   ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES
      
116.   CABLE TELEVISION AND TELECOMMUNICATIONS
CHAPTER 110: GENERAL LICENSING PROVISIONS
Section
Administration and Licensing
   
110.001   License required
   
110.002   License application
   
110.003   License term and form
   
110.004   Investigations
   
110.005   License fees
   
110.006   Location and premises
   
110.007   Suspension or revocation of license
   
110.008   Posting of license
   
110.009   Business vehicle sticker
Working Conditions
   
110.020   Nuisances prohibited
   
110.021   Health requirements
   
110.022   Sanitation
   
110.023   Heat required
   
110.024   Inspections
Appendix A: Business license application
Appendix B: Applicant/field check information card
Appendix C: Official business license
Cross-reference:
   Vehicle dealer’s license, see §
70.052
ADMINISTRATION AND LICENSING
§ 110.001 LICENSE REQUIRED.
   (A)   Applications for all licenses and permits required by this chapter
shall be made in writing to the Village Clerk in the absence of provision to
the contrary.
   (B)   Each application shall contain:
      (1)   The name of the applicant;
      (2)   The permit or license desired;
      (3)   The location to be used, if any;
      (4)   The time covered; and
      (5)   The fee to be paid.
   (C)   Each application shall also contain the number of the certificates of
registration required under the Retailer’s Occupation Tax Act, being 35 ILCS
120/1 et seq., Service Occupation Tax Act, being 35 ILCS 115/1 et seq., and/or
Use Tax Act, if applicable. Each application shall contain such additional
information as may be needed for the proper guidance of the village officials
in the issuing of the license or permit applied for.
(Prior Code, § 7-1-2)
§ 110.002 LICENSE APPLICATION.
   Whenever a license or permit is required in this code or in any municipal
ordinance for the maintenance, operation, or conduct of any business or
establishment, or for doing business or engaging in any activity or occupation,
any person, firm, or corporation shall be subject to the requirement if by
himself, herself, or itself, or through an agent, employee, or partner, he,
she, or it is held forth as being engaged in the business, activity, or
occupation, or if he, she, or it solicits patronage therefor actively or
passively; or if he, she, or it performs or attempts to perform any part of
such business, activity, or occupation in the village.
(Prior Code, § 7-1-1)
§ 110.003 LICENSE TERM AND FORM.
   (A)   (1)   No license shall be granted for longer than a one-year term, and
all licenses, unless otherwise provided by ordinance, shall expire on the last
day of the next April following their issue.
      (2)   Every license shall be signed by the Mayor and attested by the
Village Clerk under the corporate seal, and no license shall be valid until
signed and countersigned as aforesaid, nor shall any person be deemed to be
licensed until the same shall have been issued to him or her in due form.
(Prior Code, § 7-1-3)
   (B)   (1)   All annual licenses shall be operative and the license year for
the village shall commence on May 1 of each year and shall terminate on April
30 of the following year, where no provision to the contrary is made.
      (2)   The Village Clerk shall notify all licensees of the village of the
time of expiration of the license held by the licensee, if an annual license,
three weeks prior to the date of such expiration; provided, however, that a
failure to make such notification or the failure of the licensee to receive it
shall not excuse the licensee from the obligation to obtain a new license, or a
renewal thereof, nor shall it be a defense in an action based upon operation
without a license.
(Prior Code, § 7-1-6)
§ 110.004 INVESTIGATIONS.
   (A)   Upon the receipt of an application for a license or permit, where an
investigation or inspection is required by ordinance before the issuance of
such permit or license, or where an inspection or investigation shall be deemed
reasonably necessary or appropriate, the Village Clerk, within 48 hours, shall
refer the application to the appropriate officials for the making of such
investigation or inspection.
   (B)   The officials to whom the application has been referred shall make a
report thereon, favorable or otherwise, within ten days after receiving such
application or a copy thereof.
   (C)   (1)   The Chief of Police shall make or cause to be made an inspection
regarding such permits and licenses as relate to the care and handling of food,
the prevention of nuisances, the spread of disease, and the protection of
health.
      (2)   If a zoning code is in effect, the Zoning Administrator shall make
or cause to be made any inspections which relate to compliance with the Zoning
Code and other related regulations. All other investigations, except where
otherwise provided, shall be made by the Chief of Police or by some other
officer designated by the Mayor.
   (D)   Upon receipt of all related investigative reports, the Village Clerk
shall forward such reports, together with the application, to the Mayor for
evaluation and determination.
   (E)   If it shall appear to the corporate authorities that the matters and
circumstances relating to an application require further information before a
proper determination can be made, such application shall be returned to the
Village Clerk for the inclusion of such additional information as may be
specified necessary and appropriate.
   (F)   If, after due consideration of the information contained with the
application and the related investigative reports, the corporate authorities
shall determine that the matters concerning the application are unsatisfactory,
they may disapprove such application, indicating the reasons therefor.
Thereupon, the Village Clerk shall be directed to promptly notify the applicant
that his or her application is disapproved and that no license or permit will
be issued.
   (G)   If, after due consideration of the information contained within the
application and the related investigative reports, the corporate authorities
shall determine that the application is satisfactory, they shall approve the
application. Thereupon, the Village Clerk shall be directed to promptly notify
the applicant that his or her application is approved and the license or permit
may be issued.
(Prior Code, § 7-1-4)
§ 110.005 LICENSE FEES.
   (A)   In the absence of provision to the contrary, all fees and charges for
licenses or permits shall be paid in advance at the time application therefor
is made to the Village Clerk in the amounts prescribed by the corporate
authorities.
   (B)   When an applicant has not engaged in the business or activity until
after the expiration of the current license year, the license fee shall be
prorated by quarters and the fee paid for each quarter or fraction thereof
during which the business or activity has been or will be conducted.
   (C)   Except as otherwise provided, all license and permit fees shall become
a part of the corporate fund. In no event shall any rebate or refund be made of
any license or permit fee, or part thereof, by reason of death or departure of
the licensee or permittee; nor shall any rebate or refund be made by reason of
non-use of the license or discontinuance of the operation or conduct of the
licensed establishment, business, or activity.
   (D)   The annual license fee shall be $50.
(Prior Code, § 7-1-5)
§ 110.006 LOCATION AND PREMISES.
   (A)   (1)   No license shall be issued for the conduct of any business, and
no permit shall be issued for any purpose or activity, if the premises and
building to be used for the purpose do not fully comply with all applicable
ordinances and regulations of the village and the state.
      (2)   No such license or permit shall be issued for the conduct of any
business or performance of any act which would involve a violation of the
Zoning Code and/or other applicable regulations of the village.
(Prior Code, § 7-1-7)
   (B)   The location of any licensed business or occupation, or the location
of any permitted act may be changed, provided that ten days’ notice thereof is
given to the Village Clerk, in the absence of any provision to the contrary;
provided further, however, that all applicable ordinances and regulations of
the village shall be complied with.
(Prior Code, § 7-1-8)
   (C)   No license for the operation of a business or establishment in the
village shall be construed to permit the operation of a licensed business or
establishment in more than one location in the village; a separate license
shall be required for each location of a licensed establishment. For the
purpose of this code of ordinances, the existence of a single location shall be
evidenced by the fact that all buildings containing the principal or accessory
uses shall be connected or shall be located on the same lot or parcel; shall be
operated and managed by the same person or owner; and shall be an establishment
with the same classification.
(Prior Code, § 7-1-9)
§ 110.007 SUSPENSION OR REVOCATION OF LICENSE.
   (A)   Nuisance. When the conduct or operation of any business or
establishment, whether or not licensed, shall constitute a nuisance in fact and
a clear and present danger to the public health, safety, or general welfare,
the Mayor shall be authorized to summarily order the cessation of business, the
closing of the premises, and the suspension of any license or permit for a
period not to exceed ten days.
   (B)   Hearing. Within eight days after he or she has so acted, the Mayor
shall call a hearing for the purpose of determining whether or not the license
or permit should be revoked.
   (C)   Revocation. Licenses and permits issued in the village, unless
otherwise provided, may be revoked by the Mayor after notice and hearing as
provided in divisions (D) and (E) below for any of the following causes:
      (1)   Any fraud, misrepresentation, or false statement contained in the
application for the license or permit;
      (2)   Any violation by the licensee or permittee of code provisions
relating to the license or permit, the subject matter of the license or permit,
or the premises occupied;
      (3)   Conviction of the licensee or permittee of any felony or of a
misdemeanor involving moral turpitude;
      (4)   Failure of the licensee or permittee to pay any fine or penalty
owed to the village; or
      (5)   Refusal to permit an inspection or sampling, or any interference
with a duly authorized officer or employee in the performance of his or her
duties in making such inspections, as provided in §
110.024. Such revocation, if ordered, shall not preclude prosecution and
imposition of any other penalties provided for the violation of other
applicable code regulations of the village.
   (D)   Hearing notice. Notice of the hearing for revocation of a license or
permit shall be given in writing, setting forth specifically the grounds of the
complaint and the time and place of the hearing. Such notice shall be sent by
certified mail (return receipt requested]) to the licensee or permittee at his
or her last known address at least five days prior to the date set for the
hearing.
   (E)   Council. At the hearing, the Village Attorney shall present the
complaint and shall represent the village. The licensee or permittee shall be
permitted counsel and shall have the right to submit evidence and cross-examine
witnesses. The Mayor shall preside and shall render the decision.
(Prior Code, § 7-1-13)
§ 110.008 POSTING OF LICENSE.
    It shall be the duty of every person conducting a licensed business in the
village to keep his or her license posted in a prominent place on the premises
used for such business at all times.
(Prior Code, § 7-1-15)
§ 110.009 BUSINESS VEHICLE STICKER.
   Whenever the number of vehicles used is the basis in whole or in part for a
license fee, the Village Clerk shall furnish the licensee with a tag or sticker
for each vehicle covered by the license and such tag or sticker shall be posted
or affixed in a conspicuous place on each business vehicle.
(Prior Code, § 7-1-16)
WORKING CONDITIONS
§ 110.020 NUISANCES PROHIBITED.
   (A)   Generally. No business or establishment, whether licensed or not,
shall be so conducted or operated as to constitute a nuisance in fact, and no
building, vehicle, structure, yard, lot, premises, or part thereof shall be
used, kept, maintained, or operated in connection with any business or
establishment so as to occasion any nuisance or so as to be dangerous to life
or detrimental to health.
   (B)   Unsafe or unhealthful business.
      (1)   No building or structure utilized, constructed, or maintained in
connection with any business or occupation shall evidence an unsanitary,
unsafe, or dangerous condition.
      (2)   No substance, matter, or thing of any kind whatsoever, which would
be dangerous or detrimental to health, shall be allowed to exist in connection
with any business or occupation, or be used in any work or labor performed in
the village.
   (C)   Refuse disposal.
      (1)   The standard refuse container required by this code chapter shall
be a receptacle of not less than 20-gallons, nor more than 32-gallon capacity,
constructed of impervious material and sturdy construction with a tight-fitting
cover, and equipped with handles properly placed to facilitate handling.
      (2)   The occupant of every building, structure, or premises used or
maintained in connection with any business or occupation shall provide and
maintain in good condition and repair a sufficient number of refuse containers
for the temporary storage of all refuse accumulating between collections.
All refuse which is placed for collection service outside any building or
structure must be kept in standard refuse containers.
      (3)   It shall be the duty of the occupant of every building, structure,
or premises used or maintained in connection with any business or occupation to
cause to be removed, at his or her own cost and expense, at least once each
week, all refuse produced therein.
      (4)   Every person owning or controlling any hotel, restaurant, café, or
retail food establishment where more than 32 gallons of refuse is normally
produced weekly shall cause all garbage to be placed in sanitary refuse
containers and shall cause all substances deposited in such containers to be
disposed of at his or her own expense.
(Prior Code, § 7-1-10)
Cross-reference:
   Nuisances detrimental to health, see §§
91.035 through
91.037
   Specific nuisances enumerated, see §
91.002
§ 110.021 HEALTH REQUIREMENTS.
    No owner, lessee, manager, or superintendent of any store, factory,
workshop, or other place where persons are employed shall cause or permit such
place or any room, or part thereof, to be overcrowded or inadequate or faulty
in respect to light, ventilation, heat, or cleanliness.
(Prior Code, § 7-1-11.1)
§ 110.022 SANITATION.
   (A)   All such places of employment shall be kept in a clean condition, free
from effluvia of a sewer, drain, privy, stable, or other nuisances; also as far
as practicable, such premises shall be free from all gases, vapors, dust, or
other impurities generated by manufacturing processes or otherwise which are
injurious to health.
   (B)   Sufficient washroom facilities for male and female employees shall be
provided, and such facilities shall be properly ventilated.
(Prior Code, § 7-1-11.2)
§ 110.023 HEAT REQUIRED.
   (A)   It shall be the duty of every person owning or controlling the heating
plant which furnishes heat to any factory or workshop to maintain a temperature
within such factory or workshop of not less than 62°F without such undue
restriction of ventilation as to interfere with proper sanitary conditions
therein; provided, however, that this requirement shall not apply to any
factory or workshop where the business conducted therein is of such a nature
that a higher or lower temperature than 62°F is necessary or expedient for the
work or manufacturing processes of such business.
   (B)   It shall be the duty of every person owning or controlling the heating
plant which furnishes heat to any office, store, or other place of employment
to maintain a temperature therein of not less than 62°F, without such undue
restriction of ventilation as to interfere with proper sanitary conditions
therein between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m. from October 1 of each
year until June 1 of the succeeding year (Sundays and legal holidays excepted).
(Prior Code, § 7-1-11.3)
§ 110.024 INSPECTIONS.
   (A)   The Chief of Police and the Code Enforcement Officer, if any, shall
visit or cause to be visited all places of employment in the village as often
as they shall deem necessary to assure compliance with the provisions of this
section, and to have such arrangements made as may be deemed necessary for the
health and safety of the employees.
(Prior Code, § 7-1-11.4)
   (B)   (1)   Whenever inspections of the premises for or in connection with
the operation of a licensed business or occupation are provided for or required
by ordinance, or are reasonably necessary to assure compliance with the
provisions of any ordinance or regulation of the village, or to detect
violations thereof, it shall be the duty of the licensee or the person in
charge of the premises to admit thereto, for the purpose of making the
inspection, any officer or employee of the village who is duly authorized to
make such inspection at any reasonable time that such admission or entry is
requested.
      (2)   Whenever an analysis of any commodity or material is reasonably
necessary to assure compliance with the provisions of any ordinance or
regulation, or to detect violations thereof, it shall be the duty of the
licensee or the person in charge of the premises to give to any duly authorized
officer or employee of the village requesting the same, sufficient samples of
such material or commodity for such analysis upon official request.
      (3)   In addition to any other penalty which may be provided, the Mayor
may revoke the license of any owner or operator of a licensed business in the
village who refuses to permit any duly authorized officer or employee to make
such inspection or to take adequate sample(s) of said commodity, or who
interferes with such officer or employee while in the performance of his or her
duties; provided, however, that no license shall be subject to revocation for
such cause unless such officer or employee has been refused permission to enter
upon the premises in the name of the village after having first presented a
warrant authorizing such entry.
(Prior Code, § 7-1-12)
Penalty, see §
10.999
APPENDIX A: BUSINESS LICENSE APPLICATION
APPLICATION NO. __________ ANNUAL LICENSE FEE DUE MAY 1ST: $____________
(PLEASE TYPE OR PRINT)
1.   Applicant’s Name: ________________________________________   PHONE
( )__________
2.   Applicant’s
Address______________________________________________________________
   City _____________________________________ State __________________
ZIP__________
3.   Length of resident at above address ____________years __________months
4.   Applicant’s Date of Birth _____/_____/______         Social Security
No.________________
5.   Marital Status_______________________      Name of
Spouse__________________________
6.   Citizenship of
Applicant___________________________________________________________
7.   Business Name __________________________________________   PHONE
( )__________
8.   Business Address
________________________________________________________________
   City _____________________________________ State __________________
ZIP__________
9.   Length of Employment ____________years __________months
10.   All residences and addresses for the last three (3) years if different
than above:
11.   Name and Address of employers during the last three (3) years if
different than above:
   _______________________________________________________________________________
   _______________________________________________________________________________
12.   List the last three (3) municipalities where applicant has carried on
business immediately preceding the date of application:
   _______________________________________________________________________________
13.   A description of the subject matter that will be used in the applicant’s
business:
   _______________________________________________________________________________
14.   Has the applicant ever had a license in this municipality?      [ ] Yes
[ ] No
   If so,
when_____________________________________________________________________
15.   Has a license issued to this applicant ever been revoked?      [ ] Yes
[ ] No
If “yes”, explain:
____________________________________________________________________
16.   Has the applicant ever been convicted of a violation of any of the
provisions of this Code, etc.?
   [ ] Yes [ ] No    If “yes,” explain:
_________________________________________________
__________________________________________________________________________________
17.   Has the applicant ever been convicted of the commission of a
felony?      [ ] Yes [ ] No
   If “yes”, explain:
________________________________________________________________
18.   LICENSE DATA:   Term of
License_______________________________________________
                  Fee for License
$______________________________________________
                  Sales Tax Number_____________________________________________
                  License
Classification___________________________________________
19.   LIST ALL OWNERS IF LICENSE IS FOR LOCAL BUSINESS (PERMANENT):
   ______________________________________   _______________________________________
   ______________________________________   _______________________________________
(Prior Code, Ch. 7)
APPENDIX B: APPLICANT/FIELD CHECK INFORMATION CARD
INFORMATION CARD
____________________________________
Name
____________________________________
Residence Address
____________________________________
Business Address
Info
____________________________________
Occupation
____________________________________
Social Security Number
____________________________________
Race         Sex      Height
____________________________________
Weight      Eyes      Hair
____________________________________
Complexion         Date of Birth
____________________________________
Unusual Features:
____________________________________ ____________________________________
____________________________________ ____________________________________
____________________________________ ____________________________________
_____________________________________
Hat         Coat
____________________________________
Cap         Jacket
____________________________________
Blouse      Dress
____________________________________
Shirt         Sweater
____________________________________
Skirt         Trousers
_____________________________________
Location      Date      Time
____________________________________
D.L.#
____________________________________
Vehicle Color Yr. Body License
____________________________________
Vehicle Modifications:
____________________________________
_____________________________________
Action Leading to Check:________________
_____________________________________
_____________________________________
____________________________________
Comments:
____________________________________ ____________________________________
_____________________________________
____________________________________ _____________________________________
Associates:
____________________________________
____________________________________
____________________________________
_____________________________________
(Prior Code, Ch. 7)
APPENDIX C: OFFICIAL BUSINESS LICENSE
STATE OF ILLINOIS            )
COUNTY OF ST. CLAIR         ) ss.
VILLAGE OF MARISSA         )
                     ILLINOIS SALES TAX NUMBER _________________________
TO ALL TO WHOM THESE PRESENTS SHALL BECOME GREETINGS:
   WHEREAS ___________________________________________________________________,
having complied with all the requirements of the laws of the State of Illinois
and the ordinances of the Village of Marissa, Illinois in this behalf made and
required license is, by authority of the Village of Marissa, Illinois given and
granted to the________________________________________________
to _______________________________________ at
______________________________________
in the Village of Marissa, County of St. Clair, and State of Illinois, from the
date hereof until the day
of,________________________, _____, said
____________________________________________
to be subject to all laws of the State of Illinois and all ordinances of the
Village of Marissa, Illinois, not in conflict therewith, which are now or
hereafter may be in force touching the premises.
(L.S.)
   Given under the hand of the Mayor of the Village of Marissa, County of St.
Clair, Illinois and the seal thereof, this _____________________day
of________________________, ___________.
                                    _______________________________________
                                    MAYOR
                                    VILLAGE OF MARISSA
COUNTERSIGNED:
_________________________________
VILLAGE CLERK
VILLAGE OF MARISSA
(SEAL)
(Prior Code, Ch. 7)
CHAPTER 111: PEDDLERS AND SOLICITORS
Section
Solicitors
   
111.001   Definitions
   
111.002   Certificate of registration required; fees
   
111.003   Certificate application
   
111.004   Certificate issuance or revocation
   
111.005   Policy
   
111.006   Notice regulating soliciting
   
111.007   Compliance
   
111.008   Uninvited soliciting prohibited
   
111.009   Time limit
   
111.010   Soliciting on public highways
Fees
   
111.025   Definitions
   
111.026   License required; fees
   
111.027   License application
   
111.028   Investigation
   
111.029   Hours
   
111.030   Fraud
   
111.031   Unwanted peddling; nuisance
   
111.032   Duty of police to abate
   
111.033   Exclusions
SOLICITORS
§ 111.001 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   REGISTERED SOLICITOR. Includes any person who has obtained a valid
certificate of registration as hereinafter provided, and which certificate is
in the possession of the solicitor on his or her person while engaged in
soliciting.
   RESIDENCE. Includes every separate living unit occupied for residential
purposes by one or more persons, contained within any type of building or
structure.
   SOLICITING. Includes any one or more of the following activities:
      (1)   Seeking to obtain orders for the purchase of goods, wares,
merchandise, foodstuffs, services of any kind, character, or description
whatsoever, for any kind of consideration whatsoever;
      (2)   Seeking to obtain prospective customers for application or purchase
of insurance of any type, kind, or character;
      (3)   Seeking to obtain subscriptions to books, magazines, periodicals,
newspapers, and every other type or kind of publication; or
      (4)   Seeking to obtain gifts or contributions of money, clothing, or any
other valuable thing for the support or benefit of any charitable or non-profit
association, organization, corporation, or project.
(Prior Code, § 7-2-1)
§ 111.002 CERTIFICATE OF REGISTRATION REQUIRED; FEES.
   (A)   (1)   Every person desiring to engage in soliciting as herein defined
from persons within the village is hereby required to make written application
for a certificate of registration as hereinafter provided.
      (2)   All resident charitable, non-profit organizations in the village
which have been in existence for six months or longer shall be exempt from the
provisions of this subchapter.
(Prior Code, § 7-2-2)
   (B)   Upon making an application for a certificate, the applicant shall pay
a license fee, which shall be as follows:
      (1)   Daily license: $10 per person per day; and
      (2)   Annual license: $50 per person per year.
(Prior Code, § 7-2-11)
Statutory reference:
   Related provisions, see 65 ILCS 5/11-5-2
§ 111.003 CERTIFICATE APPLICATION.
   (A)   Applications for a certificate of registration shall be made upon a
form provided by the Chief of Police of the village and filed with such Chief.
The applicant shall truthfully state in full the information requested on the
application, to-wit:
      (1)   Name and address of present place of residence and length of
residence at such address; also, business address if other than residence
address, and also, Social Security number;
      (2)   Address of place of residence during the past three years, if other
than present address;
      (3)   Age of applicant and marital status, and, if married, the name of
spouse;
      (4)   Physical description of the applicant;
      (5)   Name and address of the person, firm, corporation, or association
with whom the applicant is employed or represents, and the length of time of
such employment or representation;
      (6)   Name and address of employer during the past three years, if other
than the present employer;
      (7)   Description sufficient for identification of the subject matter of
the soliciting in which the applicant will engage;
      (8)   Period of time for which the certificate is applied;
      (9)   The date or approximate date of the latest previous application for
a certificate under this chapter, if any;
      (10)   If a certificate of registration issued to the applicant under
this chapter has ever been revoked;
      (11)   If the applicant has ever been convicted of a violation of any of
the provisions of this code of ordinances or the regulations of any other state
municipality regulating soliciting;
      (12)   If the applicant has ever been convicted of the commission of a
felony under the laws of the state or any other state or federal law of the
United States;
      (13)   The last three municipalities where the applicant carried on
business immediately preceding the date of application in the municipality and
the address from which such business was conducted in those municipalities; and
      (14)   Such additional information as the Chief of Police may deem
necessary to process the application.
   (B)   All statements made by the applicant upon the application or in
connection therewith shall be under oath.
   (C)   The Chief of Police shall cause to be kept in his or her office an
accurate record of every application received and acted upon, together with all
other information and data pertaining thereto and all certificates of
registration issued under the provisions of this chapter and of the denial of
applications.
   (D)   Applications for certificates issued shall be numbered in consecutive
order as filed, and every certificate issued and any renewal thereof shall be
identified with the duplicate number of the application upon which it was
issued.
   (E)   No certificate of registration shall be issued to any person who has
been convicted of the commission of a felony under the laws of the state or any
other state or federal law of the United States within five years of the date
of the application, nor to any person who has been convicted of a violation of
any of the provisions of this chapter, nor to any person whose certificate of
registration issued hereunder has previously been revoked as herein provided.
(Prior Code, § 7-2-3)
§ 111.004 CERTIFICATE ISSUANCE OR REVOCATION.
   (A)   The Chief of Police, after consideration of the application and all
information obtained relative thereto, shall deny the application if the
applicant does not possess the qualifications for such certificate as herein
required, and that the issuance of a certificate of registration to the
applicant would not be in accord with the intent and purpose of this code of
ordinances. Endorsement shall be made by the Chief of Police upon the
application of the denial of the application. When the applicant is found to be
fully qualified, the certificate of registration shall be issued forthwith.
   (B)   Any certificate of registration issued hereunder shall be revoked by
the Chief of Police if the holder of the certificate is convicted of a
violation of any provision of this chapter, or has made a false material
statement in the application or otherwise becomes disqualified for the issuance
of a certificate of registration under the terms of this chapter. Immediately
upon such revocation, written notice thereof shall be given by the Chief of
Police to the holder of the certificate in person or by certified (return
receipt requested) United States mail, addressed to his or her residence
address set forth in the application.
      (3)   Immediately upon the giving of such notice, the certificate of
registration shall become null and void.
      (4)   The certificate of registration shall state the expiration date
thereof.
(Prior Code, § 7-2-4)
§ 111.005 POLICY.
   It is declared to be the policy of the village that the occupant or
occupants of the residences in the village shall make the determination of
whether solicitors shall be or shall not be invited to their respective
residences.
(Prior Code, § 7-2-5)
§ 111.006 NOTICE REGULATING SOLICITING.
   Every person desiring to secure the protection intended to be provided by
the regulations pertaining to soliciting contained in this subchapter shall
comply with the following directions.
   (A)   Notice of the determination by the occupant of giving invitation to
solicitors or the refusal of invitation to solicitors to any residence shall be
given in the manner provided in division (B) below.
   (B)   A weather-proof card, approximately three inches by four inches in
size, shall be exhibited upon or near the main entrance door to the residence
indicating the determination by the occupant and containing the applicable
words, as follows:
“ONLY REGISTERED SOLICITORS INVITED”
OR
“NO SOLICITORS INVITED”
   (C)   The letters shall be at least one-third inch in height. For the
purpose of uniformity, the cards shall be provided by the Chief of Police to
persons requesting the same, at the cost thereof.
   (D)   Such card so exhibited shall constitute sufficient notice to any
solicitor of the determination by the occupant of the residence of the
information contained thereon.
(Prior Code, § 7-2-6)
§ 111.007 COMPLIANCE.
   (A)   It is the duty of every solicitor upon going onto any premises in the
village upon which a residence, as herein defined, is located to first examine
the notice provided for in §
111.006 if any is attached and be governed by the statement contained on the
notice.
   (B)   If the notice states “ONLY REGISTERED SOLICITORS INVITED,” then the
solicitor not possessing a valid certificate of registration as herein provided
for shall immediately and peacefully depart from the premises; and if the
notice states, “NO SOLICITORS INVITED,” then the solicitor, whether registered
or not, shall immediately and peacefully depart from the premises.
   (C)   Any solicitor who has gained entrance to any residence, whether
invited or not, shall immediately and peacefully depart from the premises when
requested to do so by the occupant.
(Prior Code, § 7-2-7)
§ 111.008 UNINVITED SOLICITING PROHIBITED.
   It is declared to be unlawful and shall constitute a nuisance for any person
to go upon any premises and ring the doorbell upon or near any door, or create
any sound in any other manner calculated to attract the attention of the
occupant of such residence for the purpose of securing an audience with the
occupant thereof and engage in soliciting as herein defined, in defiance of the
notice exhibited at the residence in accordance with the provisions of §
111.006.
(Prior Code, § 7-2-8) Penalty, see §
10.999
§ 111.009 TIME LIMIT.
   It is hereby declared to be unlawful and shall constitute a nuisance for any
person, whether registered under this chapter or not, to go upon any premises
and ring the doorbell upon or near any door of a residence located thereon, or
rap or knock upon any door, or create any sound in any other manner calculated
to attract the attention of the occupant of such residence for the purpose of
securing an audience with the occupant thereof and engage in soliciting, as
herein defined, prior to 10:00 a.m., or after 5:00 p.m. of any weekday, or at
any time on a Sunday, or on a state or national holiday.
(Prior Code, § 7-2-9) Penalty, see §
10.999
§ 111.010 SOLICITING ON PUBLIC HIGHWAYS.
   Charitable organizations shall be allowed to solicit upon public highways
under the following terms and conditions:
   (A)   The charitable organization must be one that is registered with the
Attorney General for the state as a charitable organization as provided by “an
Act to Regulate Solicitation and Collection of Funds for Charitable Purposes,
Providing for Violations Thereof, and Making an Appropriation Therefor,”
approved July 26, 1963, as amended;
   (B)   Solicit only at intersections where all traffic from all directions is
required to come to a full stop;
   (C)   Be engaged in a state-wide fundraising activity;
   (D)   Be liable for any injury to any person or property during the
solicitation which is causally related to an act of ordinary negligence of the
soliciting agent; and
   (E)   Any person so engaged in such solicitation shall be at least 16 years
of age and shall wear a high-visibility vest.
(Prior Code, § 7-2-10)
FEES
§ 111.025 DEFINITION.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definition shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   PEDDLE. The selling, bartering, or exchanging or the offering for sale,
barter, or exchange of any tangible personal property upon or along the
streets, highways, or public places of the village or from house-to-house,
whether at one place thereon or from place-to-place, from any wagon, truck,
pushcart, or other vehicle or from movable receptacles of any kind, but shall
not include the delivery of any item previously ordered or the sale of items
along delivery routes where the purchaser has previously requested the seller
to stop and exhibit his or her items. PEDDLE shall not be taken to include the
solicitation of orders by sample where the goods are not delivered at the time
the order is taken.
(Prior Code, § 7-3-2)
§ 111.026 LICENSE REQUIRED; FEES.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person, firm, or corporation to engage in
the business of hawker or peddler of any merchandise, article, or thing without
having first secured a license therefor.
(Prior Code, § 7-3-1)
   (B)   The license fees per person to be charged for licenses to peddle in
the village, each payable in advance, are hereby fixed and established as
follows:
      (1)   Daily license: $10 per person per day; and
      (2)   Annual license: $50 per person per year.
(Prior Code, § 7-3-12) Penalty, see §
10.999
§ 111.027 LICENSE APPLICATION.
   (A)   A person desiring a license may obtain the same by making application
with the Village Clerk and providing the following information:
      (1)   Name and physical description of applicant;
      (2)   Permanent home and address and local address if operating from such
an address;
      (3)   A brief description of the business and of the goods to be sold;
      (4)   Name and address of the employer, if any;
      (5)   The length of time for which the right to do business is desired;
      (6)   Evidence that the agent is acting on behalf of the corporation he
or she represents;
      (7)   Statement of the applicant’s criminal record, other than a traffic
record; and
      (8)   The last three municipalities where the applicant carried on
business immediately preceding the date of application to the village and the
address from which such business was conducted in those municipalities.
(Prior Code, § 7-3-3)
   (B)    Two photographs of the applicant and such of its employees as will be
used in the peddling or merchandising, taken within 60 days immediately prior
to the filing of the application, which pictures shall be two inches by two
inches, showing the head and shoulders of the applicant or its agent(s) and/or
employees in a clear and distinguishing manner.
(Prior Code, § 7-3-7)
§ 111.028 INVESTIGATION.
   (A)   Upon receipt of each application, it shall be referred to the Chief of
Police, who shall investigate the business and moral character of the
applicant.
   (B)   If the facts show the applicant unfit to receive the license, then it
shall be denied.
(Prior Code, § 7-3-4)
§ 111.029 HOURS.
   It Is hereby declared to be unlawful and shall constitute a nuisance for any
person, whether registered under this code of ordinances or not, to engage in
peddling as herein defined prior to 10:00 a.m. or after 5:00 p.m. of any
weekday or at any time on a Sunday or on a state or national holiday.
(Prior Code, § 7-3-5) Penalty, see §
10.999
§ 111.030 FRAUD.
   No licensed peddler or hawker shall be guilty of any fraud, cheating, or
misrepresentation, whether through himself or herself or through an employee
while acting as a peddler in the village, or shall barter, sell, or peddle any
goods or merchandise or wares other than those specified in his or her
application for a license.
(Prior Code, § 7-3-6) Penalty, see §
10.999
§ 111.031 UNWANTED PEDDLING; NUISANCE.
   (A)   Nothing contained in this chapter, nor the issuance of any license
hereunder, shall entitle the licensee to go in or upon any private residence
for the purpose of peddling if such licensee or his or her agents or employees
are directed to depart from said private residence by the owner or person in
charge thereof.
(Prior Code, § 7-3-8)
   (B)   (1)   The practice of going in and upon private residences, business
establishments, or offices in the village by solicitors, peddlers, hawkers,
itinerant merchants, and transient vendors of merchandise without having been
requested or invited to do so by the owner or owners, or occupant or occupants,
of said private residences and business establishments or offices for the
purpose of disposing of and/or peddling or hawking of merchandise is hereby
declared to be a nuisance and is punishable as a violation of this code of
ordinances.
      (2)   No person shall peddle in a public square.
(Prior Code, § 7-3-9)
Penalty, see §
10.999
§ 111.032 DUTY OF POLICE TO ABATE.
   The Police Department of the village is hereby required and directed to
suppress the same and to abate any such nuisance as described in §
111.031.
(Prior Code, § 7-3-10)
§ 111.033 EXCLUSIONS.
   The provisions of this subchapter shall not apply to persons employed or
representing an established merchant, business firm, or corporation located and
regularly doing business in the village, or to farmers selling any food items
raised or produced by themselves, and/or to permanently established residents
who are voters in the village or anyone duly licensed.
(Prior Code, § 7-3-11)
CHAPTER 112: AMUSEMENTS
Section
Raffle Code
   
112.001   Definitions
   
112.002   Administration
   
112.003   License required
   
112.004   License applications
   
112.005   License terms and fees
   
112.006   Prohibited licenses
   
112.007   Restrictions
   
112.008   Records
RAFFLE CODE
§ 112.001 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   NET PROCEEDS. The gross receipts from the conduct of raffles, less
reasonable sums expended for prizes, local license fees, and other reasonable
operating expenses incurred as a result of operating a raffle.
   RAFFLE. A form of lottery, as defined in 230 ILCS 15/1, conducted by an
organization licensed under this subchapter in which:
      (1)   The player pays or agrees to pay something of value for a chance,
presented and differentiated by a number or by a combination of numbers, or by
some other medium, one or more of which chances is to be designated the winning
chance; and
      (2)   The winning chance is to be determined through a drawing or by some
other method based on an element of chance by an act or set of acts on the part
of persons conducting or connected with the lottery, except that the winning
chance shall not be determined by the outcome of a publicly exhibited sporting
contest.
(Prior Code, § 7-4-1)
§ 112.002 ADMINISTRATION.
   The Village Collector is hereby charged with the administration of the
appropriate provisions of this subchapter, and may appoint persons to assist in
the exercise of the powers and the performance of the duties herein provided,
including, but not limited to, the members of his or her staff, the Village
Attorney, and the Chief of Police.
(Prior Code, § 7-4-2)
§ 112.003 LICENSE REQUIRED.
   (A)   No person or organization shall conduct or partake in the selling of
raffle chances within the limits and territory of the village without having a
license to do so issued by the Village Collector in a manner hereinafter
provided and a valid license for such purpose as provided by the Illinois
Compiled Statutes.
   (B)   Licenses shall be issued only to bona fide religious, charitable,
labor, fraternal, educational, or veterans’ organizations that operate without
profit to their members and which have been in existence continuously for a
period of five years immediately before making application for a license, and
which have had during that entire five year period a bona fide membership
engaged in carrying out their objectives.
(Prior Code, § 7-4-3)
§ 112.004 LICENSE APPLICATIONS.
   (A)   The Village Collector is authorized to grant and issue licenses to
eligible organizations to conduct raffles and to participate in the sale of
raffle tickets within the limits and territory of the village upon the
conditions and in the manner provided by this subchapter and by the Act of the
State General Assembly, being 230 ILCS 15/, the Raffles and Poker Runs Act, and
not otherwise. Such license shall be in writing, signed by the Mayor and
attested by the Village Clerk with the seal of his or her office affixed
thereto. Prior to the issuance of a license, the applicant must submit to the
Village Collector an application, in triplicate, in writing and under oath,
stating the following:
      (1)   The name and address of the organization;
      (2)   The type of organization that is conducting the raffle, (e.g.,
religious, charitable, labor, fraternal, educational, veterans, or other);
      (3)   The length of time the organization has continually existed
immediately before making application for a license;
      (4)   The applicant shall give the aggregate retail value of all prizes
or merchandise awarded by a licensee in a single raffle;
      (5)   The applicant will give the maximum retail value of each prize
awarded by a licensee in a single raffle;
      (6)   The amount that the organization plans to charge for each raffle
chance issued or sold;
      (7)   The time and location where the raffle is to be held;
      (8)   The purpose for which the proceeds of the raffle will be used;
      (9)   The name and address of the person conducting and performing the
raffle, and his or her relationship with the organization;
      (10)   The last date which the applicant has applied for a raffle
license;
      (11)   The area in which the organization plans to sell or issue its
raffle chances; and
      (12)   Whether or not the applicant has ever been convicted of a felony.
(Prior Code, § 7-4-4)
   (B)   (1)   The license and application for a license must specify the area
or areas within the licensing authority in which raffle chances will be sold or
issued, the time period during which raffle chances will be sold or issued, the
time of determination in winning chances, and the location or locations with
which winning chances will be determined.
      (2)   The application must contain a sworn statement attesting to the
not-for-profit character of the prospective licensee organization signed by the
presiding officer and the secretary of that organization.
      (3)   The village shall act upon a license application within 30 days
from the date of application.
      (4)   Each license is valid for one raffle game only.
(Prior Code, § 7-4-5)
§ 112.005 LICENSE TERMS AND FEES.
   (A)   The aggregate retail value of all prizes or merchandise awarded by a
licensee in a single raffle shall not exceed $25,000.
   (B)   The maximum retail value of each prize awarded by a licensee in a
single raffle shall not exceed $15,000.
   (C)   The maximum price which may be charged for each raffle chance issued
or sold shall not exceed $25.
   (D)   The maximum number of days during which chances may be issued or sold
shall not exceed 120 days.
   (E)   Licenses issued pursuant to this subchapter shall be valid for one
raffle and may be suspended or revoked for any violation of this code of
ordinances.
   (F)   Licenses shall be issued to bona fide religious, charitable, labor,
fraternal, educational, or veterans’ organizations that operate without profit
to their members, and which have been in existence continuously for a period of
five years immediately before making application for a license and which have
had during that entire five year period a bona fide membership engaged in
carrying out their objectives.
   (G)   The above-mentioned types of organizations shall be defined pursuant
to the Illinois Compiled Statutes and incorporated herein.
   (H)   No person or organization shall be issued more than one license in a
period of one week.
   (I)   The manager of a raffle game shall give a fidelity bond in the sum of
$1,000 in the performance of his or her duties. The Mayor or his or her
designated representative is authorized to waive requirement for bond by
including a waiver provision in the license issued; provided that the license
containing such waiver provision shall be granted only by unanimous vote of the
members of the licensed organization. The terms of the bond shall provide that
notice shall be given in writing to the licensing authority not less than 30
days prior to its cancellation.
   (J)   Any license issued under this subchapter shall be nontransferable.
(Prior Code, § 7-4-9)
§ 112.006 PROHIBITED LICENSES.
   The following are ineligible for any raffle license:
   (A)   Any person who has been convicted of a felony;
   (B)   Any person who is or has been a professional gambler or gambling
promoter;
   (C)   Any person who is not of good moral character;
   (D)   Any firm or corporation in which a person defined in divisions (A),
(B), or (C) above has a propriety, equitable, or credit interest, or in which
such a person is active or employed;
   (E)   Any organization in which a person defined in divisions (A), (B), or
(C) above is an officer, director, or employee, whether compensated or not; or
   (F)   Any organization in which a person defined in divisions (A), (B), or
(C) above is to participate in the management or operation of a raffle, as
defined by this subchapter.
(Prior Code, § 7-4-6)
§ 112.007 RESTRICTIONS.
   (A)   The entire net proceeds of any raffle must be exclusively devoted to
the lawful purposes of the organization permitted to conduct that game.
   (B)   No person, except a bona fide member of the sponsoring organization,
may participate in the management or operation of the raffle.
   (C)   No person may receive any remuneration or profit for participating in
the management or operation of the raffle.
   (D)   A licensee may rent a premises on which to determine a winning chance
or chances in a raffle only from an organization which has also been licensed
under 230 ILCS 15/0.01 et seq., the Raffles and Poker Runs Act.
   (E)   Raffle chances may be sold or issued only within the area specified on
the license, and winning chances may be determined only at those locations
specified on the license.
   (F)   (1)   No person under the age of 18 years may participate in the
conducting of raffles or chances.
      (2)   A person under the age of 18 years may be within the area where
winning chances are being determined only when accompanied by his or her parent
or guardian.
(Prior Code, § 7-4-7) Penalty, see §
10.999
§ 112.008 RECORDS.
   (A)   Each organization licensed to conduct raffles and chances shall keep
records of its gross receipts, expenses, and net proceeds for each single
gathering or occasion at which winning chances are determined. All deductions
from the gross receipts for each single gathering or occasion shall be
documented with receipts or other records indicating the amount, a description
of the purchased item or service or other reason for the deduction, and the
recipient. The distribution of net proceeds shall be itemized as to payee,
purpose, amount, and date of payment.
   (B)   Gross receipts from the operation of raffle programs shall be
segregated from other revenues of the organization, including bingo gross
receipts, if bingo games are also conducted by the same non-profit organization
pursuant to license therefor issued by the State Department of Revenue, and
placed in a separate account. Each organization shall have separate records of
its raffles. The person who accounts for the gross receipts, expenses, and net
proceeds from the operation of raffles shall not be the same person who
accounts for other revenues of the organization.
   (C)   Each organization licensed to conduct raffles shall report monthly to
its membership and to the village its gross receipts, expenses, and net
proceeds from raffles and the distribution of net proceeds itemized as required
by this section.
   (D)   Records required by this section shall be preserved for three years,
and the organization shall make available their records relating to operation
of raffles for public inspection at reasonable times and places.
(Prior Code, § 7-4-8)
CHAPTER 113: PROPERTY, YARD, AND JUNK SALES
Section
Yard Sales
   
113.001   Definition
   
113.002   Permit; exceptions
   
113.003   Signs
   
113.004   Location
   
113.005   Duration
   
113.006   Frequency
   
113.007   Prohibited merchandise
   
113.008   On-site advertising
Junk Dealers
   
113.020   Definitions
   
113.021   Physical requirements
   
113.022   License required
   
113.023   License application; fees
   
113.024   License disqualification
   
113.025   Minors
 
   
113.999   Penalty
YARD SALES
§ 113.001 DEFINITION.
   YARD SALES are any display of merchandise for the purpose of exchanging it
for legal tender or barter at a location not otherwise regularly used or
specifically designated for the sale or exchange of merchandise. Events
commonly known as “garage sales,” “tailgate sales,” “flea markets,” “house
sales,” “moving sales,” and the like, shall be defined as YARD SALES under the
provisions of this subchapter.
(Prior Code, § 7-7-1) (Ord. 15-04, passed 7-6-2015)
§ 113.002 PERMIT; EXCEPTIONS.
   (A)   No person or persons shall offer for sale any merchandise, or permit
the use of his or her property, in conjunction with a yard sale without first
obtaining a permit therefor at least one day in advance of the first day of the
yard sale. The provisions of this section shall not apply to bankruptcy,
estate, other sales under judicial process, or licensed and authorized auctions
and sales conducted at or by organizations affiliated with churches, schools,
federal, state, municipal, county, and township government units; provided that
those organizations are non-profit, religious, civic, and/or charitable in
nature.
(Prior Code, § 7-7-2)
   (B)   An administrative official is authorized to issue a yard sale permit
as required by this subchapter to any resident person upon request; provided
the permit be completed to include the name and address of the applicant, and
the duration and the location of the yard sale.
(Prior Code, § 7-7-3)
(Ord. 15-04, passed 7-6-2015)
§ 113.003 SIGNS.
   Upon the issuance of a yard sale permit, the administrative official shall
also issue to the applicant two authorized yard sale signs, which shall be
permitted at locations away from the location of the sale; provided that they
do not impair the view of motorists in regard to traffic safety or otherwise
create a hazardous or unsafe condition. Such signs shall not be located on
private property without consent of the property owner. Signs may be posted
away from the location of the sale no sooner than 5:00 p.m. on the day prior to
the sale. All signs shall be removed within 24 hours of the conclusion of the
sale by the applicant.
(Prior Code, § 7-7-4) (Ord. 15-04, passed 7-6-2015)
§ 113.004 LOCATION.
   Yard sales shall be restricted to residential districts listed under §§
154.020 through
154.033 and §§
154.045 through
154.052 of this code of ordinances, unless otherwise approved by village staff.
Yard sales conducted by and for the benefit of non-profit organizations may be
held in zoning districts other than residential districts.
(Prior Code, § 7-7-5) (Ord. 15-04, passed 7-6-2015)
§ 113.005 DURATION.
   No yard sale shall be conducted for a period greater than three successive
calendar days. Yard sales shall be conducted within the period between sunrise
and sunset.
(Prior Code, § 7-7-6) (Ord. 15-04, passed 7-6-2015) Penalty, see §
113.999
§ 113.006 FREQUENCY.
   Yard sales shall be held no more than three times within the same calendar
year at the same location. Yard sales shall be held no sooner than 30 days
subsequent to the close of a yard sale at the same location.
(Prior Code, § 7-7-7) (Ord. 15-04, passed 7-6-2015) Penalty, see §
113.999
§ 113.007 PROHIBITED MERCHANDISE.
   Prohibited from such merchandise to be sold at yard sales shall be alcoholic
beverages, firearms, firearm ammunition, materials determined by this code of
ordinances as obscene, animals, or other merchandise of which sale without
proper licensing or authorization from state or local authorities is unlawful.
(Prior Code, § 7-7-8) (Ord. 15-04, passed 7-6-2015) Penalty, see §
113.999
§ 113.008 ON-SITE ADVERTISING.
   Prohibited at the location of any yard sale are loud speakers or amplifiers.
All signs for a yard sale must comply with this code of ordinances.
(Prior Code, § 7-7-9) (Ord. 15-04, passed 7-6-2015) Penalty, see §
113.999
JUNK DEALERS
§ 113.020 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   JUNK. Includes scrap and old iron, steel, chain, brass, copper, magnesium,
aluminum, tin, lead, or other base metals, scrap lumber, old rope, old bags,
rags, waste paper, paper clippings, scraps of woolens, clips, bagging, rubber
and glass, and empty bottles of different kinds or sizes when the number of
each kind or size is less than one gross, any wrecked or dilapidated motor
vehicle, engine, or machinery received, stored, or held for more than 90 days,
and all articles and things discarded or no longer used as a manufactured
article composed of or consisting of any one or more of the materials or
articles herein mentioned.
   JUNK DEALER. Includes every person, firm, partnership, or corporation that
shall engage in the business of buying, selling, bartering, or exchanging, or
shall collect, receive, store, or hold in possession for sale, barter, or
exchange, any of the things in and by this section defined as “junk.”
   JUNK YARD. Includes the premises on which a junk dealer is engaged in the
business of buying, selling, bartering, exchanging, or collecting, receiving,
storing, or holding in possession for sale, barter, or exchange, any of the
things in and by this section defined as “junk.”
(Prior Code, § 7-5-1)
Cross-reference:
   Further definitions related to junk, see §§
71.001,
71.002,
71.030 through
71.036,
91.001,
91.002,
91.015 through
91.020, and
91.037
§ 113.021 PHYSICAL REQUIREMENTS.
   The minimum physical requirements at all times for each junk yard shall be
as follows.
   (A)   The premises where the junk yard is located shall not have more than
two entrances thereto and two exits therefrom, each of which shall not exceed
15 feet in width at the perimeter of the premises.
   (B)   The premises where the junk yard is located shall be enclosed on its
perimeter with a solid, non-transparent, vertical wall or fence of a minimum
height of seven feet measured from ground level, excepting for the entrances
and exits permitted by division (A) above.
   (C)   The aforesaid solid, non-transparent wall or fence and the gates or
doors, if any, at the aforesaid entrances and exits shall not contain any sign,
poster, or advertising matter of any kind whatsoever, excepting one sign of the
licensee thereon not exceeding 100 square feet in size.
   (D)   The public streets and alleys adjacent to the junk yard shall not have
junk thereon.
(Prior Code, § 7-5-2)
§ 113.022 LICENSE REQUIRED.
   (A)   (1)   It shall be unlawful for any person to keep, maintain, conduct
or operate a junk yard within the corporate limits of the village without first
obtaining a license to do so as herein provided.
      (2)   A separate license shall be secured for each junk yard located on
non-contiguous lots, blocks, tracts, or parcels of land.
(Prior Code, § 7-5-3)
   (B)   (1)   Any and all licenses issued hereunder shall state that such
license is issued in the name of the junk dealer solely for the purpose of
keeping, maintaining, conducting, and operating a junk yard, the expiration
date thereof, the legal description of the premises where the junk yard is to
be located, that the license shall be used and the privileges thereof exercised
only at the described premises, and that such license is non-assignable and
non-transferable.
      (2)   Such license shall further provide that it is issued subject to all
the provisions of this subchapter; that upon the first conviction for a
violation of any of the provisions of this chapter, in addition to the fine,
such junk yard shall remain closed for a period of 30 days; that upon the
second conviction for a violation of any of the provisions of this chapter,
such license shall become null and void, and the licensee shall forfeit all
sums paid for such license, and that the licensee, by the acceptance of such
license expressly agrees to all the terms and conditions thereof, and to the
terms and provisions of this section and all amendments thereto.
(Prior Code, § 7-5-6)
Penalty, see §
113.999
§ 113.023 LICENSE APPLICATION; FEES.
   (A)   (1)   Before any license under the provisions of this section is
issued, any person desiring to operate a junk yard in the village shall first
make a verified application in writing to the Village Clerk in the absence of
provision to the contrary, stating thereon the full name of the applicant, his
or her residence address, the trade name of the applicant, the legal
description of the premises where the junk yard is to be located, the size and
approximate location of each entrance thereto and exit therefrom, whether or
not the premises where the junk yard is to be located is enclosed on its
perimeter with a solid, non-transparent wall or fence of a minimum height of
seven feet, measured from ground level, excepting the entrances and exits, and
whether or not the public streets and alleys adjacent to the premises where the
junk yard is to be located have junk thereon.
      (2)   If the applicant is a firm or partnership, the names and residence
addresses of all the partners and in the case of a corporation, and the names
and residence addresses of the president and secretary shall be stated in the
application.
(Prior Code, § 7-5-4)
   (B)   (1)   The annual license fee for each junk yard shall be $200, payable
in advance with the filing of the application for license, and shall not be
subject to pro rata reduction for a portion of the year, either because of the
application for or because of revocation of a license; provided, however, that
only one annual license fee shall be payable for licenses which may be issued
whenever the applicant desires to keep, maintain, conduct, or operate junk
yards on lots, blocks, tracts, or parcels of land which are situated on
directly opposite sides of and abut upon each side of a public street or alley.
      (2)   Where such place of business is not located in the village, but the
operator carries on the business of buying or collecting or bartering for the
items heretofore enumerated within the village, the annual fee shall be $200
for each junk dealer. The fee is payable as provided in this code of
ordinances.
(Prior Code, § 7-5-7)
§ 113.024 LICENSE DISQUALIFICATION.
   Any applicant for a license to keep, maintain, conduct, or operate a junk
yard shall be disqualified for any of the following reasons:
   (A)   Not a person of good character;
   (B)   Falsification of an application for a license hereunder;
   (C)   License for a junk yard theretofore issued to the applicant has been
revoked during the preceding 24 months; or
   (D)   Failure to meet any one of the minimum physical requirements for a
junk yard as specified in §
113.021.
(Prior Code, § 7-5-5)
§ 113.025 MINORS.
   No licensee hereunder shall purchase or receive any article whatsoever from
any minor, without the written consent of his or her parent(s) or guardian(s).
(Prior Code, § 7-5-8) Penalty, see §
113.999
§ 113.999 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which no
specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to §
10.999 of this code of ordinances.
   (B)   Any person who violates any provision of §§
113.001 through
113.008 shall, upon conviction thereof, be fined $100.
(Prior Code, § 7-7-10) (Ord. 15-04, passed 7-6-2015)
CHAPTER 114: ADULT ENTERTAINMENT ESTABLISHMENTS
Section
   
114.001   Purpose
   
114.002   Definitions
   
114.003   License required; fees
   
114.004   Issuance of license
   
114.005   Liquor license
   
114.006   Inspection
   
114.007   Expiration, suspension, revocation, or transfer of license
   
114.008   Business records
   
114.009   Cabaret restrictions
   
114.010   Video viewing booth restrictions
   
114.011   Hours of operation
§ 114.001 PURPOSE.
   The purpose of this chapter is to regulate adult uses to protect the
community from the many types of criminal activity frequently associated with
such uses. The village recognizes that such regulation cannot effectively
prohibit such uses, but can balance the competing interest of the community in
reducing criminal activity and protecting property values versus the protected
rights of the owners, operators, employees, and patrons of adult uses.
(Prior Code, § 7-6-1)
§ 114.002 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ADULT BOOKSTORE. An establishment having as a substantial or significant
portion of its sales or stock in trade, books, magazines, films for sale or for
viewing on premises by use of motion picture devices or by coin operated means,
and periodicals which are distinguished or characterized by their emphasis on
matter depicting, describing, or relating to specified sexual activities, or
specified anatomical areas, or an establishment with a segment or section
devoted to the sale or display of such materials, or an establishment that
holds itself out to the public as a purveyor of such materials based upon its
signage, advertising, displays, actual sales, presence of video preview or
coin-operated booths, exclusion of minors from the establishments premises, or
any other factors showing the establishments primary purpose is to purvey such
material.
   ADULT ENTERTAINMENT CABARET. A public or private establishment which:
      (1)   Features topless dancers, strippers, “go-go” dancers, male or
female impersonators, or lingerie or bathing suit fashion shows;
      (2)   Not infrequently features entertainers who display specified
anatomical areas; or
      (3)   Features entertainers who, by reason of their appearance or
conduct, perform in a manner which is designed primarily to appeal to the
prurient interest of the patron or features entertainers who engage in or are
engaged in explicit simulation of specified sexual activities.
   ADULT MOTION PICTURE THEATER. A building or area used for presenting
materials distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on matter depicting,
describing, or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical
areas for observation by patrons therein.
   ADULT NOVELTY STORE. An establishment having a substantial or significant
portion of its sales or stock in trade consisting of toys, devices, clothing
novelties, lotions, and other items distinguished or characterized by their
emphasis on or use for specialized sexual activities or specified anatomical
areas or an establishment that holds itself out to the public as a purveyor of
such materials based upon its signage, advertising, displays, actual sales,
exclusion of minors from the establishment’s premises, or any other factors
showing the establishment’s primary purpose is to purvey such material.
   ADULT USE. Adult bookstores, adult motion picture theaters, adult
entertainment cabarets, adult clubs allowing nudity at regular or frequent
times, adult novelty stores, and other similar uses.
   EMPLOYEE. Employees, independent contractors, or any other person who is
retained by the licensee or subject to dismissal from working at the licensed
premises.
   NUDITY. The showing of the human male or female genitals, pubic area, female
breasts with less than a full opaque covering below a point immediately above
the top of the areola, human male genitals in a discernibly turgid state, even
if completely and opaquely covered, or the portion of the buttocks which would
be covered by a properly worn thong type bikini bottom.
   PUBLIC PLACE. Any location frequented by the public, or where the public is
present or likely to be present, or where a person may reasonably be expected
to be observed by members of the public.
      (1)   PUBLIC PLACES include, but are not limited to, streets, sidewalks,
parks, beaches, business and commercial establishments (whether for profit or
not-for-profit and whether open to the public at large or where entrance is
limited by a cover charge or membership requirement), hotels, motels,
restaurants, nightclubs, country clubs, cabarets, and meeting facilities
utilized by social, fraternal, or similar organizations.
      (2)   Premises used solely as a private residence, whether permanent or
temporary in nature, shall not be deemed a PUBLIC PLACE. PUBLIC PLACES shall
not include enclosed single-sex public restrooms, enclosed single-sex
functional showers, locker, and/or dressing room facilities, enclosed motel
rooms and hotel rooms designed and intended for sleeping accommodations,
doctors offices, churches, synagogues, or similar places when used for
circumcisions, baptisms, or similar religious ceremonies, portions of
hospitals, and similar places in which nudity or exposure is necessarily and
customarily expected outside of the home; nor shall it include a person
appearing in a state of nudity in a modeling class operated by:
         (a)   A proprietary school licensed by the state;
         (b)   A college, junior college, or university supported entirely or
partly by taxation; or
         (c)   A private college or university which maintains and operates
educational programs in which credits are transferable to a college, junior
college, or a university supported entirely or partly by taxation or an
accredited private college.
   SPECIFIED SEXUAL ACTIVITIES. Includes:
      (1)   Human genitals in the state of sexual stimulation or arousal;
      (2)   Acts of human masturbation, sexual intercourse, or sodomy; and
      (3)   Fondling or other erotic touching of human genitals, pubic region,
buttocks, or female breasts.
   SPECIFIED ANATOMICAL AREAS. Includes:
      (1)   Human male genitals in a discernibly turgid state, even if
completely and opaquely covered; and
      (2)   Less than completely and opaquely covered:
         (a)   Human genitals;
         (b)   Pubic region;
         (c)   Buttocks; and/or
         (d)   Female breasts below a point immediately above the top of the
areola.
   SPECIFIED CRIMINAL ACTIVITY. Any of the following offenses:
      (1)   Prostitution or promotion of prostitution; dissemination of
obscenity; sale distribution or display of harmful material to a minor; sexual
performance by a minor; possession or distribution of child pornography; public
lewdness; public indecency; indecency with a child; engaged in organized
criminal activity; sexual assault; molestation of a child; gambling; or
distribution of a controlled substance; or any similar offenses to those
described above under the criminal or penal code of other states or countries;
      (2)   For which:
         (a)   Less than two years have elapsed since the date of conviction or
the date of release from confinement imposed for the conviction which is the
later, date, if the conviction is of a misdemeanor offense;
         (b)   Less than five years have elapsed since the date of conviction
or the date of release from confinement for conviction, whichever is the later
date, if the conviction is a felony offense; or
         (c)   Less than five years have elapsed since the date of the last
conviction or the date of release from confinement from the last conviction,
whichever is the later date, if the convictions are of two or more misdemeanor
offenses or combination of misdemeanor offenses occurred within any 24- month
period.
      (3)   The fact that a conviction is being appealed shall have no effect
on the disqualification of the applicant.
(Prior Code, § 7-6-2)
§ 114.003 LICENSE REQUIRED; FEES.
   (A)   (1)   It shall be unlawful for any person to operate an adult use
without a valid adult use business license issued by the village pursuant to
this chapter.
      (2)   An application for a license shall be made on a form provided by
the village.
      (3)   All applicants must be qualified according to the provisions of
this chapter. The application may request and the applicant shall provide such
information (including fingerprints) as is needed to enable the village to
determine whether the applicant meets the qualifications established in this
chapter.
      (4)   If a person who wishes to operate an adult use is an individual,
the person must sign the application for a license as applicant. If the
applicant is a club consisting of private or public membership, then such
entity shall also be licensed under this chapter. If a person who wishes to
operate an adult use is other than an individual or club, each individual who
has a 20% or greater interest in the business, including corporations, must
sign the application for a license as applicant. Each applicant must be
qualified under the following section and each applicant shall be considered a
licensee if the license is granted.
      (5)   The completed application for an adult use business license shall
contain the following information:
         (a)   If the applicant is an individual, the individual shall state
his or her legal name and any aliases and submit proof that he or she is 18
years of age;
         (b)   If the applicant is a club consisting of private or public
membership, a copy of the by-laws of the club must be submitted with the
application. In addition, a sworn statement as to the purposes, general
activities, and requirement for club membership must be submitted;
         (c)   If the applicant is a partnership, the partnership shall state
its complete name and the names of all partners, whether the partnership is
general or limited, and a copy of the partnership agreement, if any; or
         (d)   If the applicant is a corporation, the corporation shall state
its complete name, the date of incorporation, evidence that the corporation is
in good standing under the laws of its state of incorporation, the names and
capacity of all officers, directors, and principal shareholders, (those with a
20% or more stake) and the name and address of the registered corporate agent.
      (6)   If the applicant intends to operate the adult use business under a
name other than that of the application, he or she must state:
         (a)   The business’ fictitious name; and
         (b)   Submit any required registration documents.
      (7)   The applicant shall include whether he or she has been convicted of
any specified criminal activity as defined in this chapter, and if so, the
specified criminal activity involved, the date, place, and jurisdiction of
each.
      (8)   The applicant shall include whether he or she has had a previous
license under this chapter or similar ordinances from another jurisdiction
denied, suspended, or revoked, including the name and location of the business
which the permit was denied, suspended, or revoked, as well as the date of the
denial, suspension, or revocation. If the applicant has been a partner in a
partnership or an officer, director, or principal stockholder of a corporation
that is or was licensed under this chapter or similar ordinance in another
jurisdiction and a license has previously been denied, suspended, or revoked,
he or she shall include the name and location of the business for which the
permit was denied, suspended, or revoked, as well as the date of denial,
suspension, or revocation.
      (9)   The applicant shall include whether he or she holds any other
licenses under this chapter or other similar ordinance from another
jurisdiction, and, if so, the names and locations of such other licensed
businesses.
      (10)   The applicant shall include a sketch or diagram showing the
configuration of the premises, including a statement of total floor area
occupied by the business. This sketch or diagram need not be professionally
prepared, but it must be drawn to a designated scale or drawn with marked
dimensions of the interior of the premises.
(Prior Code, § 7-6-3)
   (B)   Every application for an adult use business license (whether a new
license or for renewal of an existing license) shall be accompanied by a
$2,500, non-refundable application and investigation fee.
(Prior Code, § 7-6-6)
§ 114.004 ISSUANCE OF LICENSE.
   (A)   Within 30 days after receipt of a completed adult use business license
application, the village shall approve or deny the issuance of a license to an
applicant. The village shall approve the issuance of a license unless it
determines, by a preponderance of the evidence, any one or more of the
following:
      (1)   The applicant is under 18 years of age;
      (2)   The applicant is overdue in payment to the village of taxes, fees,
fines, or penalties assessed against or imposed upon him or her in relation to
any business;
      (3)   The applicant has failed to provide information reasonably
necessary for the issuance of the license or has falsely answered a question or
request for information on the application form;
      (4)   The applicant has been denied a license by the village to operate
an adult use business within the preceding 12 months or whose license to
operate an adult use business has been revoked within the preceding 12 months;
      (5)   The applicant has been convicted of a specified criminal activity
defined in this chapter;
      (6)   The premises to be used for adult use business has not been
inspected and approved by the Fire Department and the Building Department as
being in compliance with applicable laws and ordinances;
      (7)   The license fee required by this chapter has not been paid; or
      (8)   The applicant of the proposed establishment is in violation or in
not in compliance with all of the provisions of this chapter.
   (B)   The license, if granted, shall state on its face the name of the
person or persons to whom it is granted, the expiration date, and the address
of the adult use business. All licenses shall be posted in a conspicuous place
at or near the entrance to the business so that they may be easily read at any
time.
   (C)   The Fire Department and the Code Enforcement Officers shall complete
their inspection certification that the premises is in compliance or not in
compliance with village codes within 20 days of receipt of the application by
the village.
   (D)   (1)   No adult use business license shall be issued unless it meets
all criteria set forth in the Zoning Code.
      (2)   However, an adult use business license may be issued for a premises
which is a legal nonconforming use which has not yet been amortized or for a
premises where such amortization is being challenged by litigation.
   (E)   No signs, advertising, or other notice to the public may be given for
any premises where adult use is conducted pursuant to this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 7-6-4) Penalty, see §
10.999
§ 114.005 LIQUOR LICENSE.
   (A)   No liquor license shall be issued to a licensee or to premises where
adult use is conducted, nor shall liquor be sold, given away, or allowed to be
consumed on the premises where any adult use is conducted.
(Prior Code, § 7-6-5)
   (B)   No adult use may be issued a liquor license. Nor shall any
establishment with a liquor license operate as an adult use.
(Prior Code, § 7-6-13)
Penalty, see §
10.999
§ 114.006 INSPECTION.
   (A)   (1)   An applicant or licensee shall permit representatives of the
Police Department, Fire Department, Building Department, or other village or
village-designated departments or agencies to inspect the premises of the adult
use for the purpose of ensuring compliance with the provisions of this chapter
at any time it is occupied or open for business.
      (2)   A person who operates an adult use or his or her agent or employee
violates this chapter is he or she refuses to permit such lawful inspection of
the premises at any time it is occupied or open for business.
(Prior Code, § 7-6-7)
   (B)   Any licensee hereunder shall permit law enforcement officials, free,
and unlimited access to the premises during hours of operation, upon reasonable
request, for the purposes of investigating compliance with the provisions of
this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 7-6-17)
Penalty, see §
10.999
§ 114.007 EXPIRATION, SUSPENSION, REVOCATION, OR TRANSFER OF LICENSE.
   (A)   Each license shall expire on the January 1 after it was issued and may
be renewed only by making application as provided in §
114.004. Application for renewal shall be made at least 30 days before the
expiration date and when made less than 30 days before the expiration date, the
expiration of license will not be affected. If the village denies renewal of a
license, the applicant shall not be issued a license for one year from the date
of denial. If, subsequent to denial, the [reserved].
(Prior Code, § 7-6-8)
   (B)   (1)   The village may suspend a license for a period not to exceed 30
days if, after a hearing, it determines that a licensee or an employee of a
licensee:
         (a)   Violated or is not in compliance with any section of this
chapter;
         (b)   Refused to allow an inspection of the adult use business
premises as authorized by this chapter; or
         (c)   Knowingly permitted gambling by any person on the adult use
business premises.
      (2)   If the licensee or an employee of the licensee has been found
guilty in a court of law of a violation of this chapter, no hearing is
necessary prior to suspension of the license.
(Prior Code, § 7-6-9)
   (C)   (1)   The village shall revoke a license if a cause of suspension in
division (A) above occurs and the license has been suspended within the
preceding 12 months or if the licensee is convicted of any specified criminal
activity.
      (2)   The village may revoke a license if it determines, after a hearing,
that:
         (a)   A licensee gave false or misleading information in the material
submitted during the application process;
         (b)   A licensee or management personnel has knowingly allowed
possession, use, or sale of alcohol or controlled substances on the premises;
         (c)   A licensee or management personnel has knowingly allowed
prostitution on the premises;
         (d)   A licensee or management personnel knowingly operated the adult
use business during a period of time when the licensee’s license was suspended;
         (e)   A licensee or management personnel has knowingly allowed any act
of sexual intercourse, sodomy, oral copulation, masturbation, or other sex act
to occur in or on the licensed premises;
         (f)   A licensee is delinquent in payment to the village, county, or
state for any taxes or fees past due;
         (g)   A licensee or management personnel has knowingly facilitated
another’s commission of the offense of public indecency; or
         (h)   The adult use is a public nuisance as defined by statute,
ordinance or case law.
      (3)   If the village revokes a license, the revocation shall continue for
one year and the licensee shall not be issued an adult use business license for
one year from the date the revocation became effective. If subsequent to
revocation, the village finds that the factual basis for the revocation did not
occur, the applicant may be granted a license.
      (4)   After denial of an application, or denial of a renewal of an
application, or suspension or a revocation of any license, the applicant or
licensee may seek prompt judicial review of such action in any court of
competent jurisdiction.
(Prior Code, § 7-6-10)
   (D)   A licensee shall not transfer his or her license to another nor shall
a license operate an adult use business under the authority of a license at any
place other than the address on the license.
(Prior Code, § 7-6-11)
§ 114.008 BUSINESS RECORDS.
   (A)   All adult uses shall file a verified report with the village showing
the licensee’s gross receipts and amounts paid to employees during the
preceding calendar year.
   (B)   In addition, all adult uses shall maintain and retain for a period of
two years, the names, addresses, and ages of all persons employed, including
independent contractors, by the licensee.
(Prior Code, § 7-6-12)
§ 114.009 CABARET RESTRICTIONS.
   All dancing or other performances shall occur on a stage intended for that
purpose which is raised at least two feet from the level of the floor. No
dancing or other performance shall occur closer than ten feet to any patron. In
addition, no dancer or performer shall fondle, caress, or otherwise touch any
patron and no patron shall fondle, caress, or otherwise touch any dancer or
performer. No patron shall directly pay or give any gratuity to any dancer or
performer and no dancer shall solicit any pay or gratuity from any patron.
Gratuities may be indirectly given to dancers or performers by placing the
gratuity on the stage.
(Prior Code, § 7-6-14) Penalty, see §
10.999
§ 114.010 VIDEO VIEWING BOOTH RESTRICTIONS.
   (A)   No booths, stalls, or partitioned portions of a room or individual
rooms used for the viewing of motion pictures or other forms of entertainment
shall have doors, curtains, or portal partitions, but all such booths, stalls,
or partitioned portions or a room or individual rooms so used shall have at
least one side open to an adjacent public room so that the area inside is
visible to persons in the adjacent public room.
   (B)   All such described areas shall be lighted in such a manner that the
persons in the areas used for viewing motion pictures or other forms of
entertainment are visible from the adjacent public rooms, but such lighting
shall not be of such intensity as to prevent the view of the motion pictures or
other offered entertainment.
(Prior Code, § 7-6-15) Penalty, see §
10.999
§ 114.011 HOURS OF OPERATION.
    No adult use shall be open prior to 10:00 a.m. or after 2:00 p.m.
(Prior Code, § 7-6-16) Penalty, see §
10.999
CHAPTER 115: ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES
Section
General Provisions
   
115.001   Definitions
License Requirements
   
115.015   License required
   
115.016   License applications
   
115.017   Examination of applicant
   
115.018   Prohibited licenses
   
115.019   License term; fees
   
115.020   Classification of licenses; annual fees
   
115.021   Nature of licenses
   
115.022   Limitation of licenses
   
115.023   Dramshop insurance
   
115.024   Display of license
   
115.025   Record
Operating Conditions and Regulations
   
115.040   Hours of operation; happy hour restrictions
   
115.041   Prohibited locations
   
115.042   Change of location
   
115.043   Vehicles transporting liquor
   
115.044   Open liquor to-go prohibited
   
115.045   Election days
   
115.046   Unlawful acts
   
115.047   Unlawful entertainment
   
115.048   Sanitary conditions; health permit
   
115.049   Diseased employees
   
115.050   Peddling
   
115.051   Gambling
   
115.052   Disorderly house
   
115.053   Prohibited sales
   
115.054   Minors; exclusions
   
115.055   Posting warning
   
115.056   Inspections
   
115.057   Books and records
   
115.058   Restrictions
Illegal Acts and Purchasing of Alcohol
   
115.070   Unlawful purchase
   
115.071   Identification required
   
115.072   Transfer of identification card
   
115.073   False identification
   
115.074   Underage drinking on streets
   
115.075   Residential drinking
   
115.076   Renting hotel rooms for drinking
   
115.077    Consumption area licenses (Class 2(B))
Violations
   
115.090   Owner of premises permitting violations
   
115.091   Act of agent or employee; liability
   
115.092   Revocation of license after conviction
   
115.093   Misbranding
   
115.094   Abatement of place used in violation
   
115.095   Use of premises after revocation
   
115.096   Revocation or suspension of license
   
115.097   Complaint by residents
   
115.098   Appeals from order of Liquor Commissioner
   
115.099   Subsequent violations
 
   
115.999   Penalty
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 115.001 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ACT. The Liquor Control Act of 1934, being 235 ILCS 5/.
   ALCOHOL. The product of distillation of any fermented liquid, whether
rectified or diluted, whatever may be the origin thereof, and includes
synthetic ethyl alcohol. It does not include denatured alcohol or wood alcohol.
   ALCOHOLIC LIQUOR. Alcohol, spirits, wine, and beer, and every liquid or
solid, patented or not, containing alcohol, spirits, wine, or beer, and capable
of being consumed as a beverage by human beings. The provisions of this chapter
shall not apply to alcohol used in the manufacture of denatured alcohol
produced in accordance with acts of United States Congress and regulations
promulgated thereunder, nor to any liquid or solid containing one-half of one
percent or less of alcohol by volume.
   BEER. A beverage obtained by the alcoholic fermentation of an infusion or
concoction of barley or other grain, malt, and hops in water, and includes,
among other things, beer, ale, stout, lager beer, porter, and the like.
   CLOSE. To shut up so as to prevent entrance or access by any person, and the
entire suspension of business.
   CLUB. A corporation organized under the laws of this state and not for
pecuniary profit, solely for the promotion of some common object other than the
sale or consumption of alcoholic liquors, kept, used, and maintained by its
members, through the payment of annual dues, and owning, hiring, or leasing a
building or space in a building of such extent and character as may be suitable
and adequate for the reasonable and comfortable use and accommodation of its
members and their guests and provided with suitable and adequate kitchen and
dining space and equipment and maintaining a sufficient number of servants and
employees for cooking, preparing, and serving food and meals for its members
and their guests; provided that such CLUB files with the Mayor at the time of
its application for a license under this chapter two copies of a list of names
and residences of its members, and similarly files within ten days of the
election of any additional member, his or her name and address; and provided
further, that its affairs and management are conducted by a board of directors,
executive committee, or similar body chosen by the members at their annual
meeting, and that no member or officer, agent, or employee of the CLUB is paid
or directly or indirectly receives in the form of salary or other compensation
any profits from the distribution or sale of alcoholic liquor to the CLUB or
its members or guests introduced by members, beyond the amount of such salary
as may be fixed and voted at the annual meeting by the members or by the board
of directors or other governing body out of the general revenue of the CLUB.
   MAYOR. The Local Liquor Control Commissioner as provided in 235 ILCS,
entitled “Dramshop” and all references to Liquor Commissioner shall refer to
the Mayor unless otherwise provided.
   PACKAGE LIQUOR STORE. Any public place where packaged liquors are offered
for sale in the original, unopened container for consumption away from the
premises.
   PUBLIC PLACE.
      (1)    Any premises enclosed or unenclosed or partly enclosed and partly
unenclosed wherein any service or goods, chattels, or merchandise are offered
for sale to the public or any such premises used as a clubhouse, club room, or
meeting place.
      (2)   The terms PUBLIC PLACE and PUBLIC PREMISES shall be interchangeable
for the purposes of this chapter.
   RESIDENT. One who has his or her residence in the village and is a
registered voter at that place of residence.
   RESTAURANT. Any public place kept, used, maintained, advertised, and held
out to the public as a place where meals are served, and where meals actually
are served and regularly served, without sleeping accommodations, such space
being provided with adequate and sanitary kitchen and dining room equipment and
capacity and having employed therein a sufficient number and kind of employees
to prepare, cook, and serve suitable food for its guests.
   RETAILER. A person who sells or offers for sale alcoholic liquor for use or
consumption and not for resale in any form.
   SALE. Any transfer, exchange, or barter in any manner or by any means
whatsoever for a consideration, and includes and means all sales made by any
person, whether principal, proprietor, agent, servant, or employee.
   SELL AT RETAIL and SALE OF RETAIL. Any mean sales for use or consumption and
not for resale in any form.
   SPIRITS. Any beverage which contains alcohol obtained by distillation, mixed
with water or other substance in solution, and includes brandy, rum, whiskey,
gin, or other spirituous liquors and such liquors when rectified, blended, or
otherwise mixed with alcohol or other substances.
   TO SELL. Includes to keep or expose for sale and to keep with intent to
sell.
   WINE. Any alcoholic beverage obtained by the fermentation of the natural
contents of fruits or vegetables containing sugar, including such beverages
when fortified by the addition of alcohol or spirits as above defined.
(Prior Code, § 21-1-1)
Statutory reference:
   Related provisions, see 235 ILCS 5/3.01 et seq.
LICENSE REQUIREMENTS
§ 115.015 LICENSE REQUIRED.
   (A)   No person shall sell, keep, or offer for sale at retail, or conduct
any place for the sale at retail of alcoholic liquor within the limits and
territory of the village without having a license to do so, issued by the Mayor
of the village in the manner hereinafter provided, and a valid license for such
purpose issued by the State Liquor Control Commissioner.
   (B)   A similar valid license issued by the Mayor of the village is hereby
required for and with respect to each building, location, and premises, within
the aforesaid territory of the village, at or upon which alcoholic liquor is to
be sold or kept or offered for sale at retail.
(Prior Code, § 21-2-1)
Statutory reference:
   Related provisions, see 235 ILCS 5/4-1
§ 115.016 LICENSE APPLICATIONS.
   (A)   The Mayor is authorized to grant and issue licenses to individuals,
firms, and corporations to sell at retail and to keep and offer for sale at
retail alcoholic liquors within the limits and territory of the village upon
the conditions and in the manner provided by this chapter and by the Act of the
General Assembly of the state, and not otherwise. Such license shall be in
writing, signed by the Mayor and attested by the Village Clerk, with the seal
of his or her office affixed thereto.
   (B)   Prior to issuance of a license, the applicant must submit to the Mayor
an application in triplicate, in writing and under oath, stating the following:
      (1)   The name, age, and address of the applicant in the case of an
individual; in the case of a co-partnership, the persons entitled to share in
the profits thereof, and in the case of a corporation for profit or a club, the
date of incorporation, the object for which it was organized, the names and
addresses of the officers, directors, and the name of the person who will be
managing the establishment for which the license is sought, and, if a majority
in interest of the stock of such corporation is owned by one person or his or
her nominee, the address and name of such person;
      (2)   The citizenship of the applicant, his or her place of birth and if
a naturalized citizen, the time and place of his or her naturalization;
      (3)   The character of business of the applicant, and in the case of a
corporation, the objects for which it was formed;
      (4)   The length of time that the applicant has been engaged in the
business of that character or in the case of a corporation, the date on which
its charter was issued;
      (5)   The location and description of the premises or place of business
which is to be operated under such license;
      (6)   Whether applicant has made similar application for a similar other
license on premises other than described in the application and the disposition
of such application;
      (7)   The applicant has never been convicted of a felony and is not
disqualified to receive a license by reason of any matter or thing contained in
the aforesaid Act of the General Assembly or in this chapter or resolution and
amendments thereto;
      (8)   Whether a previous license issued to the applicant by any state, or
subdivision thereof, or by the federal government has been revoked and the
reasons therefor; and
      (9)   He or she will not violate any of the laws of the state or of the
United States, or any of the provisions of this chapter or resolution and
amendments thereto in the conduct of his or her place of business.
   (C)   In the case of a partnership or corporation, the information and
statements required by this section shall be furnished as to each partner, and
with respect to a corporation, the information and statements required by this
section shall be furnished as to the president of the corporation, the
secretary of the corporation, the directors of the corporation, and with
respect to the person who is to manage the establishment for which a license is
sought.
   (D)   If the application is made on behalf of a partnership, firm,
association, club, or corporation, then the same shall be signed and sworn to
by at least two members of such partnership, firm, association, or club, or by
the president and secretary of such corporation.
   (E)   (1)   One copy of the application shall be retained by the Mayor, and
one copy given to the Chief of Police; the Chief of Police shall endorse on the
copies his or her approval or disapproval of the application and may make
further comments regarding that application.
      (2)   The copies shall be returned to the Mayor, and the endorsement and
comment of the Chief of Police shall be considered by him or her as an aid in
deciding whether the license should be issued or refused.
(Prior Code, § 21-2-2)
Statutory reference:
   Related provisions, see 235 ILCS 5/7-1
§ 115.017 EXAMINATION OF APPLICANT.
   (A)   The Mayor shall have the right to examine or cause to be examined,
under oath, any applicant for a local license or for renewal thereof, or any
licensee upon whom notice of revocation or suspension has been served in the
manner hereinafter provided, and to examine or cause to be examined, the books
and records of any such applicant or licensee; to hear testimony and take proof
for his or her information in the performance of his or her duties, and for
such purpose to issue subpoenas which shall be effective in any part of this
state.
   (B)   For the purpose of obtaining any of the information desired by the
Mayor under this section, he or she may authorize his or her agent to act on
his or her behalf.
(Prior Code, § 21-2-3)
Statutory reference:
   Related provisions, see 235 ILCS 5/4-5
§ 115.018 PROHIBITED LICENSES.
   No retail license shall be issued by the Mayor to the following:
   (A)   A person who is not a resident of the village;
   (B)   A person who is not a citizen of the United States;
   (C)   A person who has been convicted of a felony under any federal or state
law if the Mayor determines, after investigation, that such person has not been
sufficiently rehabilitated to warrant the public trust;
   (D)   A person who has been convicted of being the keeper of or is keeping a
house of ill-fame;
   (E)   A person who has been convicted of pandering or other crime or
misdemeanor opposed to decency or morality;
   (F)   A person whose license has previously been revoked for cause;
   (G)   A person who, at the time of the application for renewal for any
license issued hereunder, would not be eligible for such license upon first
application;
   (H)   A co-partnership, if any general partnership thereof or any limited
partnership thereof, owning more than 5% of the aggregate limited partner
interest in such co-partnership would not be eligible to receive a license
hereunder for any reason;
   (I)   A corporation, if any officer, manager, or director thereof or any
stockholder owning in the aggregate more than 5% of such corporation, would not
be eligible to receive a license hereunder for any reason other than the
requirement for citizenship and residence;
   (J)   A corporation unless it is incorporated in the state, or unless it is
a foreign corporation which is qualified under the Business Corporation Act of
1983, being 805 ILCS 5/1.01 et seq., to transact business in the state;
   (K)   A person whose place of business is conducted by a manager or agent
unless the manager or agent possesses the same qualifications required by the
licensee;
   (L)   Any person, association, or corporation not eligible for a state
retail liquor license;
   (M)   A person who is not of good character and reputation in the community
in which he or she resides;
   (N)   A person who has been convicted of a violation of any federal or state
law concerning the manufacture, possession or sale of alcoholic liquor,
subsequent to the passage of this code of ordinances or has forfeited his or
her bond to appear in court to answer charges for any such violation;
   (O)   A person who does not own the premises for which a license is sought,
or does not rent nor have a lease thereon for the full period for which the
license is to be issued;
   (P)   Any law enforcing public official, including members of local liquor
control commissions, any mayor, alderman, or member of a city council or
commission, any president of a village board of trustees, any member of a
village board of trustees, or any president or member of a county board; and no
such official shall be interested directly in the manufacture, sale, or
distribution of alcoholic liquor, except that license may be granted to such
official in relation to premises which are not located within the territory
subject to the jurisdiction of that official if the issuance of such license is
approved by the State Liquor Control Commission and the Mayor;
   (Q)   A person who is not a beneficial owner of the business to be operated
by the licensee;
   (R)   A person who has been convicted of a gambling offense as prescribed by
any of subsections (a)(3) through (a)(10) of § 28-1 of 720 ILCS 5/, or as
proscribed by § 28-3 of the Criminal Code of 1961, approved July 28, 1961,
being 720 ILCS 5/28-3, as heretofore or hereafter amended, or as proscribed by
a statute replaced by any of the aforesaid statutory provisions;
   (S)   A person to whom a federal wagering stamp has been issued by the
federal government for the current tax period;
   (T)   A co-partnership to which a federal wagering stamp has been issued by
the federal government for the current tax period, or if any of the partners
have been issued a federal gaming device stamp or federal wagering stamp by the
federal government for the current tax period;
   (U)   A corporation, if any officer, manager, or director thereof, or any
stockholder owning in the aggregate more than 20% of the stock of such
corporation has been issued a federal wagering stamp for the current tax
period; or
   (V)   Any premises for which a federal wagering stamp has been issued by the
federal government for the current tax period.
(Prior Code, § 21-2-4)
§ 115.019 LICENSE TERM; FEES.
   (A)   (1)   Retail liquor licenses issued under this chapter shall be valid
for 12-month periods upon the payment of the license fee as hereinafter set
forth unless sooner revoked or suspended.
      (2)   The 12-month periods shall be from July 1 to June 30 of the
following year.
   (B)   (1)   The license fee shall be payable in advance by the applicant for
a license at the time the application for a license is submitted to the Local
Liquor Control Commissioner as hereinbefore provided.
      (2)   In the event the license is denied, the license fee shall be
returned to the applicant. The fees shall be deposited in the village’s General
Fund. The application for a license shall be filed with the Village Clerk.
   (C)   Licenses shall state thereon the names of the licensees and the
address and description of the premises for which they are granted and the
dates of their issuance and expiration.
   (D)   (1)   With respect to a corporation operating an establishment for
which a liquor license has been issued, should the manager of said
establishment change after the issuance of said liquor license, the corporation
must submit the new manager’s name and shall be submitted within 30 days.
      (2)   Continuation of the license will be contingent upon a background
check of the new manager as set out in this chapter, and all fees shall be
waived should the license be changed only as a result of a change of managers.
      (3)   If, for some reason, the manager is not acceptable, the licensee
shall have 30 days to submit a new name before revocation.
      (4)   Failure to provide new information shall be grounds for suspension
or revocation of said license.
(Prior Code, § 21-2-5)
Statutory reference:
   Related provisions, see 235 ILCS 5/4-1
§ 115.020 CLASSIFICATION OF LICENSES; ANNUAL FEES.
   Licenses as required by this subchapter shall be divided into the following
classes.
   (A)   Class A: Tavern licenses. Class A licenses shall authorize the retail
sale of alcoholic liquor for consumption on the premises as well as other
retail sales of alcoholic liquor. The annual license fee for the Class A
license shall be the sum of $200. There shall be a limit of four licenses.
   (B)   Class B(1): Package liquor licenses. Class B(1) licenses shall
authorize the retail sale of alcoholic liquor, but which shall not be consumed
on the premises where sold. The annual fee for the Class B(1) license shall be
the sum of $160. There shall be a limit of four licenses.
   (C)   Class B(2): Package liquor store with on-premises consumption. Class B
(2) licenses shall authorize the retail sale of alcoholic liquors in sealed
packages for consumption off the premises and the retail sale of beer and wine
only for consumption on the premises where sold. The licensed premises shall be
primarily engaged in the sale of alcoholic liquor in sealed packages and shall
have greater than 50% of the gross sales of the business derived from the sale
of alcoholic liquor in sealed packages. The annual fee for such license shall
be $300. No more than two Class B(2) licenses shall be issued at any one time.
   (D)    Class C: Civic organizations. Upon application, the Liquor
Commissioner is authorized to issue a Class C license for a period of 12 or 24
hours to any civic organization which keeps or desires to keep any place
selling or offering for sale, or in any manner dealing in any alcoholic
liquors. The fee for such license shall be for the sale of alcoholic liquors,
the sum of $5 for each 12 hours; for more than 12 hours and not more than 24
hours within any one day, the fee shall be $10, subject to the provisions of
this chapter.
   (E)   Class D: Restaurant (liquor). A Class D License shall authorize the
retail sale of alcoholic liquors for consumption on the premises in licensed
restaurants, when such sales of alcoholic liquor do not constitute the
principal item of business within the licensed restaurant, but is served or
offered incidental to the serving of food and the conducting of a restaurant
business. They shall stop serving alcoholic liquors at 2:00 a.m. each day. Upon
cessation of serving food, Class D licenses shall not be permitted to sell or
dispense alcoholic liquors, nor give away alcoholic liquor to patron of the
restaurant as a part of their meals or in any way attempt to circumvent the
intent and meaning of this section. The annual fee shall be $160.
   (F)   Class E: Club license. Any organization which is a club, as defined in
§
115.001, may obtain a license to sell alcoholic liquors to its own members at
the building or premises actually used as the club’s quarters upon filing with
the Mayor or Village Clerk of this of its written application therefor, signed
by its president or corresponding officer and its secretary or similar officer,
together with two copies of a list of names and residences of all its members.
The license shall be in the form approved by the Mayor and shall be signed by
the Mayor and attested by the Village Clerk. The license shall, at all times,
be displayed by the licensee in a conspicuous place in the room where liquors
are to be sold. The annual fee shall be $1 per quarter.
(Prior Code, § 21-2-6) (Ord. 579, passed 2-11-1985; Ord. 2019-04, passed 3-4-
2019; Ord. 2022-02, passed 8-8-2022)
 Statutory reference:
   Related provisions, see 235 ILCS 5/4-1
§ 115.021 NATURE OF LICENSES.
   (A)   A license issued under this chapter shall be purely a personal
privilege, good for not to exceed one year after issued unless sooner revoked
as in this chapter authorized and provided, and shall not constitute property
nor shall it be subject to attachment, garnishment, or execution, nor shall it
be alienable or transferable, voluntarily or involuntarily, or subject to being
encumbered or hypothecated.
   (B)   Such license shall not descend by the laws of testate or intestate
devolution, but it shall cease upon the death of the licensee; provided that
executors and administrators of any estate of the deceased licensee and the
trustees of any insolvent or bankrupt licensee, when such estate consists in
part of alcoholic liquor, may continue the business of the sale of alcoholic
liquor under the order of the court having jurisdiction of such estate and may
exercise the privileges of such deceased, insolvent, or bankrupt licensee after
the death of such decedent or such insolvency or bankruptcy until the
expiration of such license, but not longer than six months after the death,
bankruptcy, or insolvency of such licensee.
(Prior Code, § 21-2-7)
Statutory reference:
   Related provisions, see 235 ILCS 5/6-1
§ 115.022 LIMITATION OF LICENSES.
   (A)   Annexing license holders. The restrictions contained in this chapter
shall in no way affect taverns and other businesses holding retail liquor
licenses, duly licensed by the county, which are located in the territory
annexed to the village. Licenses may be issued to them or renewed by the duly
constituted authorities upon annexation; provided that thereafter, all of the
restrictions and contingencies contained herein shall apply.
   (B)   Destroyed or damaged business. No license shall be held in existence
by the mere payment of fees by any person, firm, or corporation for a period
longer than 90 days without a tavern or liquor business for the same being in
complete and full operation. However, if a tavern or liquor business has been
destroyed or damaged by fire or act of God and cannot be rebuilt or repaired
within the 90 day period, then, in that event, the Mayor shall extend the
period of time for which a liquor license may be held by the mere payment of
fees without the tavern or liquor business being in full and complete operation
for an additional 90 days.
   (C)   Expiration. If either of the above stated periods of time passes
without the particular tavern or liquor business returning to complete and full
operation, the license for that particular business shall expire and not be
subject to renewal, unless all other requirements of this chapter shall have
been met.
(Prior Code, § 21-2-8)
Statutory reference:
   Related provisions, see 235 ILCS 5/4-1
§ 115.023 DRAMSHOP INSURANCE.
   No license shall be issued hereunder unless the applicant shall file with
the application a certificate by an insurance company authorized to do business
in the state, certifying that the applicant has the following coverages up to
the full amount of potential liability as established by the Illinois Compiled
Statutes from time to time.
(Prior Code, § 21-2-9)
Statutory reference:
   Related provisions, see 235 ILCS 5/6-21
§ 115.024 DISPLAY OF LICENSE.
   Every licensee under this chapter shall cause his or her license to be
framed and hung in plain view in a conspicuous place on the licensed premises.
(Prior Code, § 21-2-10)
Statutory reference:
   Related provisions, see 235 ILCS 5/6-24
§ 115.025 RECORD.
   (A)   The Mayor shall keep a complete record of all licenses issued by him
or her and shall supply the Village Clerk, Village Treasurer, and Chief of
Police a copy of the same.
   (B)   Upon issuance or revocation of a license, the Mayor shall give written
notice to these same officers within 48 hours.
(Prior Code, § 21-2-11)
Statutory reference:
   Related provisions, see 235 ILCS 5/4-1
OPERATING CONDITIONS AND REGULATIONS
§ 115.040 HOURS OF OPERATION; HAPPY HOUR RESTRICTIONS.
   (A)   (1)   It shall be unlawful for the holder of a liquor license to sell
any alcoholic liquor in the village between the hours of 2:00 a.m. and 5:00
a.m. of any day of the week.
      (2)   It shall be unlawful for the holder of a Class D license to sell at
retail any alcoholic liquor in the village between the hours of 2:00 a.m. and
5:00 a.m. of any day of the week.
      (3)   No alcoholic liquor shall be sold and all licensed premises must
remain closed at all other times other than those specified above. See §
115.020 for restaurants.
      (4)   The times referred to above shall refer to Daylight Saving Time or
when the same is in effect in the village and upon cessation of Daylight Saving
Time, shall be Central Standard Time.
      (5)   All patrons or customers shall leave the premises at the specified
closing time and shall not remain on the premises thereafter.
(Prior Code, § 21-3-1)
   (B)   (1)   All retail licensees shall maintain a schedule of the prices
charged for all drinks of alcoholic liquor to be served and consumed on the
licensed premises or in any room or part thereof. Whenever a hotel or multi-use
establishment which holds a valid retailer’s license operates on its premises
more than one establishment at which drinks of alcoholic liquor are sold at
retail, the hotel or multi-use establishment shall maintain at each such
establishment a separate schedule of the prices charged for such drinks at the
establishment.
      (2)   No retail licensee or employee or agent of such licensee shall:
         (a)   Serve two or more drinks of alcoholic liquor at one time to one
person for consumption by that one person, except selling or delivering wine by
the bottle or carafe;
         (b)   Sell, offer to sell, or serve to any person an unlimited number
of drinks of alcoholic liquor during any set period of time for a fixed price,
except at private functions not open to the general public;
         (c)   Sell, offer to sell, or serve any drink of alcoholic liquor to
any person on any one date at a reduced price other than that charged other
purchasers of drinks on that day where such reduced price is a promotion to
encourage consumption of alcoholic liquor, except as authorized in division (B)
(3)(g) below;
         (d)   Increase the volume of alcoholic liquor contained in a drink, or
the size of a drink of alcoholic liquor, without increasing proportionately the
price regularly charged for the drink on that day;
         (e)   Encourage or permit, on the licensed premises, any game or
contest which involves drinking alcoholic liquor or the awarding of drinks of
alcoholic liquor as prizes for such game or contest on the licensed premises;
or
         (f)   Advertise or promote in any way, whether on or off the licenses
premises, any of the practices prohibited under divisions (B)(2)(a) through (B)
(2)(e) above.
   (3)   Nothing in division (B)(2) above shall be construed to prohibit a
licensee from:
         (a)   Offering free food or entertainment at any time;
         (b)   Including drinks or alcoholic liquor as part of a meal package;
         (c)   Including drinks of alcoholic liquor as part of a hotel package;
         (d)   Negotiating drinks of alcoholic liquor as part of a contract
between a hotel or multi-use establishment and another group for the holding of
any function, meeting, convention, or trade show;
         (e)   Providing room service to persons renting rooms at a hotel;
         (f)   Selling pitchers (or the equivalent, including, but not limited
to, buckets), carafes, or bottles of alcoholic liquor which are customarily
sold in such manner and delivered to two or more persons at one time; or
         (g)   Increasing prices of drinks of alcoholic liquor in lieu of, in
whole, or in part, a cover charge to offset the cost of special entertainment
not regularly scheduled.
      (4)   A violation of this division (B) shall be grounds for suspension or
revocation of the retailer’s license as provided by §§
115.090 through
115.099.
(Prior Code, § 21-3-2)
(Ord. 570, passed 5-2-1985) Penalty, see §
115.999
Statutory reference:
   Related provisions, see 235 ILCS 5/6-28
§ 115.041 PROHIBITED LOCATIONS.
   (A)   (1)   No license shall be issued for the sale of any alcoholic liquor
at retail within 100 feet of any church, school (other than an institution of
higher learning), hospital, home for the aged or indigent persons, or for
veterans, their spouses, or children, or any military or naval station;
provided, that this prohibition shall not apply to hotels offering restaurant
service, regularly organized clubs, or to restaurants, food shops, or other
places where the sale of alcoholic liquors is not the principal business
carried on if such place of business so exempted shall have been established
for such purposes prior to the taking effect of this chapter; nor to the
renewal of a license for the sale at retail of alcoholic liquor on the premises
within 100 feet of any church or school where such church or school has been
established within such 100 feet since the issuance of the original license. In
the case of a church, the distance of 100 feet shall be measured to the nearest
part of any building used for worship services or educational programs and not
to property boundaries.
      (2)   Nothing in this division (A) shall prohibit the issuance of a
license to a church or private school to sell at retail alcoholic liquor if any
such sales are limited to periods when groups are assembled on the premises
solely for the promotion of some common object other than the sale or
consumption of alcoholic liquors.
(Prior Code, § 21-3-3)
   (B)   No license shall be issued to any person for the sale at retail of any
alcoholic liquor at any store or other place of business where the majority of
customers are minors of school age or where the principal business transacted
consists of school books, school supplies, food, lunches, or drinks for such
minors.
(Prior Code, § 21-3-5)
   (C)   It shall be unlawful to establish a retail liquor business within the
village in violation of the restrictions of the Zoning Code (found in Title XV
of this code of ordinances).
(Prior Code, § 21-3-9) Penalty, see §
115.999
Statutory reference:
   Provisions related to division (A), see 235 ILCS 5/6-11
   Provisions related to division (B), see 235 ILCS 5/6-12
§ 115.042 CHANGE OF LOCATION.
   A retail liquor dealer’s license shall permit the sale of alcoholic liquor
only on the premises described in the application and license. Such location
may be changed only upon the written permit to make such change issued by the
Mayor. No change of location shall be permitted unless the proposed new
location is a proper one for the retail sale of alcoholic liquor under the law
of this state and this code of ordinances.
(Prior Code, § 21-3-4)
Statutory reference:
   Related provisions, see 235 ILCS 5/7-14
§ 115.043 VEHICLES TRANSPORTING LIQUOR.
   (A)   No person shall, within the village, transport, carry, possess, or
have any alcoholic liquor in, upon, or about any motor vehicle in or on any
public street, parking lot, alley, or place, except in the original package and
with the seal unbroken.
(Prior Code, § 21-3-6)
   (B)   The presence in a vehicle other than a public vehicle of any alcoholic
liquor shall be prima facie evidence that it is in the possession of and is
being carried by all persons occupying such vehicle at the time of which such
alcoholic liquor is found, except under the following circumstances:
      (1)   If such liquor is found on the person of one of the occupants
therein; or
      (2)   If such vehicle contains at least one occupant over 21 years of
age.
(Prior Code, § 21-3-8)
(Ord. 592, passed 6-16-1986) Penalty, see §
115.999
§ 115.044 OPEN LIQUOR TO-GO PROHIBITED.
   The licensee shall not knowingly permit any person to leave his or her
premises with open liquor or in a “cup-to-go.”
(Prior Code, § 21-3-7)
§ 115.045 ELECTION DAYS.
   All such licensees may sell alcoholic liquor at retail, by the drink, or in
the original package for consumption either on or off the premises licensed on
the day of any national, state, county, or municipal election, including
primary elections during the hours the polls are open within the political area
in which such election is being held and on Sundays; subject to all the
remaining terms, conditions, and opening hours and closing hours as set forth
in this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 21-3-10)
§ 115.046 UNLAWFUL ACTS.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to do or commit any of the following
acts within the village, to-wit: drink any alcoholic liquors on any public
street, alley, sidewalk, without special permission granted by the Board of
Trustees.
(Prior Code, § 21-3-11) Penalty, see §
115.999
Statutory reference:
   Related provisions, see 235 ILCS 5/6-16
§ 115.047 UNLAWFUL ENTERTAINMENT.
   (A)   (1)   No licensee, his or her agent, servant, or employee shall permit
or allow any lewd or lascivious act or any topless and/or bottomless employee
and/or employees, TOPLESS being defined as naked and substantially without
clothing or covering of the body from the waist to the neckline, and BOTTOMLESS
being defined as naked and substantially without clothing or covering of the
body from the waist downward, or entertainment to be performed within the
licensed premises by an entertainer employed therein, or by any employee or
guest.
      (2)   Nor shall any licensee, his or her agent, servant, or employee
permit or allow any employee or guest or any other person whomever to solicit
or encourage the purchasing of any alcoholic liquor or beverage of any
description, or the giving of any gratuity or gift by any patron or guest to or
for the benefit of such employee or guest.
   (B)   The following kinds of conduct on premises in the village licensed to
sell alcoholic liquor are prohibited:
      (1)   The performance of acts or simulated acts of sexual intercourse,
masturbation, sodomy, bestiality, oral copulation, flagellation, or any sexual
acts;
      (2)   The actual or simulated exhibition, touching, caressing, or
fondling of the breasts, buttocks, pubic hair, anus, vulva, or genitals;
      (3)   The actual or simulated displaying of the breasts, buttocks, pubic
hair, anus, vulva, or genitals;
      (4)   The permitting by a licensee of any person to remain in or upon the
licensed premises who exposes to view any portion of his or her breasts,
buttocks, genitals, vulva, or anus; or
      (5)   The displaying of films or pictures depicting acts, a live
performance of which are prohibited by the regulations quoted above.
(Prior Code, § 21-3-12) Penalty, see §
115.999
§ 115.048 SANITARY CONDITIONS; HEALTH PERMIT.
   (A)   All premises used for the retail sale of alcoholic liquor or for the
storage of such liquor for such sale shall be kept in a clean and sanitary
condition, and shall be kept in full compliance with the codes regulating the
condition of the premises used for the storage or sale of food for human
consumption.
(Prior Code, § 21-3-13)
   (B)   Every licensee shall have, at all times, a valid operating permit from
the County Health Department which regulates health standards.
(Prior Code, § 21-3-15)
Statutory reference:
   Related provisions, see 410 ILCS 650/1 et seq.
§ 115.049 DISEASED EMPLOYEES.
   It shall be unlawful to employ in any premises used for the retail sale of
alcoholic liquor, any person who is afflicted with or who is a carrier of any
contagious, infectious, or venereal disease; and it shall be unlawful for any
person who is afflicted with or a carrier of any such disease to work in or
about any premises or to engage in any way in the handling, preparation, or
distribution of such liquor.
(Prior Code, § 21-3-14) Penalty, see §
115.999
Statutory reference:
   Related provisions, see 235 ILCS 650/10
§ 115.050 PEDDLING.
   It shall be unlawful to peddle alcoholic liquor in the village.
(Prior Code, § 21-3-16) Penalty, see §
115.999
Statutory reference:
   Related provisions, see 235 ILCS 5/4-1
§ 115.051 GAMBLING.
   It is unlawful to keep, place, maintain, or operate any gambling device or
instrument in and upon the premises used or occupied as a place where alcoholic
liquor is sold or given away, except in the following instances:
   (A)   Bingo. When conducting or participating in the game commonly known as
“bingo,” when conducted in accordance with the Bingo License and Tax Act, being
230 ILCS 25/1 et seq.; or
   (B)   Video poker. Video gaming terminal games at a licensed establishment,
licensed fraternal organization, or licensed veteran’s establishment, when
conducted in accordance with the Video Gaming Act, being 230 ILCS 40/1 et seq.
(Prior Code, § 21-3-17) Penalty, see §
115.999
§ 115.052 DISORDERLY HOUSE.
   Any person licensed under this chapter shall not suffer or permit any
disorder, drunkenness, quarreling, fighting, unlawful games, or riotous or
disorderly conduct in any house or premises kept or occupied by him or her for
the sale of liquor.
(Prior Code, § 21-3-18) Penalty, see §
115.999
Statutory reference:
   Related provisions, see 235 ILCS 5/4-1
§ 115.053 PROHIBITED SALES.
   (A)   No licensee, nor any officer, associate, member, representative,
agent, or employee of such licensee shall sell, give, or deliver alcoholic
liquor to any person under the age of 21 years, or to any intoxicated person or
to any person known by him or her to be an habitual drunkard, spendthrift,
insane, mentally ill, mentally deficient, or in need of mental treatment.
   (B)   No person, after purchasing or otherwise obtaining alcoholic liquor
shall sell, give, or deliver such alcoholic liquor to another person under the
age of 21 years, except in the performance of a religious ceremony or service.
(Prior Code, § 21-3-19) Penalty, see §
115.999
Statutory reference:
   Related provisions, see 235 ILCS 5/6-16
§ 115.054 MINORS; EXCLUSIONS.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person under the age of 18 years to
attend any bar or to sell, draw, pour, or mix any alcoholic liquor in any
licensed retail premises.
(Prior Code, § 21-3-20)
   (B)   It shall be unlawful for any person under the age of 18 years to enter
upon premises where alcoholic liquors, spirits, beer, or wine are sold by the
holder of a Class A liquor license, unless accompanied by a parent or legal
guardian, or any licensed premises which derives its principal business from
the sale of services or other commodities other than alcoholic liquor. No
holder of a liquor license, nor any officer, associate, member, representative,
agent, or employee of such license shall permit any person under the age of 18
years not accompanied by a parent or legal guardian to enter the licensed
premises. For the purpose of preventing the violation of this section, any
holder of a liquor license or his or her agent or employee may refuse to permit
entry onto the licensed premises of any person under the age of 18 years who is
unable to produce adequate written evidence of the fact that the person
accompanying such person under the age of 18 years is that person’s parent or
guardian.
(Prior Code, § 21-3-21)
   (C)   The possession and dispensing or consumption by an underaged person of
alcoholic liquor in the performance of a religious service or ceremony, or the
consumption by an underaged person under the direct supervision and approval of
the parent or parents of such underaged person in the privacy of a home is not
prohibited by this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 21-3-26)
Penalty, see §
115.999
Statutory reference:
   Provisions related to divisions (A) and (B), see 235 ILCS 5/4-1
   Provisions related to division (C), see 235 ILCS 5/6-20
§ 115.055 POSTING WARNING.
   In every licensed business where alcoholic liquor is sold, there shall be
displayed at all times in a prominent place, a printed card which shall be
supplied by the Village Clerk, and which shall read as follows:
UNDERAGE LIQUOR WARNING
“YOU ARE SUBJECT TO A FINE UP TO $750.00 UNDER THE ORDINANCES OF THIS
MUNICIPALITY IF YOU PURCHASE ALCOHOLIC LIQUOR OR MISREPRESENT YOUR AGE FOR THE
PURPOSE OF PURCHASING OR OBTAINING ALCOHOLIC LIQUOR.”
(Prior Code, § 21-3-25) (Ord. 96-5, passed 1-15-1996)
§ 115.056 INSPECTIONS.
   It shall be unlawful to refuse to grant admittance to the premises for which
a license has been issued at any time upon the verbal request of the Chief of
Police, any police officer, or the Liquor Commissioner for the purpose of
making an inspection of such premises or any part thereof.
(Prior Code, § 21-3-27) Penalty, see §
115.999
Statutory reference:
   Related provisions, see 235 ILCS 5/4-4
§ 115.057 BOOKS AND RECORDS.
   (A)   It shall be the duty of every retail licensee to make books and
records available upon reasonable notice for the purpose of investigation and
control by the Mayor having jurisdiction over the licensee.
   (B)   Such books and records need not be maintained on the licensed
premises, but must be maintained in the state.
(Prior Code, § 21-3-28)
Statutory reference:
   Related provisions, see 235 ILCS 5/6-10
§ 115.058 RESTRICTIONS.
   In addition to the restrictions on licensing, the holder of a license is
subject to the following restrictions.
   (A)   It is unlawful for any license to accept, receive, or borrow money or
anything of value directly or indirectly from any manufacturer or distributor
of alcoholic liquor.
   (B)   No licensee licensed under the provisions of this code of ordinances
shall deny or permit his or her agents or employees to deny any person the full
and equal enjoyment of the accommodations, advantages, facilities, and
privileges of any premises in which alcoholic liquors are authorized to be sold
subject only to the conditions and limitations established by law and
applicable alike to all citizens.
   (C)   No licensee shall fill or refill in whole or in part any original
package of alcohol with the same or other liquor and no liquor shall be sold
except in original packages.
   (D)   No alcoholic liquor shall be sold or delivered in any building
belonging to or under the control of a municipality except in connection with
the operation of an established food service facility or at a site specifically
provided for in the Act and where dramshop insurance coverage is provided.
   (E)   An established place of business is a prerequisite to the issuance of
a license. Revocation of a license when a licensee ceases to operate the
business before the license expires is within the authority of the commissioner
on the grounds of non-use.
(Prior Code, § 21-3-29)
Statutory reference:
   Provisions related to division (A), see 235 ILCS 5/6-5
   Provisions related to division (B), see 235 ILCS 5/6-17
   Provisions related to division (D), see 235 ILCS 5/6-22
   Provisions related to division (E), see 235 ILCS 5/6-15
   Provisions related to division (F), see Goode V. Thomas 31 III. App. 3d
674,1975
ILLEGAL ACTS AND PURCHASING OF ALCOHOL
§ 115.070 UNLAWFUL PURCHASE.
   Any person to whom the sale, gift, or delivery of any alcoholic liquor is
prohibited because of age shall not purchase or accept a gift of such alcoholic
liquor or have such alcoholic liquor in his or her possession.
(Prior Code, § 21-3-22)
Statutory reference:
   Related provisions, see 235 ILCS 5/4-1
§ 115.071 IDENTIFICATION REQUIRED.
   (A)   If a licensee or his or her agents or employees believe or have reason
to believe that a sale or delivery of any alcoholic liquor is prohibited
because of the age of the prospective recipient, he or she shall, before making
such sale or delivery, demand presentation of some form of positive
identification, containing proof of age, issued by a public officer in the
performance of his or her official duties.
   (B)   Proof that the defendant/licensee or his or her employees or agent
demanded, was shown, and reasonably relied upon such written evidence in any
transaction forbidden by this section is competent evidence and may be
considered in any criminal prosecution therefor or in any proceedings for the
suspension or revocation of any license based thereon.
(Prior Code, § 21-3-23)
Statutory reference:
   Related provisions, see 235 ILCS 5/6-20
§ 115.072 TRANSFER OF IDENTIFICATION CARD.
   No person shall transfer, alter, or deface such an identification card; use
the identification card of another; carry or use a false or forged
identification card; or obtain an identification card by means of false
information. No person shall purchase, accept delivery, or have possession of
alcoholic liquor in violation of this chapter. The consumption of alcoholic
liquor by any person under the age of 21 years is forbidden.
(Prior Code, § 21-3-24) Penalty, see §
115.999
Statutory reference:
   Related provisions, see 235 ILCS 5/6-20
§ 115.073 FALSE IDENTIFICATION.
   (A)   Any person who sells, gives, or furnishes to any person under the age
of 21 years any false or fraudulent written, printed, or photostatic evidence
of the age and identity of such person or who sells, gives, or furnishes to any
person under the age of 21 years evidence of age and identification of any
other person is guilty of violating this code of ordinances.
(Prior Code, § 21-3-30)
   (B)   Any person under the age of 21 years who presents or offers to any
licensee or his or her agent or employee, any written, printed, or photostatic
evidence of age and identity which is false, fraudulent, or not actually his or
her own for the purpose of ordering, purchasing, attempting to purchase, or
otherwise procuring or attempting to procure, the serving of any alcoholic
beverage, or who has in his or her possession any false or fraudulent, written,
printed, or photostatic evidence of age and identity, is guilty of violating
this code of ordinances.
(Prior Code, § 21-3-31)
Penalty, see §
115.999
Statutory reference:
   Related provisions, see 235 ILCS 5/6-16
§ 115.074 UNDERAGE DRINKING ON STREETS.
   Any person under the age of 21 years who has any alcoholic beverage in his
or her possession on any street or highway or in any public place or in any
place open to the public is guilty of violating this code of ordinances. This
section does not apply to possession by a person under the age of 21 years
making a delivery of an alcoholic beverage in pursuance of the order of his or
her parent or in pursuance of his or her employment.
(Prior Code, § 21-3-32)
Statutory reference:
    Related provisions, see 235 ILCS 5/6-16
§ 115.075 RESIDENTIAL DRINKING.
   (A)   Any person shall be guilty of a violation of this code of ordinances
where he or she knowingly permits a gathering at a residence which he or she
occupies of two or more persons where any one or more of the persons is under
18 years of age and the following factors also apply:
      (1)   The person occupying the residence knows that any such person under
the age of 18 is in possession of or is consuming any alcoholic beverage;
      (2)   The possession or consumption of the alcohol by the person under 18
is not otherwise permitted by this code of ordinances; and
      (3)   The person occupying the residence knows that the person under the
age of 18 leaves the residence in an intoxicated condition.
   (B)   For the purposes of this section where the residence has an owner and
a tenant or lessee, there is a rebuttable presumption that the residence is
occupied only by the tenant or lessee.
(Prior Code, § 21-3-33)
Statutory reference:
   Related provisions, see 235 ILCS 5/6-16
§ 115.076 RENTING HOTEL ROOMS FOR DRINKING.
   Any person who rents a hotel or motel room from the proprietor or agent
thereof for the purpose of or with the knowledge that such room shall be used
for the consumption of alcoholic liquor by persons under the age of 21 years
shall be guilty of violating this code of ordinances.
(Prior Code, § 21-3-34) Penalty, see §
115.999
Statutory reference:
   Related provisions, see 235 ILCS 5/6-16
§ 115.077 CONSUMPTION AREA LICENSES (CLASS 2(B)).
   (A)   For any holder of a Class B(2) license that permits consumption of
alcoholic liquor on the premises, beer, and wine shall only be served in and
restricted to a specific room or area within the licensed premises that is
sufficiently separated from the remainder of the licensed premises by walls or
other physical barriers such that the designated area cannot be viewed from the
remainder of the licensed premises, and only people over the age of 21 may be
admitted to the area.
   (B)   The annual fee for the Class B(2) consumption area liquor license
shall be $300.
   (C)   No more than three Class B(2) consumption area liquor licenses shall
be issued at any one time.
(Ord. 2019-04, passed 3-4-2019; Ord. 2022-02, passed 8-8-2022)
VIOLATIONS
§ 115.090 OWNER OF PREMISES PERMITTING VIOLATIONS.
   If the owner of the licensed premises or any person from whom the licensee
derives the right to possession of such premises, or the agent of such owner or
person shall knowingly permit the licensee to use said licensed premises in
violation of the terms of this code of ordinances, said owner, agent, or other
person shall be deemed guilty of a violation of this code of ordinances to the
same extent as said licensee and be subject to the same punishment.
(Prior Code, § 21-4-1) Penalty, see §
115.999
Statutory reference:
   Related provisions, see 235 ILCS 5/10-2
§ 115.091 ACT OF AGENT OR EMPLOYEE; LIABILITY.
   Every act or omission of whatsoever nature constituting a violation of any
of the provisions of this code of ordinances by any officer, director, manager,
or other agent or employee of any licensee shall be deemed and held to be the
act of such employer or licensee, and said employer or licensee shall be
punishable in the same manner as if said act or omission had been done or
omitted by him or her personally.
(Prior Code, § 21-4-2) Penalty, see §
115.999
Statutory reference:
   Related provisions, see 235 ILCS 5/10-3
§ 115.092 REVOCATION OF LICENSE AFTER CONVICTION.
   (A)   Whenever any licensee shall be convicted of any violation of this code
of ordinances, the license of said licensee may, in the discretion of the
Mayor, be revoked and forfeited and all fees paid thereon shall be forfeited,
and it shall thereafter be unlawful and shall constitute a further violation of
this code of ordinances for said licensee to continue to operate under such
license.
(Prior Code, § 21-4-3)
   (B)   Whenever any officer, director, manager, or other employee in a
position of authority of any licensee under this code of ordinances shall be
convicted of any violation of this code of ordinances while engaged in the
course of his or her employment or while upon the premises described by the
license, the license shall be revoked and the fees paid thereon forfeited, both
as to the holder of the license and as to the premises, as if said licensee had
himself or herself been convicted.
(Prior Code, § 21-4-4)
Penalty, see §
115.999
Statutory reference:
   Provisions related to division (A), see 235 ILCS 5/10-4
   Provisions related to division (D), see 235 ILCS 5/10-5
§ 115.093 MISBRANDING.
   Any person who shall knowingly possess, sell, or in any way dispose of any
alcoholic liquor under any other than the proper name or brand known to the
trade as designating the kind and quality of the contents of the package or
other containers of the alcoholic liquor, or who shall cause any such act to be
done, shall forfeit the alcoholic liquor and the packages and containers to the
state and shall be subject to the punishment and penalties provided for
violation of this code of ordinances.
(Prior Code, § 21-4-5) Penalty, see §
115.999
Statutory reference:
   Related provisions, see 235 ILCS 5/10-6
§ 115.094 ABATEMENT OF PLACE USED IN VIOLATION.
   Every lot, parcel, or tract of land, and every building, structure, tent,
railroad car, boat, wagon, vehicle, establishment, or place whatsoever,
together with all furniture, fixtures, ornaments, and machinery located
thereon, wherein there shall be conducted any unlawful sale of any alcoholic
liquor, or whereon or wherein there shall be kept, stored, concealed, or
allowed any alcoholic liquor intended for illegal sale or to be sold, disposed,
of or in any other manner used in violation of any of the provisions of this
code of ordinances, is hereby declared to be a public nuisance and shall be
abated as provided by the laws of this state for the abatement of public
nuisances.
(Prior Code, § 21-4-6)
Statutory reference:
   Related provisions, see 235 ILCS 5/10-7
§ 115.095 USE OF PREMISES AFTER REVOCATION.
   When any license has been revoked for any cause, no license shall be granted
for the same premises for a period of one year thereafter.
(Prior Code, § 21-4-7)
Statutory reference:
   Related provisions, see 235 ILCS 5/7-13
§ 115.096 REVOCATION OR SUSPENSION OF LICENSE.
   (A)   The Local Liquor Control Commissioner shall have the following powers,
functions, and duties with respect to licenses granted under this code of
ordinances:
      (1)   In addition to, and not limited by, the specific penalties set out
for violations of specific sections of this code of ordinances, the Local
Liquor Control Commissioner may suspend for 30 days or revoke any liquor
license issued under this code of ordinances for any state law pertaining to
the sale of alcoholic liquors by any licensee, his or her agent, servant, or
employee;
      (2)   To suspend or revoke any liquor license if the licensee makes any
false statement or misrepresentation in the application for a license;
      (3)   To enter or to authorize any law enforcing officer to enter at any
time upon any premises licensed hereunder to determine whether any of the
provisions of this code of ordinances or any rules or regulations adopted by
him or her or by the State Commission have been or are being violated, and at
such time to examine said premises of said licensee in connection therewith;
      (4)   To notify the Secretary of State where a club incorporated under
the General Not-for-Profit Corporation Act, being 805 ILCS 105/101.01 et seq.,
or a foreign corporation functioning as a club in the state under a certificate
of authority issued under that Act has violated this code of ordinances by
selling or offering for sale at retail alcoholic liquors without a retailer’s
license;
      (5)   To receive complaint from any citizen within his or her
jurisdiction that any of the provisions of the Act, or any rules or regulations
adopted pursuant hereto, have been or are being violated and to act upon such
complaints in the manner hereinafter provided; and
      (6)   The Local Liquor Control Commissioner shall also have the power to
levy fines in accordance with division (B) below.
(Prior Code, § 21-4-8)
   (B)   The Liquor Commissioner may revoke or suspend any license issued by
him or her if he or she determines that the licensee has violated any of the
provisions of the State Liquor Act, any valid ordinance adopted by the village,
any applicable rule or regulation established by the Liquor Commissioner or the
State Commission which is not inconsistent with law.
      (1)   In lieu of suspension or revocation, the Liquor Commissioner may
instead levy a fine on the licensee for such violations, further described in §
115.999. Proceeds from such fines shall be paid into the General Corporate Fund
of the county or municipal treasury, as the case may be.
      (2)   However, no such license shall be so revoked or suspended and no
licensee shall be fined except after a public hearing by the Local Liquor
Control Commissioner with a three-day written notice to the licensee affording
the licensee an opportunity to appear and defend. All such hearings shall be
open to the public and the Liquor Commissioner shall reduce all evidence to
writing and shall maintain an official record of the proceedings. If the Liquor
Commissioner has reason to believe that any continued operation of a particular
licensed premises will immediately threaten the welfare of the community he or
she may, upon the issuance of a written order stating the reason for such
conclusion and without notice or hearing order the licensed premises closed for
not more than seven days, giving the licensee an opportunity to be heard during
that period, except that if such licensee shall also be engaged in the conduct
of another business or businesses on the licensed premises such order shall not
be applicable to such other business or businesses.
      (3)   The Liquor Commissioner shall, within five days after such hearing,
if he or she determines after such hearing that the license should be revoked
or suspended, state the reason or reasons for such determination in a written
order of revocation or suspension and shall serve a copy of such order within
the five days upon the license. The findings of the Liquor Commissioner shall
be predicted upon competent evidence.
(Prior Code, § 21-4-10)
Statutory reference:
   Provisions related to division (A), see 235 ILCS 5/4-4
   Provisions related to division (B), see 235 ILCS 5/7-5
§ 115.097 COMPLAINT BY RESIDENTS.
   Any five residents of the village shall have the right to file a complaint
with the Liquor Commissioner, stating that a licensee under this code of
ordinances has been or is violating the provisions of this code of ordinances
or any amendments hereto, or of any of the statutes of the state, enacted with
reference to the control of liquor. Such complaint shall be made in writing and
shall be signed and sworn to by the parties complaining. The complaint shall
state the particular provision, rule, or regulation believed to have been
violated and the facts in detail upon which such belief is based. If the Liquor
Commissioner is satisfied that the complaint substantially charges a violation,
and that from the facts alleged, there is reasonable cause for such belief, he
or she shall set the matter for hearing, and shall serve notice upon the
licensee of the time and place of such hearing and of the particular charges in
the complaint.
(Prior Code, § 21-4-9)
Statutory reference:
   Related provisions, see 235 ILCS 5/7-7
§ 115.098 APPEALS FROM ORDER OF LIQUOR COMMISSIONER.
   (A)   Except as provided in this section, any order or action of a Local
Liquor Control Commissioner levying a fine or refusing to levy a fine on a
licensee, granting or refusing to grant a license, revoking or suspending or
refusing to revoke or suspend a license, or refusing for more than 30 days to
grant a hearing upon a complaint to revoke or suspend a license may, within 20
days after notice of such order or action, be appealed by any resident of the
village under the jurisdiction of the Liquor Commissioner or any person
interested, to the State Commission.
   (B)   In any case where a licensee appeals to the State Commission from an
order or action of the Liquor Commissioner having the effect of suspending or
revoking a license, denying a renewal application, or refusing to grant a
license, the licensee shall resume the operation of the licensed business
pending the decision of the State Commission and the expiration of the time
allowed for an application for rehearing. If an application for rehearing is
filed, the licensee shall continue the operation of the licensed business until
the denial of the application or, if the rehearing is granted, until the
decision on rehearing.
(Prior Code, § 21-4-11)
Statutory reference:
   Related provisions, see 235 ILCS 5/7-9
§ 115.099 SUBSEQUENT VIOLATIONS.
   (A)   (1)   In any case in which a licensee appeals to the State Commission
a suspension or revocation by a Local Liquor Control Commissioner that is the
second or subsequent such suspension or revocation placed on that licensee
within the preceding 12-month period, the licensee shall consider the
suspension or revocation to be in effect until a reversal of the Liquor
Commissioner’s action has been issued by the State Commission and shall cease
all activity otherwise authorized by the license.
      (2)   The State Commission shall expedite, to the greatest extent
possible, its consideration of any appeal that is an appeal of a second or
subsequent suspension or revocation within the past 12-month period.
(Prior Code, § 21-4-12)
   (B)   (1)   Any appeal of the decision and findings of the Liquor
Commissioner in division (A) above shall be limited to a review of the official
record of the proceedings of said Liquor Commissioner. The official record
shall be a certified official record of the proceedings taken and prepared by a
certified court reporter or certified shorthand reporter.
      (2)   A copy of this record shall be filed by the Liquor Commissioner
within five days after notice of the filing of such appeal is received by the
village from State Commission.
(Prior Code, § 21-4-13)
Penalty, see §
115.999
Statutory reference:
   Related provisions, see 235 ILCS 5/7-9
§ 115.999 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which no
specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to §
10.999 of this code of ordinances.
   (B)   The fine imposed by §
115.096 shall not exceed $1,000 for each violation; each day on which a
violation continues shall constitute a separate violation. No more than $10,000
in fines under this section may be imposed against any licensee during the
period of his or her license.
(Prior Code, § 21-4-10)
CHAPTER 116: CABLE TELEVISION AND TELECOMMUNICATIONS
Section
Cable/Video Service Provider Fees and Peg Access
   
116.001   Definitions
   
116.002   Cable/video service provider fee imposed
   
116.003   Peg access support fee imposed
   
116.004   Applicable principles
   
116.005   No impact on other taxes due from holder
   
116.006   Audits of cable/service provider
   
116.007   Late payments
Regulations Applicable to Holders of State-Issued Authorizations; Local
Franchises
   
116.020   Standards
   
116.021   State-issued authorization
   
116.022   General requirements
   
116.023   Insurance
   
116.024   Enforcement
   
116.025   Emergency alert system
   
116.026   Application to local franchises
Cable and Video Customer Protection Law
   
116.040   Customer service and privacy protection
   
116.041   Enforcement
   
116.042   Violation
   
116.043   Customer credits
   
116.044   Peg access required
Small Wireless Facilities
   
116.055   Purpose and scope
   
116.056   Definitions
   
116.057   Regulation of facilities
   
116.058   Collocation requirements and conditions
   
116.059   Application fees
   
116.060   Exceptions to applicability; abandonment
   
116.061   Dispute resolution
   
116.062   Indemnification
   
116.063   Insurance
   
116.999   Penalty
   
Appendix A: Model master pole attachment agreement
   
Appendix B: License supplement
   
Appendix C: Premises
   
Appendix D: Model small wireless facilities permit application
CABLE/VIDEO SERVICE PROVIDER FEES AND PEG ACCESS
§ 116.001 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   CABLE SERVICE. The term as defined in 47 U.S.C. § 522(6).
   COMMISSION. The Illinois Commerce Commission.
   GROSS REVENUES. All consideration of any kind or nature, including, without
limitation, cash, credits, property, and in-kind contributions received by the
holder for the operation of a cable or video system to provide cable service or
video service within the holder’s cable service or video service area within
the village.
      (1)   GROSS REVENUES shall include the following:
         (a)   Recurring charges for cable or video service;
         (b)   Event-based charges for cable service or video service,
including, but not limited to, pay-per-view and video-on-demand charges;
         (c)   Rental of set top boxes and other cable service or video service
equipment;
         (d)   Service charges related to the provision of cable service or
video service, including, but not limited to, activation, installation, and
repair charges;
         (e)   Administrative charges related to the provision of cable service
or video service, including, but not limited to, service order and service
termination charges;
         (f)   Late payment fees or charges, insufficient funds check charges,
and other charges assessed to recover the costs of collecting delinquent
payments;
         (g)   A pro rata portion of all revenue derived by the holder or its
affiliates pursuant to compensation arrangements for advertising or for
promotion or exhibition of any products or services derived from the operation
of the holder’s network to provide cable service or video service within the
village. The allocation shall be based on the number of subscribers in the
village divided by the total number of subscribers in relation to the relevant
regional or national compensation arrangement;
         (h)   Compensation received by the holder that is derived from the
operation of the holder’s network to provide cable service or video service
with respect to commissions that are received by the holder as compensation for
promotion or exhibition of any products or services on the holder’s network,
such as a “home shopping” or similar channels, subject to division (1)(i)
below;
         (i)   In the case of a cable service or video service that is bundled
or integrated functionally with other services, capabilities, or applications,
the portion of the holder’s revenue attributable to the other services,
capabilities, or applications shall be included in the GROSS REVENUE unless the
holder can reasonably identify the division or exclusion of the revenue from
its books and records that are kept in the regular course of business; or
         (j) The service provider fee permitted by 220 ILCS 5/21-801(b).
      (2)   GROSS REVENUES do not include any of the following:
         (a)   Revenues not actually received, even if billed, such as bad
debt, subject to 220 ILCS 5/21-801(c)(l)(vi);
         (b)   Refunds, discounts, or other price adjustments that reduce the
amount of GROSS REVENUES received by the holder of the state-issued
authorization to the extent the refund, rebate, credit, or discount is
attributable to cable service or video service;
         (c)   Regardless of whether the services are bundled, packaged, or
functionally integrated with cable service or video service, any revenues
received from services not classified as cable service or video service,
including, without limitation, revenue received from telecommunication
services, information services, or the provision of directory or internet
advertising, including yellow pages, white pages, banner advertisement, and
electronic publishing or any other revenues attributed by the holder to
noncable service or non-video service in accordance with the holder’s books and
records and records kept in the regular course of business and any applicable
laws, rules, regulations, standards, or orders;
         (d)   The sale of cable services or video services for resale in which
the purchaser is required to collect the service provider fee from the
purchaser’s subscribers to the extent the purchaser certifies in writing that
it will resell the service within the village and pay the fee permitted by 220
ILCS 5/21-801(b) with respect to the service;
         (e)   Any tax or fee of general applicability imposed upon the
subscribers or the transaction by a city, state, federal, or any other
governmental entity and collected by the holder of the state-issued
authorization and required to be remitted to the taxing entity, including sales
and use taxes;
         (f)   Security deposits collected from subscribers; or
         (g)   Amounts paid by subscribers to home shopping or similar vendors
for merchandise sold through any home shopping channel offered as part of the
cable service or video service.
      (3) Revenue of an affiliate of a holder shall be included in the
calculation of GROSS REVENUES to the extent the treatment of the revenue as
revenue of the affiliate rather than the holder has the effect of evading the
payment of the fee permitted by 220 ILCS 5/21-801(b) which would otherwise be
paid by the cable service or video service.
   HOLDER. A person or entity that has received authorization to offer or
provide cable or video service from the State Commerce Commission pursuant to
220 ILCS 5/21-401.
   PEG. Public, education, and governmental.
   PEG ACCESS SUPPORT FEE. The amount paid under this section and 220 ILCS 5/
21-801(d) by the holder to the village for the service areas within its
territorial jurisdiction.
   SERVICE. The provision of cable service or video service to subscribers and
the interaction of subscribers with the person or entity that has received
authorization to offer or provide cable or video service from the State
Commerce Commission pursuant to 220 ILCS 5/21-401.
   SERVICE PROVIDER FEE. The amount paid under this subchapter and 220 ILCS 5/
21-801 by the holder to a village for the service areas within its territorial
jurisdiction.
   VIDEO SERVICE. Video programming and subscriber interaction, if any, that is
required for the selection or use of such video programming services, and which
is provided through wireline facilities located at least in part in the public
right-of-way without regard to delivery technology, including internet protocol
technology. This definition does not include any video programming provided by
a commercial mobile service provider defined in 47 U.S.C. § 332(d) or any video
programming provided solely as part of, and via, service that enables users to
access content, information, electronic mail, or other services offered over
the public internet.
(Prior Code, § 9-2-1) (Ord. 08-03, passed 3-3-2008)
§ 116.002 CABLE/VIDEO SERVICE PROVIDER FEE IMPOSED.
   (A)   Fee imposed. A fee is hereby imposed on any holder providing cable
service or video service in the village.
   (B)   Amount of fee. The amount of the fee imposed hereby shall be 5% of the
holder’s gross revenues.
   (C)   Notice to the village. The holder shall notify the village at least
ten days prior to the date on which the holder begins to offer cable service or
video service in the village.
   (D)   Holder’s liability. The holder shall be liable for and pay the service
provider fee to the village. The holder’s liability for the fee shall commence
on the first day of the calendar month following 30 days after receipt of the
ordinance adopting this subchapter by the holder. The ordinance adopting this
subchapter shall be sent by mail, postage prepaid, to the address listed on the
holder’s application notice sent pursuant to 220 ILCS 5/21-401(b)(6) to the
village.
   (E)   Payment date. The payment of the service provider fee shall be due on
a quarterly basis, 45 days after the close of the calendar quarter. If mailed,
the fee is considered paid on the date it is postmarked. Each payment shall
include a statement explaining the basis for the calculation of the fee.
   (F)   Exemption. The fee hereby imposed does not apply to existing cable
service or video service providers that have an existing franchise agreement
with the village in which a fee is paid.
   (G)   Credit for other payments. An incumbent cable operator that elects to
terminate an existing agreement pursuant to 220 ILCS 5/21-301(c) with credit to
prepaid franchise fees under that agreement may deduct the amount of such
credit from the fees that operator owes under division (B) above.
(Prior Code, § 9-2-2) (Ord. 08-03, passed 3-3-2008)
§ 116.003 PEG ACCESS SUPPORT FEE IMPOSED.
   (A)   PEG fee imposed. A PEG access support fee is hereby imposed on any
holder providing cable service or video service in the village in addition to
the fee imposed pursuant to §
116.002(B).
   (B)   Amount of fee. The amount of the PEG access support fee imposed hereby
shall be 1% of the holder’s gross revenues or, if greater, the percentage of
gross revenues that incumbent cable operators pay to the village or its
designee for PEG access support in the village.
   (C)   Payment. The holder shall pay the PEG access support fee to the
village or to the entity designated by the village to manage PEG access. The
holder’s liability for the PEG access support fee shall commence on the date
set forth in §
116.003(D).
   (D)   Payment due. The payment of the PEG access support fee shall be due on
a quarterly basis, 45 days after the close of the calendar quarter. If mailed,
the fee is considered paid on the date it is postmarked. Each payment shall
include a statement explaining the basis for the calculation of the fee.
   (E)   Credit for other payments. An incumbent cable operator that elects to
terminate an existing agreement pursuant to 220 ILCS 5/21-301(c) shall pay, at
the time they would have been due, all monetary payments for PEG access that
would have been due during the remaining term of the agreement had it not been
terminated pursuant to that section. All payments made by an incumbent cable
operator pursuant to the previous sentence may be credited against the fees
that the operator owed under division (B) above.
(Prior Code, § 9-2-3) (Ord. 08-03, passed 3-3-2008)
§ 116.004 APPLICABLE PRINCIPLES.
   All determinations and calculations under this subchapter shall be made
pursuant to generally accepted accounting principles.
(Prior Code, § 9-2-4) (Ord. 08-03, passed 3-3-2008)
§ 116.005 NO IMPACT ON OTHER TAXES DUE FROM HOLDER.
   (A)   Nothing contained in this subchapter shall be construed to exempt a
holder from any tax that is or may later be imposed by the village, including
any tax that is or may later be required to be paid by or through the holder
with respect to cable service or video service.
   (B)   (1)   A state-issued authorization shall not affect any requirement of
the holder with respect to payment of the village’s simplified municipal
telecommunications tax or any other tax as it applies to any telephone service
provided by the holder.
      (2)   A state-issued authorization shall not affect any requirement of
the holder with respect to payment of the local unit of government’s 911 or
E911 fees, taxes, or charges.
(Prior Code, § 9-2-5) (Ord. 08-03, passed 3-3-2008)
§ 116.006 AUDITS OF CABLE/SERVICE PROVIDER.
   (A)   Audit requirement. The audit requirements contained in Ordinance 1826
are hereby incorporated by reference as though fully set forth herein.
      (1)   The village will notify the holder of the requirements it imposes
on other cable service or video service providers to submit to an audit of its
books and records. Receipt of the ordinance adopting this subchapter by the
holder shall constitute such notice. The holder shall comply with the same
requirements the village imposes on other cable service or video service
providers in its jurisdiction to audit the holder’s books and records and to
recomputed any amounts determined to be payable under the requirements of the
village.
      (2)   If all local franchises between the village and cable operator
terminate, the audit requirements shall be those adopted by the village
pursuant to the Local Government Taxpayers’ Bill of Rights Act, being 50 ILCS
45/1 et seq. No acceptance of amounts remitted should be construed as an accord
that the amounts are correct.
   (B)   Additional payments. Any additional amount due after an audit shall be
paid within 30 days after the village’s submission of an invoice for the sum.
(Prior Code, § 9-2-6) (Ord. 08-03, passed 3-3-2008)
§ 116.007 LATE PAYMENTS.
   All fees due and payments which are past due shall be subject to penalties
set forth by ordinances adopted by the village pursuant to the Local Government
Taxpayers’ Bill of Rights Act, 50 ILCS 45/1 et seq., or any other penalties the
village may be authorized by law to impose on payments which are past due.
(Prior Code, § 9-2-7) (Ord. 08-03, passed 3-3-2008) Penalty, see §
10.999
Statutory reference:
   Provisions related to this subchapter, see 220 ILCS 5/21-801
REGULATIONS APPLICABLE TO HOLDERS OF STATE-ISSUED AUTHORIZATIONS; LOCAL
FRANCHISES
§ 116.020 STANDARDS.
   (A)   All holders of a state-issued authorization to provide cable or video
services shall be subject to construction and technical standards and right-of-
way occupancy standards set forth in Ordinance 1826 and other village
ordinances relating to the use of public rights-of-way, pole attachments,
permit obligations, indemnification, performance bonds, penalties, or
liquidated damages as may apply to a provider of cable or video services
operating pursuant to a franchise granted by the village under such ordinances.
   (B)   Notwithstanding any other provisions of law, if the village is
permitted by law to require a holder of a state-issued authorization to seek a
permit to install, construct, operate, maintain, or remove its cable service,
video service, or telecommunications network within a public right-of-way,
those permits shall be deemed granted within 45 days after being submitted, if
not otherwise acted upon by the village; provided the holder complies with the
requirements applicable to the holder imposed by the village.
(Prior Code, § 9-3-1) (Ord. 08-03, passed 3-3-2008)
§ 116.021 STATE-ISSUED AUTHORIZATION.
   All holders of a state-issued authorization to provide cable or video
service that provide such services within the village shall be subject to the
additional provisions set forth in 220 ILCS 5/21-1001, as amended.
(Prior Code, § 9-3-2) (Ord. 08-03, passed 3-3-2008)
§ 116.022 GENERAL REQUIREMENTS.
   In addition to the above requirements, all holders of a state-issued
authorization to provide cable or video services shall be subject to the
following general requirements regarding placement and location of such a
holder’s facilities.
   (A)   No interference with village facilities. No facilities shall be placed
in any location if the Village Engineer determines that the proposed location
will require the relocation or displacement of any of the village’s utility
facilities or will otherwise interfere with the operation or maintenance of any
of the village’s utility facilities.
   (B)   Minimum interference and impact. The proposed location shall cause
only the minimum possible interference with the use of the rights-of-way and
shall cause only the minimum possible impact upon, and interference with the
rights and reasonable convenience of property owners who adjoin said rights-of-
way.
   (C)   No interference with travel. No facility shall be placed in any
location that interferes with the usual travel on such rights-of-way.
   (D)   No limitations on visibility. No utility facility shall be placed in
any location so as to limit visibility of or by users of the rights-of-way.
   (E)   Size of utility facilities. The proposed installation of facilities
shall use the smallest suitable vaults, boxes, equipment enclosures, power
pedestals, and/or cabinets then in use by the facility owner, regardless of
location, for the particular application.
   (F)   Location and screening. A holder of a state-issued authorization shall
comply with the village’s reasonable requests to place equipment on public
property where possible, and promptly comply with the village’s direction with
respect to the location and screening of equipment and facilities.
(Prior Code, § 9-3-3) (Ord. 08-03, passed 3-3-2008)
§ 116.023 INSURANCE.
   All holders of a state-issued authorization to provide cable or video
services shall provide the village evidence of self-insurance.
(Prior Code, § 9-3-4) (Ord. 08-03, passed 3-3-2008)
§ 116.024 ENFORCEMENT.
   The requirements of the Cable and Video Competition Law of 2007 (codified at
220 ILCS 5 XXI, being 220 ILCS 5/21-100 et seq.) shall apply to all holders of
a state-issued authorization to provide cable and video services under the
terms thereof and, to the extent provided by law, the village may enforce such
provisions as a condition of this section, consistent with 220 ILCS 5/21-1301
(a).
(Prior Code, § 9-3-5) (Ord. 08-03, passed 3-3-2008)
§ 116.025 EMERGENCY ALERT SYSTEM.
   (A)   (1)   A provider of cable or video services, whether providing such
services pursuant to a state-issued authorization or a local franchise
(“provider”), shall comply with 47 U.S.C. § 544(g) and all regulations issued
pursuant thereto in addition to the supplementary requirements herein. In
addition, consistent with the provisions of 220 ILCS 5/21-701, a provider shall
on request of the village provide an override capability so that the village
may access the provider’s system with an audio and visual message on all
channels in the event of an emergency or disaster.
      (2)   A provider will provide the necessary electronic equipment for such
emergency override system. Further, a provider will maintain said equipment and
provide for regularly scheduled testing by the village to ensure that the
equipment is functioning properly.
   (B)   Except as may be otherwise agreed or required by law, the required
telephone or other connection to the emergency alert system shall be the
responsibility of a provider.
(Prior Code, § 9-3-6) (Ord. 08-03, passed 3-3-2008)
§ 116.026 APPLICATION TO LOCAL FRANCHISES.
   The requirements of this subchapter shall also apply to providers of cable
service or video service providing such services pursuant to a local franchise
or other authority from the village to the extent permitted by applicable law;
provided such application does not violate the terms of such local franchise or
authority.
(Prior Code, § 9-3-7) (Ord. 08-03, passed 3-3-2008)
CABLE AND VIDEO CUSTOMER PROTECTION LAW
§ 116.040 CUSTOMER SERVICE AND PRIVACY PROTECTION.
   (A)   Adoption. The regulations of 220 ILCS 5/22-501 (the “Cable and Video
Customer Protection Law”) are hereby adopted by reference and may applicable to
the cable or video providers offering services within the village’s boundaries.
As such regulations are deemed necessary to the village’s exercise of the
police power, the ordinance adopting this section and the regulations contained
in 5/22- 501 will supersede any customer service and privacy protection
standards contained in a franchise granted by the village to a provider of
cable or video services.
   (B)   Amendments. Any amendment to the Cable and Video Customer Protection
Law that becomes effective after the effective date of this subchapter shall be
incorporated into this subchapter by reference and shall be applicable to cable
or video providers offering services within the village’s boundaries. However,
any amendment that makes its provisions optional for adoption by municipalities
shall not be incorporated into this subchapter by reference without formal
action by the corporate authorities of the village.
(Prior Code, § 9-4-1) (Ord. 08-03, passed 3-3-2008)
§ 116.041 ENFORCEMENT.
   The village does hereby pursuant to law declare its intent to enforce all of
the customer service and privacy protection standards of the Cable and Video
Customer Protection Law with respect to complaints received from residents
within the village.
(Prior Code, § 9-4-2) (Ord. 08-03, passed 3-3-2008)
§ 116.042 VIOLATION.
   (A)   The village, pursuant to 5/22-501(r)(l), does hereby provide for a
schedule of penalties for any material breach of the Cable and Video Customer
Protection Law by cable or video providers in addition to the penalties
provided in the law.
   (B)   MATERIAL BREACH means any substantial failure of a cable or video
provider to comply with service quality and other standards specified in any
provision of the Cable and Video Customer Protection Law.
   (C)   The village shall give the cable or video provider written notice of
any alleged material breaches of the Cable and Video Customer Protection Law
and allow such provider at least 30 days from the receipt of the notice to
remedy the specified material breach.
   (D)   A material breach, for the purposes of assessing penalties, shall be
deemed to occur for each day that a material breach has not been remedied by
the cable or video service provider after the notice in division (B).
(Prior Code, § 9-4-3) (Ord. 08-03, passed 3-3-2008) Penalty, see §
116.999
§ 116.043 CUSTOMER CREDITS.
   (A)   The village hereby adopts the schedule of customer credits that shall
be paid directly to customers by the cable or video provider for violations of
the requirements adopted by this subchapter. The schedule of credits shall be
the maximum amount as provided for in the provisions of 5/22-501(s) and applied
on the statement issued to the customer for the next billing cycle following
the violation or following the discovery of the violation.
   (B)   The cable or video provider is responsible for providing the credits
and the customer is under no obligation to request the credit
(Prior Code, § 9-4-4) (Ord. 08-03, passed 3-3-2008)
§ 116.044 PEG ACCESS REQUIRED.
   Holders of a state-issued authorization to provide cable or video services
that are providing such services within the village shall provide public,
education, and government (PEG) access in the manner provided in 220 ILCS 5/21-
601. Receipt of the ordinance enacting this paragraph by a state-authorized
provider of cable and video services shall be considered a request by the
village to provide such PEG access.
(Prior Code, § 9-4-5) (Ord. 08-03, passed 3-3-2008)
SMALL WIRELESS FACILITIES
§ 116.055 PURPOSE AND SCOPE.
   (A)   Purpose. The purpose of this subchapter is to establish regulations,
standards, and procedures for the siting and collocation of small wireless
facilities on rights-of-way within the village’s jurisdiction, or outside the
rights-of-way on property zoned by the village exclusively for commercial or
industrial use, in a manner that is consistent with the Cable and Video
Competition Law of 2007, being 220 ILCS 5/21-100 et seq.
   (B)   Conflicts with other ordinances. This subchapter supersedes all
ordinances or parts of ordinances adopted prior hereto that arc in conflict
herewith, to the extent of such conflict.
   (C)   Conflicts with state and federal laws. In the event that applicable
federal or state laws or regulations conflict with the requirements of this
subchapter, the wireless provider shall comply with the requirements of this
subchapter to the maximum, extent possible without violating federal or state
laws or regulations.
(Prior Code, § 9-6-1) (Ord. 2018-08, passed 8-6-2018)
§ 116.056 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ACT. The Cable and Video Competition Law of 2007, being 220 ILCS 5/Art XXI.
   ANTENNA. Communications equipment that transmits or receives electromagnetic
radio frequency signals used in the provision of wireless services.
   APPLICABLE CODES. Uniform building, fire, electrical, plumbing, or
mechanical codes adopted by a recognized national code organization or local
amendments to those codes, including the National Electric Safety Code.
   APPLICANT. Any person who submits an application and is a wireless provider.
   APPLICATION. A request submitted by an applicant to the village for a permit
to collocate small wireless facilities, and a request that includes the
installation of a new utility pole for such collocation, as well as any
applicable fee for the review of such application.
   COLLOCATE or COLLOCATION. To install, mount, maintain, modify, operate, or
replace wireless facilities on or adjacent to a wireless support structure or
utility pole.
   COMMUNICATIONS SERVICE. “Cable service,” as defined in 47 U.S.C. § 522(6),
as amended; “information service,” as defined in 47 U.S.C. § 153(24), as
amended; “telecommunications service,” as defined in 47 U.S.C. § 153(53), as
amended; “mobile service,” as defined in 47 U.S.C. § 153(33), as amended; or
wireless service other than mobile service.
   COMMUNICATIONS SERVICE PROVIDER. A cable operator, as defined in 47 U.S.C. §
522(5), as amended; a provider of information service, as defined in 47 U.S.C.
§ 153(24), as amended; a telecommunications carrier, as defined in 47 U.S.C. §
153(51), as amended; or a wireless provider.
   FCC. The Federal Communications Commission of the United States.
   FEE. A one-time charge.
   HISTORIC DISTRICT or HISTORIC LANDMARK. A building, property, or site, or
group of buildings, properties, or sites that are either:
      (1)   Listed in the National Register of Historic Places or formally
determined eligible for listing by the Keeper of the National Register, the
individual who has been delegated the authority by the federal agency to list
properties and determine their eligibility for the National Register, in
accordance with §§ VI.C.a.i through V1.C.1.a.v of the Nationwide Programmatic
Agreement codified at 47 C.F.R. pt. 1, app. C; or
      (2)   Designated as a locally landmarked building, property, site, or
historic district by an ordinance adopted by the village pursuant to a
preservation program that meets the requirements of the Certified Local
Government Program of the State Historic Preservation office or where such
certification of the preservation program by the State Historic Preservation
office is pending.
   LAW. A federal or state statute, common law, code, rule, regulation, order,
or local ordinance or resolution.
   MICRO WIRELESS FACILITY. A small wireless facility that is not larger in
dimension than 24 inches in length, 15 inches in width, and 12 inches in height
and that has an exterior antenna, if any, no longer than 11 inches.
   MUNICIPAL UTILITY POLE. A utility pole owned or operated by the village in
public rights-of-way.
   PERMIT. A written authorization required by the village to perform an action
or initiate, continue, or complete a project.
   PERSON. An individual, corporation, limited liability company, partnership,
association, trust, or other entity or organization.
   PUBLIC SAFETY AGENCY. The functional division of the federal government, the
state, a unit of local government, or a special purpose district located in
whole or in part within this state, that provides or has authority to provide
firefighting, police, ambulance, medical, or other emergency services to
respond to and manage emergency incidents.
   RATE. A recurring charge.
   RIGHT-OF-WAY. The area on, below, or above a public roadway, highway,
street, public sidewalk, alley, or utility easement dedicated for compatible
use. RIGHT-OF-WAY does not include village-owned aerial lines.
   SMALL WIRELESS FACILITY.
      (1)   A wireless facility that meets both of the following
qualifications:
         (a)   Each antenna is located inside an enclosure of no more than six
cubic feet in volume or, in the case of an antenna that has exposed elements,
the antenna and all of its exposed elements could fit within an imaginary
enclosure of no more than six cubic feet; and
         (b)   All other wireless equipment attached directly to a utility pole
associated with the facility is cumulatively no more than 25 cubic feet in
volume.
      (2)   The following types of associated ancillary equipment are not
included in the calculation of equipment volume: electric meter; concealment
elements; telecommunications demarcation box; ground-based enclosures;
grounding equipment; power transfer switch; cut-off switch; and vertical cable
runs for the connection of power; and other services.
   UTILITY POLE. A pole or similar-structure that is used in whole or in pail
by a communications service provider or for electric distribution, lighting,
traffic control, or a similar function.
   WIRELESS FACILITY.
      (1)   Equipment at a fixed location that enables wireless communications
between user equipment and a communications network, including:
         (a)   Equipment associated with wireless communications; and
         (b)   Radio transceivers, antennas, coaxial or fiber-optic cable,
regular and backup power supplies, and comparable equipment, regardless of
technological configuration. WIRELESS FACILITY includes small wireless
facilities.
      (2)   WIRELESS FACILITY does not include:
         (a)   The structure or improvements on, under, or within which the
equipment is collocated; or
         (b)   Wireline backhaul facilities, coaxial or fiber optic cable that
is between wireless support structures or utility poles or coaxial, or fiber
optic cable that is otherwise not immediately adjacent to or directly
associated with an antenna.
   WIRELESS INFRASTRUCTURE PROVIDER. Any person authorized to provide
telecommunications service in the state that builds or installs wireless
communication transmission equipment, wireless facilities, wireless support
structures, or utility poles, and that is not a wireless services provider but
is acting as an agent or a contractor for a wireless services provider for the
application submitted to the village.
   WIRELESS PROVIDER. A wireless infrastructure provider or a wireless services
provider.
   WIRELESS SERVICES. Any services provided to the general public, including a
particular class of customers, and made available on a non-discriminatory basis
using licensed or unlicensed spectrum, whether at a fixed location or mobile,
provided using wireless facilities.
   WIRELESS SERVICES PROVIDER. A person who provides wireless services.
   WIRELESS SUPPORT STRUCTURE. A freestanding structure, such as a monopole;
tower, either guyed or self-supporting; billboard; or other existing or
proposed structure designed to support or capable of supporting wireless
facilities. WIRELESS SUPPORT STRUCTURE does not include a utility pole.
(Prior Code, § 9-6-2) (Ord. 2018-08, passed 8-6-2018)
§ 116.057 REGULATION OF FACILITIES.
   (A)   Permitted use. Small wireless facilities shall be classified as
permitted uses and subject to administrative review, except as provided in §
116.058(H) regarding height exceptions or variances, but not subject to zoning
review or approval if they are collocated in rights-of-way in any zoning
district, or outside rights-of-way in property zoned exclusively for commercial
or industrial use.
   (B)   Permit required. An applicant shall obtain one or more permits from
the village to collocate a small wireless facility. An application shah be
received and processed, and permits issued shall be subject to the following
conditions and requirements:
      (1)   Application requirements. Applicant shall complete the village’s
small cell facilities permit application, which shall be in a form approved by
the Village President and the Village Attorney. A wireless provider shall
provide the following information to the village, together with the village’s
small cell facilities permit application, as a condition of any permit
application to collocate small wireless facilities on a utility pole or
wireless support structure:
         (a)   Site specific structural integrity and, for a municipal utility
pole, make-ready analysis prepared by a structural engineer, as that term is
defined in § 4 of the Structural Engineering Practice Act of 1989, being 225
ILCS 340/4;
         (b)   The location where each proposed small wireless facility or
utility pole would be installed and photographs of the location and its
immediate surroundings depicting the utility poles or structures on which each
proposed small wireless facility would be mounted or location where utility
poles or structures would be installed. This should include a depiction of the
completed facility;
         (c)   Specifications and drawings prepared by a structural engineer,
as that term is defined in § 4 of the Structural Engineering Practice Act of
1989, being 225 ILCS 340/4, for each proposed small wireless facility covered
by the application as it is proposed to be installed;
         (d)   The equipment type and model numbers for the antennas and all
other wireless equipment associated with the small wireless facility;
         (e)   A proposed schedule for the installation and completion of each
small wireless facility covered by the application, if approved;
         (f)   Certification that the collocation complies with the collocation
requirements and conditions contained herein, to the best of the applicant’s
knowledge; and
         (g)   In the event that the proposed small wireless facility is to be
attached to an existing pole owned by an entity other than the village, the
wireless provider shall provide legally competent evidence of the consent of
the owner of such pole to the proposed collocation.
      (2)   Application process. The village shall process applications as
follows.
         (a)   The first completed application shall have priority over
applications received by different applicants for collocation on the same
utility pole or wireless support structure.
         (b)   An application to collocate a small wireless facility on an
existing utility pole or wireless support structure, or replacement of an
existing utility pole or wireless support structure shall be processed on a
nondiscriminatory basis and may be deemed approved if the village fails to
approve or deny the application within 90 days after the submission of a
completed application.
            1.   However, if an applicant intends to proceed with the permitted
activity on a deemed approved basis, the applicant shall notify the village in
writing of its intention to invoke the deemed approved remedy no sooner than 75
days after the submission of a completed application.
            2.   The permit shall be deemed approved on the latter of the
ninetieth day after submission of the complete application or the tenth day
after the receipt of the deemed approved notice by the village. The receipt of
the deemed approved notice shall not preclude the village’s denial of the
permit request within the time limits as provided under this subchapter.
         (c)   An application to collocate a small wireless facility that
includes the installation of a new utility pole shall be processed on a
nondiscriminatory basis and may be deemed approved if the village fails to
approve or deny the application within 120 days after the submission of a
completed application.
            1.   However, if an applicant intends to proceed with the permitted
activity on a deemed approved basis, the applicant shall notify the village in
writing of its intention to invoke the deemed approved remedy no sooner than
105 days after the submission of a completed application.
            2.   The permit shall be deemed approved on the latter of the one-
hundred-twentieth day after submission of the complete application or the tenth
day after the receipt of the deemed approved notice by the village. The receipt
of the deemed approved notice shall not preclude the village’s denial of the
permit request within the time limits as provided under this subchapter.
            3.   If the wireless service provider submits an application for a
new utility pole, the village proposes an alternate placement on an existing
utility pole or existing wireless support structure within 100 feet of the
proposed collocation, and the wireless service provider fails to provide,
within 15 days, the written certification describing why the proposed location
does not satisfy the criteria in the collocation requirements and conditions
section of this subchapter, the village may deem the application incomplete or
deny the application.
         (d)   The village shall deny an application which does not meet the
requirements of this subchapter.
            1.   If the village determines that applicable codes, ordinances,
or regulations that concern public safety, or the collocation requirements and
conditions contained herein require that the utility pole or wireless support
structure be replaced before the requested collocation, approval shall be
conditioned on the replacement of the utility pole or wireless support
structure at the cost of the provider.
            2.   If the application is denied by the village, the village shall
document the basis for a denial, including the specific code provisions or
application conditions on which the denial is based, and send the documentation
to the applicant on or before the day the village denies an application.
            3.   a.   The applicant may cure the deficiencies identified by the
village and resubmit the revised application once within 30 days after notice
of denial is sent to the applicant without paying an additional application
fee.
               b.   The village shall approve or deny the revised application
within 30 days after the applicant resubmits the application or it is deemed
approved.
               c.   Failure to resubmit the revised application within 30 days
of denial shall require the application to submit a new application with
applicable fees, and recommencement of the village’s review period.
            4.   The applicant must notify the village, in writing, of its
intention to proceed with the permitted activity on a deemed approved basis,
which may be submitted with tire revised application.
            5.   Any review of a revised application shall be limited to the
deficiencies cited in the denial. However, this revised application does not
apply if the cure requires the review of a new location, new or different
structure to be collocated upon, new antennas, or other wireless equipment
associated with the small wireless facility.
         (e)   Within 30 days after an approved permit to collocate a small
wireless facility on a municipal utility pole, the village and the applicant
shall enter into a Master Pole Attachment Agreement, provided by the village
for the initial collocation on a municipal utility pole by the application. For
subsequent approved permits to collocate on a small wireless facility on a
municipal utility pole, the village and the applicant shall enter into a
license supplement of the Master Pole Attachment Agreement. The Master Pole
Attachment Agreement and any license supplement shall be in a form approved by
the Village President and the Village Attorney.
      (3)   Completeness of application.
         (a)   Within 30 days after receiving an application, the village shall
determine whether the application is complete and notify the applicant. If an
application is incomplete, the village must specifically identify the missing
information. An application shall be deemed complete if the village fails to
provide notification to the applicant within 30 days after all documents,
information, and fees specifically enumerated in the village’s permit
application form are submitted by the applicant to the village.
         (b)   Processing deadlines are tolled from the time the village sends
the notice of incompleteness to the time the applicant provides the missing
information, or from the time that the village sends the notice proposing an
alternate placement on an existing utility pole or existing wireless support
structure within 100 feet of the proposed collocation.
      (4)   Tolling. The time period for applications may be further tolled by:
         (a)   An express written agreement by both the applicant and the
village; or
         (b)   A local, state, or federal disaster declaration or similar
emergency that causes the delay.
      (5)   Consolidated applications.
         (a)   An applicant seeking to collocate small wireless facilities
within the jurisdiction of the village shall be allowed, at the applicant’s
discretion, to file a consolidated application and receive a single permit for
the collocation of up to 25 small wireless facilities, if the collocations each
involve substantially the same type of small wireless facility and
substantially the same type of structure.
         (b)   If an application includes multiple small wireless facilities,
the village may remove small wireless facility collocations from the
application and treat separately small wireless facility collocations for which
incomplete information has been provided or that do not qualify for
consolidated treatment or that are denied. The village may issue separate
permits for each collocation that is approved in a consolidated application.
      (6)   Duration of permits. The duration of a permit shall be for a period
of five years, and the permit shall be renewed for equivalent durations unless
the village makes a finding that the small wireless facilities or the new or
modified utility pole do not comply with the applicable village codes or any
provision, condition or requirement contained in this subchapter. If the Act is
repealed, renewals of permits shall be subject to the applicable village code
provisions or regulations in effect at the time of renewal; provided, however,
that the permits shah not automatically renew.
      (7)   Means of submitting applications. Applicants shall submit
applications, supporting information, and notices to the Village Clerk by
personal delivery at the village’s designated place of business, by regular
mail or certified mail, postmarked on the date due, or by electronic mail. Any
application submitted will not be considered submitted until the required
application fee is received by the Village Clerk.
(Prior Code, § 9-6-3) (Ord. 2018-08, passed 8-6-2018)
§ 116.058 COLLOCATION REQUIREMENTS AND CONDITIONS.
   (A)   Public safety space reservation. The village may reserve space on
municipal utility poles for future public safety uses, for the village’s
electric utility uses, or both, but a reservation of space may not preclude the
collocation of a small wireless facility unless the village reasonably
determines that the municipal utility pole cannot accommodate both uses.
   (B)   Installation and maintenance.
      (1)   The wireless provider shall install, maintain, repair, and modify
its small wireless facilities in safe condition and good repair and in
compliance with the requirements and conditions of this subchapter.
      (2)   The wireless provider shall ensure that its employees, agents, or
contractors that perform work in connection with its small wireless facilities
are adequately trained and skilled in accordance with all applicable industry
and governmental standards and regulations.
   (C)   No interference with public safety communication frequencies. The
wireless provider’s operation of the small wireless facilities shall not
interfere with the frequencies used by a public safety agency for public safety
communications.
      (1)   A wireless provider shall install small wireless facilities of the
type and frequency that will not cause unacceptable interference with a public
safety agency’s communications equipment.
      (2)   Unacceptable interference will be determined by and measured in
accordance with industry standards and the FCC’s regulations addressing
unacceptable interference to public safety spectrum or any other spectrum
licensed by a public safety agency.
      (3)   If a small wireless facility causes such interference and the
wireless provider has been given written notice of the interference by the
public safety agency, the wireless provider, at its own expense, shall remedy
the interference in a manner consistent with the abatement and resolution
procedures for interference with public safety spectrum established by the FCC
including 47 C.F.R. §§ 22.970 through 22.973 and 47 C.F.R. §§ 90.672 through
90.675.
      (4)   The village may terminate a permit for a small wireless facility
based on such interference if the wireless provider is not in compliance with
the Code of Federal Regulations cited in division (C)(3) above. Failure to
remedy the interference as required herein shall constitute a public nuisance.
   (D)   Position related to pole placement.
      (1)   The wireless provider shall not collocate small wireless facilities
on village utility poles that are part of an electric distribution or
transmission system within the communication worker safety zone of the pole or
the electric supply zone of the pole. However, the antenna and support
equipment of the small wireless facility may be located in the communications
space on the village utility pole and on the top of the pole, if not otherwise
unavailable, if the wireless provider complies with applicable codes for work
involving the top of the pole.
      (2)   For purposes of this subparagraph, the terms COMMUNICATIONS SPACE,
COMMUNICATION WORKER SAFETY ZONE, and ELECTRIC SUPPLY ZONE have the meanings
given to those terms in the National Electric Safety Code, as published by the
Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers.
   (E)   Code compliance. The wireless provider shall comply with all
applicable codes and local code provisions or regulations that concern public
safety.
   (F)   Compliance with other regulations. The wireless provider shall comply
with any and all written design standards that are in effect, or may in the
future be in effect, for decorative utility poles, or reasonable stealth,
concealment, and aesthetic requirements that are set forth in a village
ordinance, written policy adopted by the village, a comprehensive plan, or
other written design plan that applies to other occupiers of the rights-of-way,
including on a historic landmark or in a historic district.
   (G)   Alternate placements.
      (1)   (a)   Except as provided in this section, a wireless provider shall
not be required to collocate small wireless facilities on any specific utility
pole, or category of utility poles, or be required to collocate multiple
antenna systems on a single utility pole.
         (b)   However, with respect to an application for the collocation of a
small wireless facility associated with a new utility pole, the village may
propose that the small wireless facility be collocated on an existing utility
pole or existing wireless support structure within 100 feet of the proposed
collocation, which the applicant shall accept if it has the right to use the
alternate structure on reasonable terms and conditions, and the alternate
location and structure does not impose technical limits or additional material
costs as determined by the applicant.
      (2)   If the applicant refuses a collocation proposed by the village, the
applicant shall, within 15 days, provide written certification describing the
property rights, technical limits, or material cost reasons the alternate
location does not satisfy the criteria in this paragraph.
   (H)   Height limitations. The maximum height of a small wireless facility
shall be no more than ten feet above the utility pole or wireless support
structure on which the small wireless facility is collocated.
New or replacement utility poles or wireless support structures on which small
wireless facilities are collocated may not exceed the higher of:
      (1)   Ten feet in height above the tallest existing utility pole, other
than a utility pole supporting only wireless facilities, that is in place on
the date the application is submitted to the village, that is located within
300 feet of the new or replacement utility pole or wireless support structure,
and that is in the same right-of-way within the jurisdictional boundary of the
village; provided the village may designate which intersecting right-of-way
within 300 feet of the proposed utility pole or wireless support structures
shall control the height limitation for such facility; or
      (2)   Forty-five feet above ground level.
   (I)   Contractual design requirements. The wireless provider shall comply
with requirements that are imposed by any contract between the village and a
private property owner that concerns design or construction standards
applicable to utility poles and ground-mounted equipment located in tire right-
of-way.
   (J)   Ground-mounted equipment spacing.
      (1)   No ground-mounted equipment desired to be installed by a wireless
service provider shall be collocated within 300 feet of any other ground-
mounted equipment owned or operated by the same wireless service provider.
      (2)   In addition, the wireless provider shall comply with all spacing
requirements in applicable codes and ordinances concerning the location of
ground-mounted equipment located in the right-of-way, which shall include, but
not be limited to, the following.
         (a)   No facilities shall be placed in any location if the Village
President determines that the proposed location will require the relocation or
displacement of any of the village’s utility facilities or will otherwise
interfere with the operation or maintenance of any of the village’s utility
facilities.
         (b)   The proposed collocation shall cause only the minimum possible
interference with the use of the right-of-way, and shall cause only the minimum
possible impact upon, and interference with the rights and reasonable
convenience of property owners who adjoin said right-of-way.
         (c)   No facility shall be placed in any location that interferes with
the usual travel on such right-of-way.
         (d)   No facility shall be placed in any location so as to limit
visibility of or by users of the right-of-way.
         (e)   Notwithstanding the maximum size requirement contained in this
subchapter, the proposed installation or collocation shall use the smallest
suitable vaults, boxes, equipment enclosures, power pedestals, and/or cabinets
then in use by the wireless service provider, regardless of location, for the
particular application.
   (K)   Undergrounding regulations. No new utility poles, equipment, and/or
appurtenances may be installed, and no existing utility poles may be modified,
in a manner that results in such poles, equipment, or appurtenances to be
installed above ground unless:
      (1)   There exists other utility poles in the area that are located above
ground;
      (2)   New underground installation is not technically feasible; and
      (3)   The proposed installation will be made at a location, and will
employ suitable design and materials, to provide the greatest protection of
aesthetic qualities of the area being traversed without adversely affecting
safety.
   (L)   Variances of collocation requirements. If an applicant proposes a
height for a new or replacement pole in excess of the above height limitations,
the spacing requirements concerning the location of ground-mounted equipment,
or the undergrounding requirements that prohibit the installation of new or the
modification of existing utility poles, equipment, or appurtenances in a right-
of-way, the applicant shall apply for a variance in conformance with the
procedures, terms, and conditions set forth in §§
154.375 through
154.380.
   (M)   Collocation completion deadline. Collocation for which a permit is
granted shall be completed within 180 days after issuance of the permit, unless
the village and the wireless provider agree to extend this period or a delay is
caused by make-ready work for a municipal utility pole or by the lack of
commercial power or backhaul availability at the site; provided the wireless
provider has made a timely request within 60 days after the issuance of the
permit for commercial power or backhaul services, and tire additional time to
complete installation does not exceed 360 days after issuance of the permit.
Otherwise, the permit shall be void unless the village grants an extension in
writing to the applicant.
(Prior Code, § 9-6-3) (Ord. 2018-08, passed 8-6-2018)
§ 116.059 APPLICATION FEES.
   (A)   Application fees are imposed as follows.
      (1)   The applicant shall pay an application fee of $650 for an
application to collocate a single small wireless facility on an existing
utility pole or wireless support structure, and $350 for each small wireless
facility addressed in a consolidated application to collocate more than one
small wireless facility on existing utility poles or wireless support
structures.
      (2)   The applicant shall pay an application fee of $1,000 for each small
wireless facility addressed in an application that includes the installation of
a new utility pole for such collocation.
      (3)   Notwithstanding any contrary provision of state law or local
ordinance, applications pursuant to this section shall be accompanied by the
required application fee. Application fees shall be non-refundable.
      (4)   The village shall not require an application, approval, or permit,
or require any fees or other charges, from a communications service provider
authorized to occupy the rights-of-way, for:
         (a)   Routine maintenance;
         (b)   The replacement of wireless facilities with wireless facilities
that are substantially similar, the same size, or smaller if the wireless
provider notifies the village at least ten days prior to the planned
replacement and includes equipment specifications for the replacement of
equipment consistent with §
116.057(B)(1)(d); or
         (c)   The installation, placement, maintenance, operation, or
replacement of micro wireless facilities suspended on cables that are strung
between existing utility poles in compliance with applicable safety codes.
      (5)   Wireless providers shall secure a permit from the village to work
within rights-of-way for activities that affect traffic patterns or require
lane closures.
   (B)   (1)   A wireless provider shall pay to the village an annual recurring
rate to collocate a small wireless facility on a village utility pole located
in a right-of-way that equals the greater of $200 per year, or the actual,
direct, and reasonable costs related to the wireless provider’s use of space on
the village utility pole.
      (2)   If the village has not billed the wireless provider actual and
direct costs, the fee shall be $200, payable on the first day after the first
annual anniversary of the issuance of the permit or notice of intent to
collocate, and on each annual anniversary date thereafter.
(Prior Code, § 9-6-3) (Ord. 2018-08, passed 8-6-2018)
§ 116.060 EXCEPTIONS TO APPLICABILITY; ABANDONMENT.
   (A)   Exceptions to applicability.
      (1)   Nothing in this subchapter authorizes a person to collocate small
wireless facilities on:
         (a)   Property owned by a private party or property owned or
controlled by the village or another unit of local government that is not
located within rights-of-way, or a privately owned utility pole or wireless
support structure without the consent of the property owner;
         (b)   Property owned, leased, or controlled by a park district, forest
preserve district, or conservation district for public park, recreation, or
conservation purposes without the consent of the affected district, excluding
the placement of facilities on rights-of-way located in an affected district
that are under the jurisdiction and control of a different unit of local
government as provided by the State Highway Code, being 625 ILCS 5/1-100 et
seq.; or
         (c)   Property owned by a rail carrier registered under § 18c-7201 of
the State Vehicle Code, being 625 ILCS 5/18c-7201, Metra Commuter Rail, or any
other public commuter rail service, or an electric utility as defined in § 16-
102 of the Public Utilities Act, being 220 ILCS 5/16-102, without the consent
of the rail earner, public commuter rail service, or electric utility. The
provisions of this subchapter do not apply to an electric or gas public utility
or such utility’s wireless facilities if the facilities are being used,
developed, and maintained consistent with the provisions of subsection (i) of §
16-108.5 of the Public Utilities Act, being 220 ILCS 5/16-108.5(I).
      (2)   For the purposes of this section, PUBLIC UTILITY has the meaning
given to that term in § 3-105 of the Public Utilities Act, being 220 ILCS 5/3-
105. Nothing in this subchapter shall be construed to relieve any person from
any requirement to obtain a franchise or a state-issued authorization to offer
cable service or video service, or to obtain any required permission to
install, place, maintain, or operate communications facilities, other than
small wireless facilities subject to this subchapter.
   (B)   Abandonment. A small wireless facility that is not operated for a
continuous period of 12 months shall be considered abandoned. The village may
send written inquiry to the wireless service provider inquiring whether any
small wireless facility is in operation and, if it is not in operation, inquire
of the last date upon which the small wireless facility was in operation. If
the wireless service provider fails to respond to the village’s written inquiry
within 90 days from the receipt of tire written inquiry, the village may deem
that such small wireless facility has not operated for a continuous period of
12 months. The owner of the facility shall remove the small wireless facility
within 90 days after receipt of written notice from the village notifying the
wireless provider of the abandonment.
      (1)   (a)   Any notice shall be sent by certified or registered mail,
return receipt requested, by the village to the owner at the last known address
of the wireless provider.
         (b)   If the small wireless facility is not removed within 90 days of
such notice, the village may remove or cause the removal of such facility
pursuant to the terms of its pole attachment agreement for municipal utility
poles or through whatever actions are provided for abatement of nuisances or by
other law for removal and cost recovery.
      (2)   A wireless provider shall provide written notice to the village if
it sells or transfers small wireless facilities within the jurisdiction of the
village. Such notice shall include the name and contact information of the new
wireless provider.
(Prior Code, § 9-6-3) (Ord. 2018-08, passed 8-6-2018)
§ 116.061 DISPUTE RESOLUTION.
   The county circuit court shall have exclusive jurisdiction to resolve all
disputes arising under this subchapter and the Act. Pending resolution of a
dispute concerning rates for collocation of small wireless facilities on
municipal utility poles within the right-of-way, the village shall allow the
collocating person to collocate on its poles at annual rates of no more than
$200 per year per municipal utility pole, with rates to be determined upon
final resolution of the dispute.
(Prior Code, § 9-6-4) (Ord. 2018-08, passed 8-6-2018)
§ 116.062 INDEMNIFICATION.
   A wireless provider shall indemnify and hold the village harmless against
any and all liability or loss from personal injury or property damage resulting
from or arising out of, in whole or in part, the use or occupancy of the
village improvements or rights-of-way associated with such improvements by the
wireless provider or its employees, agents, or contractors arising out of the
rights and privileges granted under this subchapter and the Act. A wireless
provider has no obligation to indemnify or hold harmless against any
liabilities and losses as may be due to or caused by the sole negligence of the
village or its employees or agents. A wireless provider shall further waive any
claims that they may have against the village with respect to consequential,
incidental, or special damages, however caused, based on the theory of
liability.
(Prior Code, § 9-6-5) (Ord. 2018-08, passed 8-6-2018)
§ 116.063 INSURANCE.
   (A)   The wireless provider shall carry, at the wireless provider’s own cost
and expense, the following insurance:
      (1)   Property insurance for its property’s replacement cost against all
risks;
      (2)   Workers’ compensation insurance, as required by law; and
      (3)   Commercial general liability insurance, in amount not less than
$1,000,000 per occurrence and $2,000,000 in the aggregate, with respect to its
activities on the village improvements or rights-of-way to afford minimum
protection limits consistent with its requirements of other users of village
improvements or rights-of-way, including coverage for bodily injury and
property damage.
   (B)   The wireless provider shall include the village as an additional
insured on the commercial general liability policy and provide certification
and documentation of inclusion of the village in a commercial general liability
policy prior to the collocation of any wireless facility.
   (C)   A wireless provider may self-insure all or a portion of the insurance
coverage and limit requirement required by the village. A wireless provider
that self-insures is not required, to the extent of the self-insurance, to
comply with the requirement for the name of additional insureds under this
section. A wireless provider that elects to self-insure shall provide to the
village evidence sufficient to demonstrate its financial ability to self-insure
the insurance coverage limits required by the village.
(Prior Code, § 9-6-6) (Ord. 2018-08, passed 8-6-2018)
§ 116.999 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which no
specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to §
10.999 of this code of ordinances.
   (B)   As described in §
116.042, the monetary penalties shall apply on a competitively neutral basis
and shall not exceed $750 for each day of the material breach, and shall not
exceed $25,000 for each occurrence of a material breach per customer.
(Prior Code, § 9-4-3) (Ord. 08-03, passed 3-3-2008)
APPENDIX A: MODEL MASTER POLE ATTACHMENT AGREEMENT
   This Master Pole Attachment Agreement (Agreement) is entered into this
__________day of, ____________, 20_____, between the Village of Marissa, with
its principal offices located at 111 N.
Main St., Marissa, Illinois, 62257, hereinafter designated LICENSOR and
_______________________________________________________,   with its principal
offices at
____________________________________________________,   hereinafter   designated
LICENSEE.
LICENSOR and LICENSEE are at times collectively referred to hereinafter as the
“Parties” or individually as the “Party.”
WITNESSETH
   WHEREAS, LICENSOR is the owner, of certain utility poles, wireless support
structures, and/or real property, which are located within the geographic area
of a license to provide wireless services licensed by the Federal
Communications Commission (FCC) to LICENSEE; and
   WHEREAS, LICENSEE desires to install, maintain, and operate small wireless
facilities in and/or upon certain of LICENSOR’S utility poles, wireless support
structures, and/or real property; and
   WHEREAS, LICENSOR and LICENSEE acknowledge that any term used in this
Agreement that is defined in Section 2 of the Small Wireless Facilities
Deployment Ordinance (Ordinance No. _________, as now or hereafter amended)
shall have the meaning provided therein; and
   WHEREAS, LICENSOR and LICENSEE acknowledge that the terms of this Agreement
are nondiscriminatory, competitively neutral, and commercially reasonable.
   WHEREAS, LICENSOR and LICENSEE desire to enter into this Agreement to define
the general terms and conditions which would govern their relationship with
respect to particular sites at which LICENSOR may wish to permit LICENSEE to
install, maintain, and operate small wireless facilities as hereinafter set
forth; and
   WHEREAS, the LICENSOR and LICENSEE intend to promote the expansion of
communications services in a manner consistent with the Small Wireless
Facilities Deployment Act, being 50 ILCS 840/1 et seq., the Cable and Video
Competition Law, being 220 ILCS 5/21-100 et seq., the Telephone Company Act,
being 220 ILCS 65/0.01 et seq., the federal Telecommunications Act of 1996,
being Pub. L. No. 104-104, Sec. 1(a), Feb. 8, 1996, 110 Stat. 56, the federal
Middle Class Tax Relief and Job Creation Act of 2012, being Pub. L. No. 112-96,
126 Stat. 156, the Simplified Municipal Telecommunications Tax Act, 35 ILCS
636/5-1 et seq., and Federal Communication Commission Regulations, being 47
C.F.R.; and
   WHEREAS, LICENSOR and LICENSEE acknowledge that they will enter into a
License Supplement (Supplement), a copy of which will be in the same form and
substance as Appendix B attached hereto, with respect to any particular
location or site which the Parties agree to license; and
   WHEREAS, the Parties acknowledge that different related entities may operate
or conduct the business of LICENSEE in different geographic areas and as a
result, each Supplement may be signed by LICENSEE affiliated entities as
further described herein, as appropriate based upon the entity holding the FCC
license in the subject geographic location.
   NOW THEREFORE, in consideration of the mutual covenants contained herein and
intending to be legally bound hereby, the Parties hereto agree as follows:
1) PREMISES. Pursuant to all of the terms and conditions of this Agreement and
the applicable Supplement. LICENSOR agrees to license to LICENSEE that certain
space on or upon LICENSOR’S utility poles, and/or wireless support structures
as more fully described in each Supplement to be executed by the Parties
hereinafter referred to as the “Premises,” for the installation, operation,
maintenance, repair and modification of small wireless facilities; together
with the non-exclusive right of ingress and egress from a public right-of-way,
seven (7) days a week, twenty-four (24) hours a day, over the Property (as
defined below) and to and from the Premises for the purpose of installation,
operation, maintenance, repair and modification of LICENSEE’S small wireless
facilities. The LICENSOR’S utility poles, wireless support structures and other
poles and towers are hereinafter referred to as “Pole” and the entirety of the
LICENSOR’S property is hereinafter referred to as “Property.” In the event
there are not sufficient electric and telephone, cable, or fiber utility
sources located at the Premises or on the Property, LICENSOR agrees to grant
LICENSEE the right to install such utilities on, over and/or under the Property
and to the Premises as necessary for LICENSEE to operate its communications
facility, but only from duly authorized provider of such utilities, which must
be authorized by the LICENSOR to utilize the LICENSOR’S rights-of-way, provided
the location of such utilities shall be designated by LICENSOR.
2)   PERMIT APPLICATION. For each small wireless facility, LICENSEE shall
submit an application to LICENSOR for permit that includes:
a)   Site specific structural integrity and, for LICENSOR’S utility pole or
wireless support structure, make-ready analysis prepared by a structural
engineer, as that term is defined in Section 4 of the Structural Engineering
Practice Act of 1989, being 225 ILCS 340/4;
b)   The location where each proposed small wireless facility or utility pole
would be installed and photographs of the location and its immediate
surroundings depicting the utility poles or structures on which each proposed
small wireless facility would be mounted or location where utility poles or
structures would be installed. This should include a depiction of the completed
facility;
c)   Specifications and drawings prepared by a structural engineer, as that
term is defined in Section 4 of the Structural Engineering Practice Act of
1989, for each proposed small wireless facility covered by the application as
it is proposed to be installed;
d)   The equipment type and model numbers for the antennas and all other
wireless equipment associated with the small wireless facility;
e)   A proposed schedule for the installation and completion of each small
wireless facility covered by the application, if approved; and
f)   Certification that the collocation complies with LICENSOR’S Small Wireless
Facilities Ordinance requirements, to the best of the applicant’s knowledge.
g)   The application fee due.
3)   APPLICATION FEES. Application fees are subject to the following
requirements:
a)   LICENSEE shall pay an application fee of $650 for an application to
collocate a single small wireless facility on an existing utility pole or
wireless support structure and $350 for each small wireless facility addressed
in a consolidated application to collocate more than one small wireless
facility on existing utility poles or wireless support structures.
b)   LICENSEE shall pay an application fee of $1,000 for each small wireless
facility addressed in an application that includes the installation of a new
utility pole for such collocation.
c)   Notwithstanding any contrary provision of State law or local ordinance,
applications pursuant to this Section must be accompanied by the required
application fee.
d)   LICENSOR shall not require an application, approval, or permit, or require
any fees or other charges, from LICENSEE, for:
i)   Routine maintenance; or
ii)   The replacement of wireless facilities with wireless facilities that are
substantially similar, the same size, or smaller if LICENSEE notifies LICENSOR
at least 10 days prior to the planned replacement and includes equipment
specifications for the replacement of equipment consistent with the
requirements of this Agreement; or
iii)   The installation, placement, maintenance, operation, or replacement of
small wireless facilities that are suspended on cables that are strung between
existing utility poles in compliance with applicable safety codes, provided
this provision does not authorize such facilities to be suspended from
municipal electric lines, if any.
LICENSEE shall secure a permit from LICENSOR to work within rights-of-way for
activities that affect traffic patterns or require lane closures.
4)   REQUIREMENTS.
a)   LICENSEE’S operation of the small wireless facilities shall not interfere
with the frequencies used by a public safety agency for public safety
communications. LICENSEE shall install small wireless facilities of the type
and frequency that will not cause unacceptable interference with a public
safety agency’s communications equipment. Unacceptable interference will be
determined by and measured in accordance with industry standards and the FCC’s
regulations addressing unacceptable interference to public safety spectrum or
any other spectrum licensed by a public safety agency. If a small wireless
facility causes such interference, and LICENSEE has been given written notice
of the interference by the public safety agency, LICENSEE, at its own expense,
shall take all reasonable steps necessary to correct and eliminate the
interference, including, but not limited to, powering down the small wireless
facility and later powering up the small wireless facility for intermittent
testing, if necessary. The LICENSOR may terminate a permit for a small wireless
facility based on such interference if LICENSEE is not making a good faith
effort to remedy the problem in a manner consistent with the abatement and
resolution procedures for interference with public safety spectrum established
by the FCC including 47 C.F.R. §§ 22970 through 22.973 and 47 C.F.R. §§ 90.672
through 90.675.
b)   LICENSEE shall not install devices on the existing utility pole or
wireless support structure that extend beyond 10 feet of the poles existing
height.
c)   LICENSEE shall install pole-mounted equipment at a minimum of 8 feet from
the ground.
d)   LICENSEE shall be limited to one (1) cabinet or other ground-mounted
device for ground- mounted installations.
e)   LICENSEE shall paint antennas, mounting hardware, and other devices to
match or complement the structure upon which they are being mounted.
f)   LICENSEE shah install landscaping at the base of poles with respect to any
ground equipment installed by LICENSEE on which devices are being installed.
g)   LICENSEE shall comply with all the terms and conditions of ordinances
governing LICENSOR’S rights-of-way in regards to construction of utility
facilities.
h)   LICENSEE shall comply with requirements that are imposed, by a contract
between the LICENSOR and a private property owner that concern design or
construction standards applicable to utility poles and ground-mounted equipment
located in the right-of-way.
i)   LICENSEE shall comply with applicable spacing requirements concerning the
location of ground-mounted equipment located in the right-of-way.
j)   LICENSEE shall comply with undergrounding requirements or determinations
from the municipal officer or employee in charge of municipal utilities, if
any.
k)   LICENSEE shall comply with all of LICENSOR’S ordinances regulating
construction and public safety in the rights-of-way, including, but not limited
to, wiring and cabling requirements, grounding requirements, utility pole
extension requirements, and signage limitations; and shall comply with
reasonable and non discriminatory requirements that are consistent with PA 100-
0585 and adopted by LICENSOR regulating the location, size, surface area and
height of small wireless facilities, or the abandonment and removal of small
wireless facilities.
l)   LICENSEE shall not collocate small wireless facilities within the
communication worker safety’ zone of the pole or the electric supply zone of
the pole on LICENSOR utility poles that are part of an electric distribution or
transmission system. However, the antenna and support equipment of the small
wireless facility may be located in the communications space on the LICENSOR
utility pole and on the top of the pole, if not otherwise unavailable, if
LICENSEE complies any of LICENSOR’S ordinances regulating work involving the
top of the pole. For purposes of this subparagraph, the terms “communications
space,” “communication worker safety zone,” and “electric supply zone” have the
meanings given to those terms in the National Electric Safety Code as published
by the Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers.
m)   LICENSEE shall comply with all applicable ordinances, regulations, and
policies that concern public safety.
n)   LICENSEE shall install, maintain, repair and modify its small wireless
facilities in safe condition and good repair and in compliance with the
requirements and conditions of this Agreement. LICENSEE shall ensure that its
employees, agents, or contractors that perform work in connection with its
small wireless facilities are adequately trained and skilled in accordance with
all applicable industry and governmental standards and regulations.
o)   LICENSEE shall comply with LICENSOR’S design standards for decorative
utility poles, or stealth, concealment, and aesthetic requirements that are
identified by LICENSOR, and LICENSOR’S comprehensive plan, as amended from time
to time, or other written design plan that applies to other occupiers of the
rights-of-way, including on a historic landmark or in a historic district.
5)   APPLICATION PROCESS. LICENSOR shall process applications in accordance
with LICENSOR’S Small Wireless Facilities Deployment Ordinance.
6)   COLLOCATION COMPLETION DEADLINE. Collocation for which a permit is granted
shall be completed within 180 days after issuance of the permit, unless
LICENSOR, and LICENSEE agree to extend this period or a delay is caused by
make-ready work for a LICENSOR utility pole or by the lack of commercial power
or backhaul availability at the site, provided LICENSEE has made a timely
request within 60 days after the issuance of the permit for commercial power or
backhaul services, and the additional time to complete installation does not
exceed 360 days after issuance of the permit. Otherwise, the permit shall be
void unless LICENSOR grants an extension in writing to the LICENSEE.
7)   DURATION OF PERMITS AND SUPPLEMENTS. The duration of a permit and the
initial Supplement shall be for a period of 5 years, and the permit and
Supplement shall be renewed for equivalent durations unless LICENSOR makes a
finding that the small wireless facilities or the new or modified utility pole
do not comply with the applicable codes or local code provisions or regulations
in LICENSOR’S Small Wireless Facilities Deployment Ordinance, as now or
hereafter amended. If P.A. 100-0585 is repealed as provided in Section 90 of
the Small Wireless Facilities Deployment Act, being 50 ILCS 840/90, renewals of
permits shall be subject to the LICENSOR’S code provisions or regulations in
effect at the time of renewal.
8)   EXTENSIONS. Each Supplement may be extended for additional five (5) year
terms unless LICENSEE terminates it at the end of the then current term by
giving LICENSOR written notice of the intent to terminate at least three (3)
months prior to the end of the then current term. The initial term and all
extensions under a Supplement shall be collectively referred to herein as the
“Term”. Notwithstanding anything herein, after the expiration of this
Agreement, its terms and conditions shall survive and govern with respect to
any remaining Supplements in effect until their expiration or termination.
9)   RENTAL. Each Supplement shall be effective as of the date of execution by
both Parties (the “Effective Date”), provided, however, the initial term of
each Supplement shall be for five (5) years and shall commence on the first day
of the month following the day that LICENSEE commences installation of the
equipment on the Premises (the “Commencement Date”) at which time rental
payments shall commence and be due at a total annual rental as set forth in the
Supplement, to be paid in advance annually on the Commencement Date and on each
anniversary of it in advance, to the LICENSOR in the Supplement (unless LESSOR
otherwise designates another payee and provides notice to LICENSEE). LICENSOR
and LICENSEE acknowledge and agree that the initial rental payment for each
Supplement shall not actually be sent by LICENSEE until thirty (30) days after
the Commencement Date. LICENSOR and LICENSEE agree that they shall acknowledge
in writing the Commencement Date of each Supplement. Rental for the use of any
poles pursuant to this Agreement, shall be an annual fee of $200.00 per each
wireless facility which LICENSEE attaches to LICENSOR’S pole. Thereafter, rent
will be due at each annual anniversary of the “Commencement Date” of the
applicable Supplement. Upon agreement of the Parties, LICENSEE may pay rent by
electronic funds transfer and in such event, LICENSOR agrees to provide to
LICENSEE bank routing information for such purpose upon request of LICENSEE.
10)   ABANDONMENT. A small wireless facility that is not operated for a
continuous period of 12 months shall be considered abandoned. The Village may
send written inquiry to the wireless service provider inquiring whether any
small wireless facility is in operation and, if it is not in operation, inquire
of the last date upon which the small wireless facility was in operation. If
the wireless service provider fails to respond to the Village’s written inquiry
within 90 days from the receipt of the written inquiry, the Village may deem
that such small wireless facility has not operated for a continuous period of
12 months. The owner of the facility shall remove the small wireless facility
within 90 days after receipt of written notice from the Village notifying the
wireless provider of the abandonment.
Any notice shall be sent by certified or registered mail, return receipt
requested, by the Village to the owner at the last known address of the
wireless provider. If the small wireless facility is not removed within 90 days
of such notice, the Village may remove or cause the removal of such facility
pursuant to the terms of its pole attachment agreement for municipal utility
poles or through whatever actions are provided for abatement of nuisances or by
other law for removal and cost recovery.
A wireless provider shall provide written notice to the Village if it sells or
transfers small wireless facilities within the jurisdiction of the Village.
Such notice shall include the name and contact information of the new wireless
provider.
11)   CONDITION OF PREMISES. Where the Premises includes one or more Poles,
LICENSOR covenants that it will keep the Poles in good repair as required by
all federal, state, county, and local laws. If the LICENSOR fails to make such
repairs including maintenance within 60 days, of any notification to LICENSOR,
the LICENSEE shall have the right to cease annual rental for the effected
poles, but only if the poles are no longer capable of being used for the
purpose originally contemplated in this Agreement or otherwise do not comply
with existing law. If LICENSEE terminates, LICENSEE shall remove its small
wireless facility. Termination of this Agreement shall be the LICENSEE’S sole
remedy.
12)   MAKE READY TERMS. LICENSOR shall not require more make-ready work than
required to meet applicable codes or industry standards. Make-ready work may
include work needed to accommodate additional public safety communications
needs that are identified in a documented and approved plan for the deployment
of public safety equipment as specified and included in an existing or
preliminary LICENSOR or public service agency plan. Fees for make-ready work,
including any LICENSOR utility pole attachment, shall not exceed actual costs
or the amount charged to communications service providers for similar work and
shall not include any consultants’ fees or expenses for LICENSOR utility poles
that do not support aerial facilities used to provide communications services
or electric service. Make-ready work, including any pole replacement, shall be
completed within 60 days of written acceptance of the good-faith estimate by
the LICENSOR at the LICENEE’s sole cost and expense.
13)   AERIAL FACILITIES. For LICENSOR utility poles that support aerial
facilities used to provide communications services or electric services,
LICENSEE shall comply with the process for makeready work under 47 U.S.C. § 224
and its implementing regulations. LICENSOR shall follow a substantially similar
process for such make-ready work except to the extent that the timing
requirements are otherwise addressed in LICENSOR’S Small Wireless Facilities
Deployment Ordinance, as now or hereafter amended. The good-faith estimate of
the person owning or controlling LICENSOR’S utility pole for any make-ready
work necessary to enable the pole to support the requested collocation shall
include LICENSOR utility pole replacement, if necessary. Make-ready work for
utility poles that support aerial facilities used to provide communications
services or electric services may include reasonable consultants’ fees and
expenses.
14)   NO AERIAL FACILITIES. For LICENSOR utility poles that do not support
aerial facilities used to provide communications services or electric services,
LICENSOR shall provide a good-faith estimate for any make-ready work necessary
to enable the LICENSOR utility pole to support the requested collocation,
include pole replacement, if necessary, within 90 days after receipt of a
complete application. Make-ready work, including any LICENSOR utility pole
replacement, shall be completed within 60 days of written acceptance of the
good-faith estimate by LICENSEE at LICENSEE’s-sole cost and expense.
Alternatively, if LICENSOR determines that applicable codes or public safety
regulations require the LICENSOR’S utility pole to be replaced to support the
requested collocation, LICENSOR may require LICENSEE to replace LICENSOR’S
utility pole at LICENSEE’S sole cost and expense.
15)   GENERAL RESTRICTIONS. In the event LICENSOR, in its reasonable discretion
deems it necessary to remove, relocate or replace a Pole, LICENSOR shall notify
LICENSEE at least one hundred eighty (180) days prior of the need to remove or
relocate its small wireless facility. In such event, LICENSOR shall provide
options for alternative locations for LICENSEE relocation of equipment which
shall be in a mutually agreeable location (“Alternative Premises”). LICENSEE
shall be solely responsible for all costs related to the relocation of its
small wireless facility to the Alternative Premises. In the event that a
suitable Alternative Premises cannot be identified, LICENSEE may terminate the
applicable Supplement. In the event of an emergency, which for purposes of this
Agreement shall be considered any imminent threat to health, safety, and
welfare of the public, LICENSOR must provide as much notice as reasonably
practical under the circumstances. LICENSEE may terminate this Agreement by
giving written notice to the other party specifying the date of termination,
such notice to be given not less than one hundred eighty (180) days prior to
the date specified therein.
16)   ELECTRICAL. LICENSEE shall be permitted to connect its equipment to
necessary electrical and telephone service, at LICENSEE’S expense. LICENSEE
shall attempt to coordinate with utility companies to provide separate service
to LICENSEE’S equipment for LICENSEE use. In the event that LICENSEE can obtain
separate electrical service with a separate meter measuring usage, the LICENSEE
shall pay the utility directly for its power consumption, if billed directly by
the utility. In the event that separate electrical service is not possible or
practical under the circumstances, LICENSEE may use existing service, at
LICENSEE’S expense, upon the reasonable approval of LICENSOR. In the event that
LICENSEE uses existing utility service at an individual Premises, the Parties
agree to either: (i) attempt to have a sub-meter installed, at LICENSEE’S
expense, which shall monitor LICENSEE’S utility usage (with a reading and
subsequent bill for usage delivered to LICENSEE by either the applicable
utility company or LICENSOR); or (ii) provide for an additional fee in the
applicable Supplement which shall cover LICENSEE’S utility usage. The Parties
agree to reflect power usage and measurement issues in each applicable
Supplement.
17)   TEMPORARY POWER. LICENSEE shall be permitted at any time during the Term
of each Supplement, to install, maintain, and/or provide access to and use of,
as necessary (during any power interruption at the Premises), a temporary power
source, and all related equipment and appurtenances within the Premises, or
elsewhere on the Property in such locations as reasonably approved by LICENSOR.
LICENSEE shall be permitted to connect the temporary power source to its
equipment on the Premises in areas and manner approved by LICENSOR.
18)   USE; GOVERNMENTAL APPROVALS. LICENSEE shall use the Premises for the
purpose of constructing, maintaining, repairing, and operating small wireless
facilities and uses incidental thereto. LICENSEE shall have the right to
replace, repair, and modify equipment, antennas, and/or conduits or any portion
thereof and the frequencies over which the equipment operates, in conformance
with the original Supplement. It is understood and agreed that LICENSEE’S
ability to use the Premises is contingent upon its obtaining after the
execution date of each Supplement all of the certificates, permits and other
approvals (collectively the “Governmental Approvals”) that may be required by
any Federal, State, or Local authorities as well as a satisfactory building
structural analysis which will permit LICENSEE use of the Premises as set forth
above. In the event, that (i) any of such applications for such Governmental
Approvals should be finally rejected; (ii) any Governmental Approval issued to
LICENSEE is canceled, expires, lapses, or is otherwise withdrawn or terminated
by governmental authority; and (iii) LICENSEE determines that such Governmental
Approvals may not be obtained in a timely manner, LICENSEE shall have the right
to terminate the applicable Supplement. Notice of LICENSEE’S exercise of its
right to terminate shall be given to LICENSOR in accordance with the notice
provisions set forth herein and shall be effective upon the mailing of such
notice by LICENSEE, or upon such later date as designated by LICENSEE. All
rentals paid to said termination date shall be retained by LICENSOR. Upon such
termination, the applicable Supplement shall be of no further force or effect
except to the extent of the representations, warranties and indemnities made by
each Party to the other thereunder. Otherwise, the LICENSEE shall have no
further obligations for the payment of rent to LICENSOR for the terminated
Supplement. Notwithstanding anything to the contrary in this Paragraph,
LICENSEE shall continue to be liable for all rental payments to the LICENSOR
until all equipment is removed from the Property.
19)   INSURANCE. LICENSEE shall carry, at LICENSEE’S own cost and expense,
insurance meeting the requirements specified in the LICENSOR’S Small Wireless
Facilities Deployment Ordinance.
20)   INDEMNIFICATION. LICENSEE shall indemnify and hold LICENSOR harmless
against any and all liability or loss from personal injury or property damage
resulting from or arising out of, in whole or in part, the use or occupancy of
LICENSOR’S improvements or right-of-way associated with such improvements by
LICENSEE or its employees, agents, or contractors arising out of the rights and
privileges granted1 under this Agreement and PA 100-0585. LICENSEE has no
obligation to indemnify or hold harmless against any liabilities and losses as
may be due to or caused by the sole negligence of LICENSOR or its employees or
agents. LICENSEE hereby further waives any claims that LICENSEE may have
against the LICENSOR with respect to consequential, incidental, or special
damages, however caused, based on the theory of liability.
21)   REMOVAL AT END OF TERM. LICENSEE shall, upon expiration of the Term, or
within ninety (90) days after any earlier termination of a Supplement, remove
its equipment, conduits, fixtures, and all personal property and restore the
Premises to its original condition, reasonable wear and tear, and casualty
damage not caused by LICENSEE excepted. LICENSOR agrees and acknowledges that
all of the equipment, conduits, fixtures, and personal property of LICENSEE
shall remain the persona] property of LICENSEE and LICENSEE shall have the
right to remove the same at any time during the Term, whether or not said items
are considered fixtures and attachments to real property under applicable laws.
If such time for removal causes LICENSEE to remain on the Premises after
termination of the Supplement, LICENSEE shall pay rent at the then existing
monthly rate or on the existing monthly pro-rata basis if based upon a longer
payment term, until such time as the removal of the antenna structure, fixtures
and all personal property are completed.
22)   RIGHTS UPON SALE. Should LICENSOR, at any time during the Term of any
Supplement decide to sell or transfer all or any part of the Property such sale
or grant of an easement or interest therein shall be under and subject to the
Supplement and any such purchaser or transferee shall recognize LICENSEE’S
rights hereunder and under the terms of the Supplement.
23)   NOTICES. All notices hereunder must be in writing and shall be deemed
validly given if sent by certified mail, return receipt requested or by
commercial courier, provided the courier’s regular business is delivery service
and provided further that it guarantees delivery to the addressee by the end of
the next business day following the courier’s receipt from the sender,
addressed as follows (or any other address that the Party to be notified may
have designated to the sender by like notice):
         LICENSOR:
         Village of Marissa
         c/o Village President
         111 N. Main St.
         Marissa, IL 62257
         LICENSEE:
         ________________________________
         ________________________________
         ________________________________
         ________________________________
Either Party may change the addressee and/or location for the giving of notice
to it by providing a thirty (30) days’ prior written notice to the other Party.
Notice shall be effective upon actual receipt or refusal as shown on the
receipt obtained pursuant to the foregoing.
24)   CASUALTY. In the event of damage by fire or other casualty to the Pole or
Premises that cannot reasonably be expected to be repaired within forty-five
(45) days following same or, if the Pole or Property is damaged by fire or
other casualty so that such damage may reasonably be expected to disrupt
LICENSEE’S operations at the Premises for more than forty-five (45) days, then
LICENSEE may, at any time following such fire or other casualty, provided
LICENSOR has not completed the restoration required to permit LICENSEE to
resume its operation at the Premises, terminate the Supplement upon fifteen
(15) days prior written notice to LICENSOR. Any such notice of termination
shall cause the Supplement to expire with the same force and effect as though
the date set forth in such notice were the date originally set as the
expiration date of the Supplement and the Parties shall make an appropriate
adjustment, as of such termination date, with respect to payments due to the
other under the Supplement. Notwithstanding the foregoing, the rent shall abate
during the period of repair following such fire or other casualty in proportion
to the degree to which LICENSEE’S use of the Premises is impaired.
25)   DEFAULT. In the event there is a breach by a Party with respect to any of
the provisions of this Agreement or its obligations under it, the non-breaching
Party shall give the breaching Party written notice of such breach. After
receipt of such written notice, the breaching Party shall have 30 days in which
to cure any breach, provided the breaching Party shall have such extended
period, not to exceed 90 days, as may be required beyond the 30 days if the
breaching Party commences the cure within the 30-day period and thereafter
continuously and diligently pursues to cure to completion. The non-breaching
Party may maintain any action or affect any remedies for default against the
breaching Party subsequent to the 30-day cure period, as potentially extended
to 90 days based on circumstances.
26)   REMEDIES. In the event of a default by either Party with respect to a
material provision of this Agreement, without limiting, other than by the
specific terms of this Agreement, the non-defaulting Party in the exercise of
any right or remedy which the non-defaulting Party, may have by reason of such
default, the non-defaulting Party may terminate the applicable Supplement and/
or pursue any remedy now or hereafter available to the non-defaulting Party
under the Laws or judicial decisions of the state of Illinois. Further, upon a
default, the non-defaulting Party may at its option (but without obligation to
do so), perform the defaulting Party’s duty or obligation on the defaulting
Party’s behalf, including, but not limited to, the obtaining of reasonably
required insurance policies. The costs and expenses of such performance by the
non-defaulting Party shall be due and payable by the defaulting Party upon
invoice therefor.
27)   APPLICABLE LAWS. During the Term, LICENSOR shall maintain the Property
and the Pole in compliance with all applicable laws, rules, regulations,
ordinances, directives, covenants, easements, zoning and land use regulations,
and restrictions of record, permits, building codes, (collectively “Laws”).
LICENSEE shall, in respect to the condition of the Premises and at LICENSEE’S
sole cost and expense, comply with (a) all Laws relating solely to LICENSEE’S
specific and unique nature of use of the Premises; and (b) all building codes
requiring modifications to the Premises due to the improvements being made by
LICENSEE in the Premises. It shall be LICENSOR’S obligation to comply with all
Laws relating to the Pole in general, without regard to specific use
(including, without limitation, modifications required to enable LICENSEE to
obtain all necessary building permits).
28)   BOND. LICENSEE shall deposit with LICENSOR on one occasion prior to the
commencement of the first Supplement a bond in a form reasonably acceptable to
LICENSOR in the amount of $10,000 per small wireless facility to guarantee the
safe and efficient removal of any equipment from any Premises subject to this
Agreement, which equipment remains more than 30 days after rental payment has
ceased and Licensee has failed to remove the equipment. The funds may also be
used to restore the premises to original condition, if LICENSEE fails to do so.
29)   MISCELLANEOUS. Except as to the terms and conditions contained in
LICENSOR’S Small Wireless Facilities Deployment Ordinance, this Agreement and
the Supplements that may be executed from time to time hereunder contain all
agreements, promises, and understandings between the LICENSOR and the LICENSEE
regarding this transaction, and no oral agreement, promises, or understandings
shall be binding upon either the LICENSOR or the LICENSEE in any dispute,
controversy or proceeding. This Agreement may not be amended or varied except
in a writing signed by all Parties. This Agreement shall extend to and bind the
heirs, personal representatives, successors, and assigns hereto. The failure of
either party to insist upon strict performance of any of the terms or
conditions of this Agreement or to exercise any of its rights hereunder shall
not waive such rights and such party shall have the right to enforce such
rights at any time. The performance of this Agreement via each Supplement shall
be governed interpreted, construed, and regulated by the laws of the state of
Illinois.
30)   EXECUTION IN COUNTERPARTS. This Agreement and any Supplements may be
executed in multiple counterparts, including by counterpart facsimiles or
scanned email counterpart signature, each of which shall be deemed an original,
and all such counterparts once assembled together shall constitute one
integrated instrument.
31)   AUTHORIZATION. LICENSEE certifies and warrants that it has the authority
to enter into this Agreement.
   IN WITNESS WHEREOF, the Parties hereto have set their hands and affixed
their respective seals the day and year first above written.
LICENSOR:
Village of Marissa, an Illinois Municipal Corporation
____________________________________
By: Chad Easton, Village President
LICENSEE:
BY:
Name: ____________________
Title: _____________________
(Prior Code, Ch. 9) (Ord. 2018-08, passed 8-6-2018)
APPENDIX B: LICENSE SUPPLEMENT
This License Supplement (Supplement), is made this _____ day of _____________,
20_____, by and
between the Village of Marissa, whose principal place of business is 111 N.
Main St., Marissa, Illinois, 62257 (LICENSOR),
and   _______________________________, whose principal place of business is
_______________________________________________(LICENSEE).
1.   Master License Agreement. This Supplement is a Supplement as referenced in
that certain Master License Agreement between the Village of Marissa and
LICENSEE, dated _____________________,
20_____, (the “Agreement”). All of the terms and conditions of the Agreement
are incorporated herein by reference and made a part hereof without the
necessity of repeating or attaching the Agreement. In the event of a
contradiction, modification or inconsistency between the terms of the Agreement
and this Supplement, the terms of this Supplement shall govern. Capitalized
terms used in this Supplement shall have the same meaning described for them in
the Agreement unless otherwise indicated herein.
2.   Premises.   The Property owned by Licensor is located at
______________________________
____________________________________The Premises licensed by the LICENSOR to
the LICENSEE hereunder is described on Exhibit “1” attached hereto and made a
part hereof.
3.   Term. The Commencement Date and the Term of this Supplement shall be as
set forth in Paragraph 7 of the Agreement.
4.   Consideration. Rent under this Supplement shall be $200.00 per year,
payable to LICENSOR at LICENSOR’S address above. Thereafter, rent will be due
at each annual anniversary of the “Commencement Date” of this Supplement.
LESSEE shall obtain electrical service and provide for a separate meter and
billing from the applicable utility provider.
5.   Site Specific Terms. The following are terms that are specific to this
Supplement:
___________________________________________________________________________________
____________________________________________________________________________________
___________________________________________________________________________________
____________________________________________________________________________________
___________________________________________________________________________________
___________________________________________________________________________________
___________________________________________________________________________________
      IN WITNESS WHEREOF, the Parties hereto have set their hands and affixed
their respective seals the day and year first above written.
LICENSOR:
Village of Marissa, an Illinois Municipal Corporation
____________________________________
By: ________________________________
Title: Village President
LICENSEE:
BY:
Name: ____________________
Title: ____________________________
(Prior Code, Ch. 9) (Ord. 2018-08, passed 8-6-2018)
APPENDIX C: PREMISES
[Reserved].
(Prior Code, Ch. 9) (Ord. 2018-08, passed 8-6-2018)
APPENDIX D: MODEL SMALL WIRELESS FACILITIES PERMIT APPLICATION
Village of Marissa
111 N. Main St.
Marissa, Illinois 62257
(618) 295-2351
villageofmarissa.com
MODEL SMALL WIRELESS FACILITIES PERMIT APPLICATION
APPLICANT INFORMATION
Applicant Name:                                            Date:
Applicant is a: Carrier/Wireless Provider Representative Other
Company Name:
Address:
City:                     State:                           Zip Code:
Phone:                     Email:
PROPOSED SITE LOCATION
Property Address:
City:                     State:                           Zip Code:
Closest Intersection (Distance and Direction from):
 
 
 
EXISTING POLE/STRUCTURE INFORMATION
New Pole/Structure Construction?Yes No
Pole/Structure ID Number: Height of Pole/Structure (feet): Pole Color:
Existing Attachment(s) on Pole/Structure? (e.g., banners, light fixtures)Yes
No
Existing Structure Owner:
Name of Structure Owner Representative:
Address:
City:                     State:                           ZIP Code:
Phone:                    E-mail:                          Fax:
PROPERTY OWNER INFORMATION
In the event that the proposed small wireless facility is to be attached to
an existing pole owned by an entity other than the City, the wireless
provider shall provide legally competent evidence of the consent of the
owner of such pole to the proposed collocation. Permission has been granted
by property owner? Yes No
Name:
Address:
City: State: ZIP Code:
Phone: Email:
APPLICATION REQUIREMENTS
The following documents must be attached or included for the Application to
be complete:
 
Application fee(s)
 
Site specific structural integrity, AND for a municipal utility pole
 
Make-ready analysis prepared by a structural engineer
 
The location where each proposed small facility or utility pole would be
installed
 
Photographs of the proposed site location and its immediate surroundings
 
Specifications and drawings prepared by a structural engineer for each
proposed small wireless facility
 
The equipment type and model numbers for the antennas and all other wireless
equipment associated with the small wireless facility
 
A proposed schedule for the installation and completion of each small
wireless facility, if approved
 
Proof of permission granted by property owner, if existing pole not owner by
the City
 
 
ATTESTATION, ACKNOWLEDGMENT, AND SIGNATURE
I attest to the best of my knowledge and belief, that the information stated
in this application and in all supporting plans and documents is true and
accurate. To the best of my knowledge, I certify that the proposed collocation
complies with the terms of the “Collocation Requirements and Conditions”
Section of [CITY/VILLAGE]’s Small Wireless Facility Deployment Ordinance.
Signature of Applicant:     Date:
Printed Name of Applicant: Title:
 
**FOR ADMINISTRATIVE USE ONLY**
Date Application was submitted:
Application is: Complete Incomplete
If incomplete, date the Applicant was notified:
Missing documents or information:
 
 
 
 
(Prior Code, Ch. 9) (Ord. 2018-08, passed 8-6-2018)
TITLE XIII: GENERAL OFFENSES
   Chapter
      
130.   OFFENSES IN GENERAL
      
131.   OFFENSES AGAINST PROPERTY
      
132.   OFFENSES AGAINST PUBLIC HEALTH, SAFETY, AND DECENCY
CHAPTER 130: OFFENSES IN GENERAL
Section
General Provisions
   
130.001   Definitions
   
130.002   Criminal Code adopted
   
130.003   Administrative booking fee
Offenses Concerning the Authority
   
130.015   Disturbing police officers
   
130.016   Impersonation of officer
   
130.017   Escapes; aid in escapes
   
130.018   Aid to an offense
Truancy and Curfew Code
   
130.030   Definitions
   
130.031   Curfew restrictions
   
130.032   Truancy restrictions
   
130.033   Establishment restrictions
   
130.034   Enforcement
   
130.035   Civil liability
   
130.036   Curfew; Halloween curfew
Miscellaneous Restrictions
   
130.050   Barbed wire and electric fences
   
130.051   False pretenses
   
130.052   Reserved
   
130.053   Throwing rocks
   
130.054   Fortune telling
   
130.055   Throwing objects from motor vehicles
   
130.056   Use of upholstered furniture in outdoor locations
   
130.057   Admission fees; fraudulently avoiding payment
 
   
130.999   Penalty
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 130.001 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter the words and phrases of the 720 ILCS 2-
1 through 2-11; 2-13 through 2-16; 2-19 and 2-20, as approved, adopted, and
amended, are hereby adopted by the village, as fully as if set out herein.
(Prior Code, § 27-1-1)
Statutory reference:
   Related provisions, see 65 ILCS 5/1-3-2
§ 130.002 CRIMINAL CODE ADOPTED.
   The State Criminal Code, being 720 ILCS, as passed, approved, and amended by
the State General Assembly, is hereby adopted by the village; the provisions
thereof shall be controlling within the corporate limits of the village;
provided, however, the penalties as provided by this code of ordinances shall
apply.
(Prior Code, § 27-1-2)
Statutory reference:
   Related provisions, see 65 ILCS 5/1-3-2 and 5/11-1-1
§ 130.003 ADMINISTRATIVE BOOKING FEE.
   (A)   An administrative processing fee of $20 shall be imposed upon an
arrestee when posting bail or bond for any criminal, village ordinance, or
bookable arrest, including a warrant to be paid at the time of posting said
bail or bond.
   (B)   In order for the fee to be assessed, the subject must be processed in
the Police Department’s booking area and post bond at the Police Department.
   (C)   (1)   If the administrative processing fee is imposed pursuant to this
section, such penalty shall constitute a debt due and owing to the village, and
the village may seek to obtain judgment on the debt and enforce such judgment
as provided by law.
      (2)   Failure to pay the administrative processing fee shall not, by
itself, constitute grounds for holding the subject.
(Prior Code, § 27-12-1) (Ord. 09-04, passed 8-3-2009)
OFFENSES CONCERNING THE AUTHORITY
§ 130.015 DISTURBING POLICE OFFICERS.
    No person shall, by violent conduct, disturb any police officer in the
discharge of his or her duties; nor shall any person assault, strike, or fight
with any police officers in the discharge of his or her duties, or permit such
conduct in or upon any house or premises in the village-owned or possessed by
him or her or under his or her management and control. Abusive or vulgar
language in the presence of an officer does not constitute a crime unless the
language is directed at the officer and provokes a breach of the peace.
(Prior Code, § 27-2-1) Penalty, see §
130.999
Statutory reference:
   Related provisions, see 65 ILCS 5/11-1-1
§ 130.016 IMPERSONATION OF OFFICER.
   No person in the village shall falsely represent himself or herself to be an
officer of the village or shall, without being duly authorized by the village,
exercise or attempt to exercise any of the duties, functions, or powers of the
village officer, or hinder, obstruct, resist, or otherwise interfere with any
village officer in the discharge of the duties of his or her office.
(Prior Code, § 27-2-2) Penalty, see §
130.999
Statutory reference:
   Related provisions, see 720 ILCS 5/17-2
§ 130.017 ESCAPES; AID IN ESCAPES.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful to rescue or attempt to rescue or shall abet or
encourage the rescue or escape of any person from the custody of any officer or
other person legally having him or her in charge, or shall molest or interfere
with any officer or other person so legally having him or her in charge, or
shall, in any manner, aid, abet, or encourage the rescue or the attempt to
escape from any person legally committed thereto, or shall supply or attempt to
supply any such person with any weapon or with any implement or means whereby
an escape might be affected, or with any intoxicating liquors, drugs, or other
article(s) without the consent of the officer in charge.
(Prior Code, § 27-2-11)
   (B)   It shall be unlawful for any person convicted of any offense or in
lawful custody to escape or attempt to escape from custody.
(Prior Code, § 27-2-12)
Penalty, see §
130.999
Statutory reference:
   Provisions related to division (A), see 720 ILCS 5/31-7
   Provisions related to division (B), see 720 ILCS 5/31-6(c)
§ 130.018 AID TO AN OFFENSE.
   It shall be unlawful for any person, in any way or manner, to aid, abet,
counsel, advise, or encourage any other person in the commission of any of the
acts mentioned herein or in any manner encourage the commission of such offense
hereby defined.
(Prior Code, § 27-2-15) Penalty, see §
130.999
TRUANCY AND CURFEW CODE
§ 130.030 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   COURT. The Twentieth Judicial Circuit, St. Clair County, Illinois.
   CUSTODIAN.
      (1)   A person who under court order is the CUSTODIAN of the person of a
minor;
      (2)   A public or private agency with which the court has placed a minor;
or
      (3)   A person acting in the role of a parent by reason of a private
agreement, arrangement, custom, or habit.
   EMERGENCY. An unforeseen combination of circumstances or the resulting state
that calls for immediate action. The term includes, but is not limited to,
fire, natural disaster, automobile accident, medical emergency, or any
situation requiring immediate action to prevent serious bodily injury or loss
of life.
   ESTABLISHMENT. Any privately owned place of business to which the public is
invited, including, but not limited to, any place of amusement or
entertainment.
   GUARDIAN.
      (1)   A parent;
      (2)   A person who under court order is the GUARDIAN of the person of a
minor; or
      (3)   A public or private agency with which the court has placed a minor.
   MINOR. A person under 17 years of age.
   PARENT. A person who is a natural parent, adoptive parent, or stepparent of
another person.
   PUBLIC PLACE. Any place to which the public or a substantial group of the
public has access and includes, but is not limited to, streets, highways,
public ways, sidewalks, and the common areas of schools, hospitals, apartment
houses, office buildings, transport facilities, and shops.
   RESPONSIBLE ADULT. A person at least 18 years of age, authorized by a
parent, guardian, or custodian to have the care and custody of a minor.
   SERIOUS BODILY INJURY. Bodily injury that creates a substantial risk of
death or that causes death, serious, permanent disfigurement, or protracted
loss or impairment of the function of any bodily member or organ.
   TRUANCY CURFEW HOURS. The period of the day when the school the minor would
normally attend is in session, on days when the school the minor would normally
attend is in session.
   TRUANT OFFICER. Any officer, appointee, employee, or other agent of any
school district or any federal, state, or local governmental entity or any
agency thereof performing the duties of a truant officer under the State
Compulsory Attendance Statute.
(105 ILCS 5/26-1 et seq.)
   TRUANCY REVIEW BOARD. An agency or entity established by any school district
or any federal, state, or local governmental entity or any counseling or social
agency or any combination thereof recognized by the village and/or the court as
an agency which provides service to improve education performance and/or
attendance.
   VILLAGE CURFEW HOURS. The period of 10:00 p.m. on any Sunday, Monday,
Tuesday, Wednesday, or Thursday until 6:00 a.m. on the following day; and 12:00
a.m. (midnight) until 6:00 a.m. on any Friday or Saturday.
(Prior Code, § 27-11-1)
§ 130.031 CURFEW RESTRICTIONS.
   (A)   It is unlawful for any minor to be present in any public place or on
the premises of any establishment within the village during village curfew
hours.
   (B)   It is unlawful for any parent, guardian, or custodian of a minor to
knowingly permit, or by insufficient control to allow, the minor to be present
in any public place or on the premises of any establishment within the village
during the village curfew hours.
   (C)   It is a defense to prosecution under divisions (A) or (B) above or §
130.033 that the minor was:
      (1)   Accompanied by the minor’s parent, guardian, custodian, or
responsible adult;
      (2)   On an errand at the direction of the minor’s parent, guardian, or
responsible adult, without any detour or stop;
      (3)   In a motor vehicle involved in interstate travel with the consent
or authorization of a parent, guardian, or custodian;
      (4)   Engaged in going to or returning home from an employment activity
without any detour or stop;
      (5)   Involved in an emergency;
      (6)   On the sidewalk abutting the minor’s residence;
      (7)   Engaged in, going to, or returning home from an official school,
religious, or other recreational activity supervised by adults, sponsored by
the village, a civic organization, or another similar entity that takes
responsibility for the minor;
      (8)   Exercising First Amendment rights protected by the United States
Constitution; or
      (9)   Emancipated pursuant to law.
(Prior Code, § 27-11-2)
§ 130.032 TRUANCY RESTRICTIONS.
   (A)   It is unlawful for any minor who is subject to compulsory education or
to compulsory continuation education by statute or court order to be present in
any public place or on the premises of any establishment within the village
during truancy curfew hours.
   (B)   It is unlawful for any parent, custodian, or guardian of a minor to
knowingly permit, or by sufficient control, to allow, the minor to be present
in any public place or on the premises of any establishment within the village
during truancy curfew hours.
   (C)   It is a defense to prosecution under divisions (A) or (B) above or §
130.033 that the minor was:
      (1)   Accompanied by a parent, guardian, or responsible adult if engaged
in an activity which would constitute an excused absence from the school from
which the minor would normally attend;
      (2)   Involved in an emergency;
      (3)   Going to or returning from a medical appointment without any detour
or stop;
      (4)   Engaged in, going to, or returning home from an employment activity
pursuant to a cooperative school vocation program without any detour or stop;
      (5)   In possession of valid proof that the minor is a student who has
permission to leave the school campus;
      (6)   A bona fide participant in an alternative education or home
schooling program; or
      (7)   Engaged in or subject to an authorized or excused absence from the
school which minor attends, including, but not limited to, lunch periods.
(Prior Code, § 27-11-3) Penalty, see §
130.999
§ 130.033 ESTABLISHMENT RESTRICTIONS.
   (A)   It is unlawful for any owner, operator, or any employee of an
establishment to allow a minor to be present or to remain upon the premises of
the establishment in violation of §§
130.031 and
130.032 during curfew or truancy hours.
   (B)   It is a defense to prosecution under this section if the owner,
operator, or any employee of the establishment, immediately upon discovery of a
minor reasonably believed to be in violation of §§
130.031 and
130.032, notified the Police Department that a minor was present on the
premises of the establishment during curfew or truancy hours and refused to
leave the establishment after being advised to do so by the owner, operator, or
employee.
(Prior Code, § 27-11-4) Penalty, see §
130.999
§ 130.034 ENFORCEMENT.
   (A)   (1)   Every member of the Police Department, while on duty, is hereby
authorized to temporarily detain any minor violating the provisions of this
subchapter (regardless of whether a citation is immediately issued) until the
parent, custodian, or guardian of the minor shall take him or her into custody,
but such officer shall immediately, upon taking custody of the minor,
reasonably attempt to communicate with the parent, custodian, or guardian of
the minor, unless division (F) below is applicable.
      (2)   A parent, custodian, or guardian must take custody of the minor
within one hour of the time of notice, or be subject to a charge of $25 per
hour as hereinafter provided.
   (B)   Whenever a police officer or truant officer witnesses or has knowledge
based on reasonable grounds of a violation of this subchapter by any person,
such person may be issued a citation. A citation or complaint may be made to a
police officer or truant officer by any person.
   (C)   A citation issued hereunder shall be in writing and shall:
      (1)   State the name of the person being cited and the person’s address,
if known;
      (2)   Set forth the specific section of this subchapter that was
violated, the date of the violation, and a brief description of the violation;
and
      (3)   Be signed by the issuing police officer, truant officer, or
complaining party.
   (D)   In each instance where a citation is issued to a minor for violation
of this subchapter, a minor’s parent, custodian, or guardian shall be provided
a copy of the citation notifying the parent, custodian, or guardian of the
charge made against the minor.
   (E)   (1)   A minor cited for a citation under this subchapter must attend a
court hearing or Truancy Review Board hearing on the citation and must be
accompanied at the hearing by his or her parent, guardian, custodian, or other
adult person having the legal care and custody of the minor.
      (2)   If any such person fails to attend any court hearing with the
minor, and unless the interest of justice would otherwise be served, the court
may continue the hearing and shall issue a notice or a rule to show cause to
the person directing that said person appear at the continued hearing with the
minor.
      (3)   Failure of the person to thereafter appear shall subject said
person to sanctions for contempt of court as determined by the court.
   (F)   Every sworn member of the Police Department, while on duty, is hereby
authorized to temporarily detain any minor violating the provisions of §
130.032, regardless of whether a citation is issued, and to deliver and
surrender the minor to the lawful authorities of the school that the minor
would normally attend.
(Prior Code, § 27-11-5)
§ 130.035 CIVIL LIABILITY.
   (A)   If a minor is detained for a period of time in excess of one hour
which requires the supervision of the minor by personnel of any Police
Department, the parent, guardian, custodian, or other adult person having the
legal care or custody of the minor shall be jointly and severally liable for
the costs therefor.
   (B)   (1)   The parent, guardian, custodian, or other adult person having
the legal care or custody of a minor who has committed any offense of this
subchapter shall be assessed and billed for the costs.
      (2)   The costs shall be recoverable in any action enforcing any
provision of this subchapter or in a separate civil action.
   (C)   In addition, the failure to pay the costs shall constitute a violation
of this subchapter and subject the violator to the penalties described within §
130.999. In the event any action is filed, the liable party shall be
responsible for all court costs and any reasonable attorney’s fees incurred by
the village in collecting.
(Prior Code, § 27-11-7) (Ord. 04-15, passed 12-6-2004) Penalty, see §
130.999
§ 130.036 CURFEW; HALLOWEEN CURFEW.
   (A)   It shall be illegal for any person to engage in Halloween practice,
commonly called “Trick or Treat,” by calling at the homes or dwelling places
within the village, either masked or unmasked, except on a day designated by
the Board of Trustees, and no later than 9:00 p.m.
(Prior Code, § 27-2-26)
   (B)   (1)   It shall be unlawful for a person less than 17 years of age to
be present at or upon any public assembly, building, place, street, or highway
at the following times, unless accompanied and supervised by a parent, legal
guardian, or other responsible companion at least 18 years of age approved by a
parent or legal guardian, or unless engaged in a business or occupation which
the laws of the state authorize a person less than 17 years of age to perform:
         (a)   Between 10:00 p.m. on Sunday to Thursday, inclusive and 6:00
a.m. on the following day; or
         (b)   Between 12:00 a.m. (midnight) on Friday and Saturday, inclusive
and 6:00 a.m. on the following day.
      (2)   It shall be unlawful for a parent, legal guardian, or other person
to knowingly permit a person in his or her custody or control to violate
division (B)(1) above.
(Prior Code, § 27-2-27)
(Ord. 01-09, passed 9-4-2001) Penalty, see §
130.999
Statutory reference:
   Related provisions, see 65 ILCS 5/11-1-5
MISCELLANEOUS RESTRICTIONS
§ 130.050 BARBED WIRE AND ELECTRIC FENCES.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to erect or maintain any electrically-
charged fence or barbed wire or other such sharp, pointed fence below eight
feet in height, except in an agricultural or conservation zoning district.
(Prior Code, § 27-2-6) Penalty, see §
130.999
§ 130.051 FALSE PRETENSES.
    It shall be unlawful for any person to obtain any food, drink, goods,
wares, or merchandise under false pretenses, or to enter public places and call
for refreshments or other articles and receive and refuse to pay for same, or
to depart without paying for or satisfying the person from whom he or she
received the food, goods, wares, and/or merchandise.
(Prior Code, § 27-2-13) Penalty, see §
130.999
§ 130.052 RESERVED.
§ 130.053 THROWING ROCKS.
   No person in the village shall throw or cast any rock or stone or any other
missile upon or at any building, tree, or other public or private property, or
at any person in any street, avenue, alley, or public place.
(Prior Code, § 27-2-22) Penalty, see §
130.999
§ 130.054 FORTUNE TELLING.
   No person in the village shall pursue the calling of a fortune teller or
practice fortune telling, soothsaying, or the like and receive payment in any
manner therefor without obtaining a business license first.
(Prior Code, § 27-2-24) (Ord. 2024-15, passed 11-20-2024) Penalty, see §
130.999
§ 130.055 THROWING OBJECTS FROM MOTOR VEHICLES.
   Pursuant to the police powers in 65 ILCS 5/11-1-1, it shall be unlawful for
any person occupying or driving a motor vehicle, whether moving or not, to
shoot, throw, cast, launch, or drop any object, liquid, or substance at any
person, animal, or structure wherein the possibility of harm, injury, or damage
may occur as a result of these actions. The driver and/or all passengers shall
be, upon conviction, fined in accordance with the provisions of this code of
ordinances and shall be liable for all damage, injury, or harm caused by the
activity.
(Prior Code, § 27-2-29) Penalty, see §
130.999
Cross-reference:
   Criminal damage to property, see §
131.003
§ 130.056 USE OF UPHOLSTERED FURNITURE IN OUTDOOR LOCATIONS.
   (A)   Upholstered or other furniture designed or manufactured primarily for
indoor use shall not be used or allowed to remain:
      (1)   On unenclosed exterior porches or balconies; or
      (2)   In an open area on private property exposed to outdoor weather
conditions.
   (B)   It shall not be a defense to said prohibition that such furniture is
covered by plastic cover, or other tarpaulin, canvas, or sheeting.
   (C)   This prohibition shall not apply to the following:
      (1)   Wood, metal, or plastic furniture;
      (2)   Outdoor patio furniture with weather-resistant cushions; or
      (3)   Upholstered furniture designated for prepaid special pickup or
delivery by public or private hauler; provided that such remain outdoors for a
period not to exceed 72 hours.
(Prior Code, § 27-2-35) Penalty, see §
130.999
§ 130.057 ADMISSION FEES; FRAUDULENTLY AVOIDING PAYMENT.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to fraudulently enter, without payment
of the proper admission fee, any theater, ballroom, lecture, concert, or other
place where admission fees are charged; provided, however, that nothing herein
contained shall be deemed to prohibit or restrict the free admission of police
officers engaged in the performance of police duties to any place of public
entertainment or amusement.
(Prior Code, § 27-2-7) Penalty, see §
130.999
§ 130.999 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which no
specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to §
10.999 of this code of ordinances.
   (B)   (1)   Any person who violated any provision of §§ 130.007 or
130.030 through
130.035  shall, upon conviction thereof, be fined not less than $5, nor more
than $200; and a separate offense shall be deemed to have been committed upon
each day on which such violation occurs or continues.
      (2)   In lieu of or in addition to a fine, a minor may be ordered to
attend counseling or to perform ten hours of court-approved community service
during times other than the minor’s hours of school attendance, and/or the
minor’s parents, guardian, custodian, or other adult person having legal care
or custody of the minor may be ordered to attend a parenting class or series of
parenting classes or other counseling approved by the court or recommended by
the Truancy Review Board, or to attend any program directly related to
improving school attendance and/or performance.
      (3)   In addition to any penalty imposed pursuant to divisions (B)(1) or
(B)(2) above, the minor’s parents, guardian, custodian, or other adult person
having legal care or custody of the minor may be ordered to pay all amounts
imposed as civil liability under §
130.035 .
(Prior Code, § 27-11-6)
CHAPTER 131: OFFENSES AGAINST PROPERTY
Section
   
131.001   Petty theft
   
131.002   Theft of recyclables
   
131.003   Criminal damage to property
   
131.004   Criminal damage to firefighting apparatus, hydrants, or equipment
   
131.005   Injury to utility wires and poles
   
131.006   Damage or destruction of street signs
   
131.007   Tampering with public notice
   
131.008   Skateboards and the like
   
131.009   Trespassing
   
131.010   Vandalism; parental responsibility
   
131.011   Graffiti
   
131.012   Manhole safety regulations
   
131.013   Unlawful conduct on public way
   
131.014   Renting premises for unlawful purposes
   
131.015   Destruction of public property
   
131.016   Disturbing the peace
 
   
131.999   Penalty
§ 131.001 PETTY THEFT.
   (A)   A person commits a petty theft when the value of the property is under
$300 and he or she knowingly:
      (1)   Obtains or exerts unauthorized control over property of the owner;
      (2)   Obtains, by deception, control over property of the owner;
      (3)   Obtains, by threat, control over property of the owner; or
      (4)   Obtains control over stolen property knowing the property to have
been stolen by another or under such circumstances as would reasonably induce
him or her to believe that the property was stolen and:
         (a)   Intends to deprive the owner permanently of the use or benefit
of the property;
         (b)   Knowingly uses, conceals, or abandons the property in such a
manner as to deprive the owner permanently of such use or benefit; or
         (c)   Uses, conceals, or abandons the property, knowing such use,
concealment, or abandonment probably will deprive the owner permanently of such
use or benefit.
   (B)   It shall be unlawful to commit a petty theft.
(Prior Code, § 27-3-1) Penalty, see §
131.999
Statutory reference:
   Related provisions, see 720 ILCS 5/16-1
§ 131.002 THEFT OF RECYCLABLES.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to collect, obtain, possess, or pickup
any recyclable item(s) from any receptacle or collection point where service is
provided by an authorized waste hauler licensed by the municipality or from any
specified recycling center within the village limits, unless said person is
acting as an agent for the village or acting as an agent for a waste hauler
licensed by the village.
(Prior Code, § 27-2-28) Penalty, see §
131.999
§ 131.003 CRIMINAL DAMAGE TO PROPERTY.
   Any of the following acts by a person shall be a violation of this chapter:
   (A)   To knowingly damage any property of another without his or her
consent;
   (B)   Recklessly, by means of fire or explosive, damage property of another;
   (C)   Knowingly start a fire on the land of another without his or her
consent;
   (D)   Knowingly injure a domestic animal of another without his or her
consent; or
   (E)   Knowingly deposit on the land or in the building of another, without
his or her consent, any stink bomb or any offensive smelling compound and
thereby, intend to interfere with the use by another of the land or building.
(Prior Code, § 27-3-2) Penalty, see §
131.999
Cross-reference:
   Open burning provisions, see §§
132.075 through
132.077
Statutory reference:
   Related provisions, see 720 ILCS 5/21-1
§ 131.004 CRIMINAL DAMAGE TO FIREFIGHTING APPARATUS, HYDRANTS, OR EQUIPMENT.
   No person shall willfully and maliciously cut, injure, damage, tamper with,
or destroy or deface any fire hydrant or any fire hose, any fire engine, or
other public or private firefighting equipment or any apparatus appertaining to
such equipment, or to intentionality open any fire hydrant without proper
authorization.
(Prior Code, § 27-3-3) Penalty, see §
131.999
Statutory reference:
   Related provisions, see 720 ILCS 5/21-1.01
§ 131.005 INJURY TO UTILITY WIRES AND POLES.
    It shall be unlawful to willfully, maliciously, or negligently break,
deface, injure, or destroy any telegraph or telephone pole, post, or wire, or
any electric lightpost, pole, or electric conductor, wire, or lamp or any other
thing connected with the same or belonging thereto, or any water main, gas
main, pipe, hydrant, lamp, or lamppost, or anything belonging to or connected
therewith or with any of them.
(Prior Code, § 27-3-4) Penalty, see §
131.999
§ 131.006 DAMAGE OR DESTRUCTION OF STREET SIGNS.
   It shall be unlawful for any person in any manner or form, to deface,
disfigure, damage, or destroy any of the street signs or parts thereof located
in the village.
(Prior Code, § 27-3-5) Penalty, see §
131.999
§ 131.007 TAMPERING WITH PUBLIC NOTICE.
   It shall be unlawful for a person to knowingly and without lawful authority
alter, destroy, deface, remove or conceal any public notice, posted according
to law, during the time for which the notice was to remain posted.
(Prior Code, § 27-3-6) Penalty, see §
131.999
Statutory reference:
   Related provisions, see 720 ILCS 5/32-9
§ 131.008 SKATEBOARDS AND THE LIKE.
   The practice of riding or propelling oneself upon a device commonly known or
referred to as a skateboard, roller skates, or blade skates is hereby
prohibited in the village’s Business District where posted.
(Prior Code, § 27-3-7) Penalty, see §
131.999
§ 131.009 TRESPASSING.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person or firm to commit a trespass
within the village upon either public or private property.
(Prior Code, § 27-6-1)
   (B)   Without constituting any limitation upon the provisions of division
(A) above, any of the following acts by any person, firm, or corporation shall
be deemed included among those that constitute trespasses in violation of the
provisions of division (A) above, and appropriate action may be taken hereunder
at any time, or from time to time, to prevent or suppress any violation or
violations of this chapter; the aforesaid enumerated acts so included, being as
follows, to-wit:
      (1)   An entry upon the premises of another, or any part thereof,
including any public property, in violation of a notice posted or exhibited at
the main entrance to the premises, or at any point of approach or entry or in
violation of any notice, warning, or protest given orally or in writing, by any
owner or occupant thereof;
      (2)   The pursuit of a course of conduct or action incidental to the
making of an entry upon the land of another in violation of a notice posted or
exhibited at the main entrance to the premises or at any point of approach or
entry, or in violation of any notice, warning or protest given orally or in
writing by any owner or occupant thereof;
      (3)   A failure or refusal to depart from the premises of another in case
of being requested, either orally or in writing to leave by any owner or
occupant thereof; or
      (4)   An entry into or upon any vehicle, aircraft, or watercraft made
without the consent of the person having the right to leave any such vehicle,
aircraft, or watercraft after being requested to leave by the person having
such right.
(Prior Code, § 27-6-2) Penalty, see §
131.999
§ 131.010 VANDALISM; PARENTAL RESPONSIBILITY.
   (A)   Definitions. For the purpose of this section, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.
      ACTS OF VANDALISM AND SIMILAR OFFENSES. Include any of the following
acts:
         (a)   Maliciously, recklessly, negligently, or knowingly damaging,
destroying, or defacing any property within the village, whether such property
is owned by the state, county, or governmental body or owned by any private
person, firm, partnership, or association;
         (b)   Maliciously, recklessly, or knowingly, by means of fire or
explosive device, damaging, debasing, or destroying any property of another
person;
         (c)   Maliciously, recklessly, negligently, or knowingly starting a
fire on land of another person without his or her consent;
         (d)   Maliciously, recklessly, or knowingly depositing on land or in
the building of another person, without his or her consent, any stink bomb or
any offensive smelling compound and thereby interfering with the use and
occupancy by another of the land or building; or
         (e)   Maliciously, recklessly, or knowingly, and without authority,
entering into or obtaining control over any building, house trailer, motor
vehicle, aircraft, or watercraft or any part thereof of another person without
his or her consent.
      LEGAL GUARDIAN. Includes a foster parent, a person appointed guardian of
a person or given custody of a minor by a circuit court of this state, but does
not include a person appointed guardian only to the estate of a minor, or
appointed guardian, or given custody of a minor under the State Juvenile Court
Act of 1987, being 705 ILCS 405/1-1 et seq.
      MINOR. Includes a person who is above the age of 11 years, but not yet 18
years of age.
      PARENT. Includes the lawful father and mother of a minor child whether by
birth or adoption.
      PROPERTY. Includes any real estate including improvements thereon and
tangible personal property.
(Prior Code, § 27-7-1)
   (B)   Responsibility of parents and guardians. The parent or legal guardian
of an unemancipated minor residing with such parent or legal guardian shall be
presumed, in the absence of evidence to the contrary to have failed to exercise
proper parental responsibility and said minor shall be deemed to have committed
the acts described herein with the knowledge and permission of the parent or
guardian in violation of this chapter upon the occurrence of the events
described in divisions (B)(1), (B)(2) and (B)(3) below:
      (1)   An unemancipated minor residing with said parent or legal guardian
shall either be adjudicated to be in violation of any ordinance, law, or
statute prohibiting willful and malicious acts causing injury to a person or
property, or shall have incurred non-judicial sanctions from another official
agency resulting from an admission of guilt of a violation of any ordinance,
law, or statute prohibiting willful and malicious acts causing injury to a
person or property;
      (2)   Said parent or legal guardian shall have received a written notice
thereof, either by certified mail, return receipt requested, or by personal
service, with a certificate of personal service returned from the village,
following said adjudication or non-judicial sanctions; and
      (3)   If, at any time within one year following receipt of notice set
forth in division (B)(2) above, said minor is either adjudicated to be in
violation of any ordinance, law, or statute as described in division (B)(1)
above, or shall have incurred nonjudicial sanctions from another official
agency resulting from an admission of guilt of violation of any ordinance, law,
or statute as described in division (B)(1) above.
(Prior Code, § 27-7-2) Penalty, see §
131.999
§ 131.011 GRAFFITI.
   (A)   Definition. GRAFFITI means and includes any unauthorized inscription,
word, figure, or design or collection thereof, which is marked, etched,
scratched, painted, drawn, or printed on any structural component of any
building, structure, or other facility, regardless of the nature of the
material of that structural component.
   (B)   Declaration of nuisance. The existence of graffiti on buildings, or on
structures, including, but not limited to, fences, or walls, located upon any
property in the village is declared a nuisance.
   (C)   Notice to abate. Any village inspector, upon observing any nuisance
under this subchapter, shall issue a notice directed to the owner of record of
the property on which the nuisance occurs. The notice shall describe the
nuisance and shall establish a reasonable time limit for the abatement thereof
by such owner, which time shall be not less than five days, nor more than 14
days after service of such notice. The notice shall also specify clearly that
graffiti established on a painted surface shall be painted over with a color
consistent with the predominant tone of the building or structure, and that
graffiti established on any unpainted masonry or wood surface shall be removed
by cleaning so that such unpainted surface is returned.
   (D)   Complaints by citizens, inspection, issuance of notice. Any citizen of
the village who observes a nuisance under this subchapter may file a complaint
with the village. Such complaints shall be investigated, and, if a nuisance
exists, notice as provided in this subchapter shall be issued.
   (E)   Service, return of notice, certified mail. The inspector issuing the
notice to abate a nuisance under this subchapter or his or her designee shall,
by personal service or certified mail, serve the notice upon the owner of the
property where such nuisance exists, and shall make his or her return upon a
copy of such notice showing the date of service and the person upon whom it was
served.
   (F)   Investigation to determine compliance with notice. Immediately upon
the termination of the time allowed in any notice of the abatement of the
nuisance under this subchapter, the inspector shall investigate to determine
whether or not the nuisance has been abated.
   (G)   Failure to comply with notice.
      (1)   In the event the owner of the property where such nuisance exists
has failed within the prescribed time to abate such nuisance, then the Director
of the Division of Inspection and Permits shall have the authority to make
arrangements for the removal of the graffiti through any available public
agency or by contract with any applicable private entity.
      (2)   The cost of such removal shall be billed to the village and shall
be a lien upon the affected property if not paid within 60 days after billing
thereof.
(Prior Code, § 27-2-32) Penalty, see §
131.999
§ 131.012 MANHOLE SAFETY REGULATIONS.
   (A)   Rule imposed. Any person who enters a manhole for any reason must have
the applicable safety equipment as required pursuant to the United States
Department of Labor, Occupational Safety and Health Administration, OSHA 3138,
concerning rules and regulations regarding “Permit - Required Confined Space
Entry, see 29 C.F.R. §§ 1910.146 et seq.”
   (B)   Permit. Any person other than a village employee or third party agent
of the village who enters a manhole is required to obtain a permit, at a cost
of $50, and show proof of confined space entry training and insurance.
(Prior Code, § 27-2-33) Penalty, see §
131.999
§ 131.013 UNLAWFUL CONDUCT ON PUBLIC WAY.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for a pedestrian to stand upon any sidewalk or
public way, except as near as reasonably possible to the building line or curb
line if such standing interferes with the use of said sidewalk by other
pedestrians.
   (B)   It shall be unlawful to impede or interfere with another person’s use
of a public way.
   (C)   It shall be unlawful for a person to loiter on public property.
(Prior Code, § 27-2-10) Penalty, see §
131.999
§ 131.014 RENTING PREMISES FOR UNLAWFUL PURPOSES.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to rent, use, or allow to be used any
building or property owned by him or her, for any purpose whereby riotous or
disorderly persons are gathered.
(Prior Code, § 27-2-14) Penalty, see §
131.999
§ 131.015 DESTRUCTION OF PUBLIC PROPERTY.
   It shall be unlawful for any person, in any way or manner, to aid, abet,
counsel, advise, or encourage any other person in the commission of any of the
acts mentioned herein or in any manner encourage the commission of such offense
hereby defined.
(Prior Code, § 27-2-23) Penalty, see §
131.999
§ 131.016 DISTURBING THE PEACE.
   No person shall disturb the peace of any individual or private family, or of
any lawful congregation within the village by any noise or amusement, or by
vulgar or profane language, or by any disorderly or unreasonable conduct.
(Prior Code, § 27-2-5) Penalty, see §
131.999
Statutory reference:
   Related provisions, see 65 ILCS 5/11-5-2
§ 131.999 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which no
specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to §
10.999 of this code of ordinances.
   (B)   A person commits a petty theft when the value of the property is under
$300 and he or she knowingly:
      (1)   Obtains or exerts unauthorized control over property of the owner;
      (2)   Obtains, by deception, control over property of the owner;
      (3)   Obtains, by threat, control over property of the owner;
      (4)   Obtains control over stolen property knowing the property to have
been stolen by another or under such circumstances as would reasonably induce
him or her to believe that the property was stolen, and:
         (a)   Intends to deprive the owner permanently of the use or benefit
of the property;
         (b)   Knowingly uses, conceals, or abandons the property in such a
manner as to deprive the owner permanently of such use or benefit; and
         (c)   Uses, conceals, or abandons the property, knowing such use,
concealment, or abandonment probably will deprive the owner permanently of such
use or benefit.
      (5)   It shall be unlawful to commit a petty theft.
(Prior Code, § 27-3-1)
Statutory reference:
   Related provisions, see 720 ILCS 5/16-1
CHAPTER 132: OFFENSES AGAINST PUBLIC HEALTH, SAFETY, AND DECENCY
Section
General Provisions
   
132.001   Disorderly conduct; elements of the offense
   
132.002   Resisting of obstructing a peace officer
   
132.003   Refusing to aid an officer
   
132.004   Concealed weapons; discharge of weapons
   
132.005   Games in street
   
132.006   Storage of explosives
   
132.007   Abandoned refrigerators or icebox
Assemblies
   
132.020   Unlawful assembly
   
132.021   Assembling at public places and businesses
   
132.022   Disturbing lawful assemblies
   
132.023   Sanctity of funeral and memorial services
Littering
   
132.035   Definitions
   
132.036   Littering prohibited
   
132.037   Prevention of scattering
   
132.038   Receptacles; upsetting or tampering
   
132.039   Sidewalks and alleys
   
132.040   Owner to maintain private premises
   
132.041   Littering from vehicles and aircrafts
   
132.042   Litter in parks
   
132.043   Handbills; posting notices
   
132.044   Construction sites
   
132.045   Loading and unloading docks
   
132.046   Parking lots
   
132.047   Clearing of litter from open private property by village
Obscenity
   
132.060   Offense defined
   
132.061   Harmful material
   
132.062   Tie-in sales of obscene publications to distributors
Open Burning
   
132.075   Definitions
   
132.076   Burning prohibited
   
132.077   Restrictions on burning landscape waste
Alcohol, Tobacco, and Drug Offenses
   
132.090   Definitions
   
132.091   Determination
   
132.092   Forfeiture of property
   
132.093   Prohibition of possession of weapons, liquor, and drugs in Village
Hall
   
132.094   Products containing synthetic cannabinoids
   
132.095   Synthetic cocaine
   
132.096   Loitering and drug activity prohibited
   
132.097   Intoxication in public
   
132.098   Sale of cigarettes or tobacco to minors
 
   
132.999   Penalty
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 132.001 DISORDERLY CONDUCT; ELEMENTS OF THE OFFENSE.
   A person commits disorderly conduct when he or she knowingly:
   (A)   Does any act in such an unreasonable manner as to alarm or disturb
another and to provoke a breach of the peace;
   (B)   Transmits in any manner to the Fire Department of any village, town,
village, or fire protection district, a false alarm of fire, knowing at the
time of such transmission that there is no reasonable ground for believing that
such fire exists;
   (C)   Transmits in any manner to another a false alarm to the effect that a
bomb or other explosive device of any nature is concealed in such a place that
its explosion would endanger human life, knowing at the time of such
transmission that there is no reasonable ground for believing that such bomb or
explosive device is concealed in such a place;
   (D)   Transmits in any manner to any peace officer, public officer, or
public employee a report to the effect that an offense has been committed,
knowing at the time of such transmission that there is no reasonable ground for
believing that such an offense has been committed;
   (E)   Enters upon the property of another and for a lewd or unlawful
purpose, deliberately looks into a dwelling on the property through any window
or other opening in it;
   (F)   While acting as a collection agency as defined in the Collection
Agency Act, being 205 ILCS 740/1 et seq., or as an employee of such collection
agency, and while attempting to collect an alleged debt, makes a telephone call
to the alleged debtor which is designed to harass, annoy, or intimidate the
alleged debtor; or
   (G)   Transmits a false report to the Department of Children and Family
Services.
(Prior Code, § 27-4-1)
Statutory reference:
   Related provisions, see 720 ILCS 5/26-1
§ 132.002 RESISTING OF OBSTRUCTING A PEACE OFFICER.
   A person commits an offense when that person knowingly resists or obstructs
the performance of any authorized act of one known to the person to be a peace
officer within that peace officer’s official capacity.
(Prior Code, § 27-4-2)
Statutory reference:
   Related provisions, see 720 ILCS 5/31-1
§ 132.003 REFUSING TO AID AN OFFICER.
   A person who refuses or knowingly fails, upon command, to reasonably aid a
person known by him or her to be a peace officer in the following commits a
misdemeanor:
   (A)   Apprehending a person whom the officer is authorized to apprehend; or
   (B)   Preventing the commission by another of any offense.
(Prior Code, § 27-4-3) Penalty, see §
132.999
Statutory reference:
   Related provisions, see 720 ILCS 5/31-8
§ 132.004 CONCEALED WEAPONS; DISCHARGE OF WEAPONS.
   (A)   (1)   No person shall, within the village, carry or wear under his or
her clothes, or concealed about his or her person, any sling-shot, or cross
knuckles, or knuckles of lead, brass, or other metal, or any switchblade knife
or razor, bowie knife, dirk knife or dirk dagger, or any other dangerous or
deadly weapon.
      (2)   This section shall not prohibit any person from carrying a
concealed firearm in compliance with the State Firearm Concealed Carry Act (430
ILCS 66/1 et seq.), nor shall this division (A) apply to officers or members of
the Police Department, nor any sheriff, deputy sheriff, or constable of the
state, nor to any United States Marshal.
(Prior Code, § 27-2-18)
   (B)   It shall be unlawful to discharge any firearm, bow and arrow, or air
gun in the village or so that the bullet, arrow, missile, or projectile
therefrom enters the village without written permission from the Mayor,
provided that this division (B) shall not be construed to prohibit:
      (1)   Any officer of the law from discharging a firearm in the
performance of his or her duty;
      (2)   Any citizen from discharging a firearm when lawfully defending his
or her person or property;
      (3)   The discharge of bow and arrow by students upon school grounds
while under the direct and immediate supervision of teachers or other school
supervisory personnel;
      (4)   Any citizen from discharging a firearm, bow and arrow, or air gun
when:
         (a)   The property upon which such firearm, bow and arrow or air gun
is discharged is zoned as A-l, Agricultural District;
         (b)   The parcel upon which such firearm, bow and arrow, or air gun is
discharged is equal to or greater than five acres;
         (c)   The bullet, arrow, missile, or projectile projected from the
firearm, bow and arrow, or air gun does not enter upon any property upon which
the discharge of a firearm, bow and arrow, or air gun is prohibited; and
         (d)   The discharge of the firearm, bow and arrow, or air gun is at
least 300 yards away from an inhabited dwelling, unless the person responsible
for such discharge has first obtained permission from the owner or tenant of
the inhabited dwelling.
      (5)   The discharge of a bow and arrow shall be subject to the following
requirements:
         (a)   The user/archer must be 16 years of age or older unless
supervised by an adult;
         (b)   1.   The user/archer must register at the Village Hall and have
target inspected before using; and
            2.   Said inspection is only designed to make sure that the village
ordinance is followed, and said inspection is not designed to ensure the safety
of the bow and arrow facility.
         (c)   The user’s/archer’s permit must be displayed or fine will be
issued;
         (d)   The user/archer must have permission of landowner if bow and
arrow shooting is on property other than your own;
          (e)   No lethal broadheads; practice points only;
         (f)   The target must be enclosed on three sides by a six-foot high
and eight-foot long, wooden fence or other suitable barrier such as an
outbuilding, garage, house, or the like;
         (g)   The target must be a minimum of two feet thick, four feet high,
and four feet wide, and shall be made of styrofoam, pressed cardboard, or
saucer bales; and
         (h)   Target must have a backing of rubber belting or plywood; plywood
shall be one-half inch at minimum.
      (6)   As an exception to divisions (B)(5)(f), (B)(5)(g), and (B)(5)(h)
above, shooting shall be permitted in an open field which contains no residents
within 100 yards of the target.
(Prior Code, § 27-2-19)
(Ord. 2016-06, passed 4-4-2016; Ord. 2017-04, passed 3-20-2017; Ord. 2024-15,
passed 11-20-2024) Penalty, see §
132.999
§ 132.005 GAMES IN STREET.
    No person shall, upon any village street, fly any kite, play any game of
ball, or engage in any amusement or practice having a tendency to injure or
annoy any person passing in the streets or on the sidewalks.
(Prior Code, § 27-2-20) Penalty, see §
132.999
§ 132.006 STORAGE OF EXPLOSIVES.
   (A)   Nitroglycerine; dynamite, and the like. No person shall have, keep,
possess, or store at or in any place within the village, any nitroglycerine,
dynamite, or giant powder, or any form or combination of any of them.
   (B)   Blasting powder and the like. No person shall keep, possess, or store
any gun or blasting powder or any gun or explosive cotton at or in any one
place in the village in any quantity exceeding five pounds.
(Prior Code, § 27-2-21) Penalty, see §
132.999
Statutory reference:
   Related provisions, see 65 ILCS 5/11-8-4
§ 132.007 ABANDONED REFRIGERATORS OR ICEBOX.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to abandon or discard in any place
accessible to children any refrigerator, icebox, or ice chest, of a capacity of
one and one-half cubic foot or more, which has an attached lid or door which
may be opened or fastened shut by means of an attached latch. The owner,
lessee, or manager of such place, who knowingly permits such abandoned or
discarded refrigerator, icebox, or ice chest to remain there in such condition,
shall be guilty of violating this code of ordinances.
(Prior Code, § 27-2-25) Penalty, see §
132.999
Statutory reference:
   Related provisions, see 430 ILCS 150/1
ASSEMBLIES
§ 132.020 UNLAWFUL ASSEMBLY.
   It shall be illegal for persons to assemble unlawfully in the following
situations:
   (A)   The use of force or violence disturbing the public peace by two or
more persons acting together and without authority of law;
   (B)   The assembly of two or more persons to do an unlawful act; or
   (C)   The assembly of two or more persons, without authority of law, for the
purpose of doing violence to the person or property of any one supposed to have
been guilty of a violation of the law, or for the purpose of exercising
correctional powers or regulative powers over any person by violence.
(Prior Code, § 27-2-4) Penalty, see §
132.999
Statutory reference:
   Related provisions, see 65 ILCS 5/11-5-2 and 720 ILCS 5/25-1
§ 132.021 ASSEMBLING AT PUBLIC PLACES AND BUSINESSES.
   (A)   Drive-in business. A DRIVE-IN BUSINESS within the meaning of this code
of ordinances shall be deemed to be any business where meals, sandwiches, cold
drinks, beverages, ice cream, food, drink, or consumer services are served
directly to or are permitted to be consumed by patrons in or upon automobiles,
motorcycles, or other vehicles parked on the premises.
   (B)   Declared public places. For the purpose of preserving public peace,
health, and safety, the entire premises occupied by a drive-in business,
together with means of ingress or egress, are hereby declared to be a public
place.
      (1)   No person on the premises of a drive-in business shall race the
motor of any motor vehicle, needlessly bring to a sudden start or stop any
motor vehicle, blow any horn of any motor vehicle, or cause to be made any loud
or unseemly noise, nuisance, or disturbance whereby the quiet and good order of
the premises or the neighborhood are disturbed.
      (2)   The following acts or conduct of any persons entering a drive-in
business or premises are hereby declared to be unlawful, and any person found
guilty of any such acts shall be guilty of a violation of this subchapter:
         (a)   Entering the premises of any drive-in business with any motor
vehicle of any description and parking such vehicle and leaving the premises
(thereby leaving such vehicle parked and unoccupied), without express consent
of the owner or operator of such business, in which event, such motor vehicle
shall be subject to a parking citation or may be impounded subject to the usual
impounding charges;
         (b)   Entering the premises in or upon a motor vehicle and using said
premises for cruising, racing as a shortcut to another street, or to annoy or
endanger any person or persons or other vehicle or vehicles lawfully on said
premises;
         (c)   For three or more persons to congregate on the premises and
linger or loiter at any location on the premises of any drive-in business,
other than in the building or in a legally parked motor vehicle; or
         (d)   For any person who, while on the premises of any drive-in
business, in the presence or hearing of another, to curse or abuse such person
or use any violently abusive language under circumstances reasonably calculated
to provoke a breach of the peace.
   (C)   Posting sign. It shall be the responsibility of the business operator
to post on the premises in a conspicuous location, one or more signs bearing
the following legend in letters at least two inches or more in height and
readable:
“CRUISING IN OR CONGREGATING AND LOITERING OUTSIDE A MOTOR
VEHICLE IS UNLAWFUL. NO UNOCCUPIED MOTOR VEHICLES MAY BE LEFT ON THE PREMISES
WITHOUT THE CONSENT OF THE OWNER.”
(Prior Code, § 27-4-4) Penalty, see §
132.999
Statutory reference:
   Related provisions, see 65 ILCS 5/11-5-2
§ 132.022 DISTURBING LAWFUL ASSEMBLIES.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to willfully interrupt or disturb any
funeral assembly, funeral procession, school, any assembly met for the worship
of God or any other assembly met for a lawful purpose by any offensive
behavior, or by any disorderly conduct.
(Prior Code, § 27-2-3) Penalty, see §
132.999
Statutory reference:
   Related provisions, see 65 ILCS 5/11-5-2
§ 132.023 SANCTITY OF FUNERAL AND MEMORIAL SERVICES.
   It shall be unlawful for a person to violate any of the following provisions
of this section:
   (A)   Engaging in any loud protest of signing, chanting, whistling, or
yelling with, or without, noise amplification, including, but not limited to,
bullhorns, auto horns, and microphones within 500 feet of any entrance of a
facility being used for a funeral or memorial service at any time during the
period starting 30 minutes before any funeral or memorial service is scheduled
to begin and ending 30 minutes after the funeral or memorial service
terminates;
   (B)   Displaying any visual images that convey fighting words or actual or
veiled threats against any other person within 500 feet of any entrance of a
facility being used for a funeral or memorial service at any time during the
period starting 30 minutes before any funeral or memorial service is scheduled
to begin and ending 30 minutes after the funeral or memorial service
terminates;
   (C)   Blocking access to any facility being used for a funeral or memorial
service at any time during the period starting 30 minutes before any funeral or
memorial service is scheduled to begin and ending 30 minutes after the funeral
or memorial service terminates; or
   (D)   Ending in a directed protest march or picket at any public location
within 500 feet of any entrance of a facility being used for a funeral or
memorial service at any time during the period starting 30 minutes before any
funeral or memorial service is scheduled to begin and ending 30 minutes after
the funeral or memorial service terminates.
(Prior Code, § 27-2-34) Penalty, see §
132.999
LITTERING
§ 132.035 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   AIRCRAFT. Any contrivance now known or hereafter invented, used, or designed
for navigation or for flight in the air. The word AIRCRAFT shall include
helicopters and lighter-than-air-powered craft and balloons.
   AUTHORIZED PRIVATE RECEPTACLE.
      (1)   A container of water-tight construction with a tight-fitting lid or
cover capable of preventing the escape of contents within.
      (2)   Such RECEPTACLES shall have handles or other means for safe and
convenient handling and be of such size or sufficient capacity to hold all
litter generated between collection periods and shall be in compliance with the
regulations promulgated.
   CONSTRUCTION SITES. Any private or public property upon which repairs to
existing buildings, construction of new buildings, or demolition of existing
structures is taking place.
   HANDBILL. Any printed or written matter, any sample or device, dodger,
circular, leaflet, pamphlet, paper, booklet, or any other printed matter of
literature which is not delivered by the United States Mail Service, including,
but not limited to, those which:
      (1)   Advertise for sale any merchandise, product, commodity, or thing;
      (2)   Direct attention to any business or mercantile or commercial
establishment, or other activity for the purpose of either directly or
indirectly promoting the interest thereof by sales; or
      (3)   Direct attention to or advertise any meeting, theatrical
performance, exhibition, or event of any kind for which an admission fee is
charged for the purpose of private gain or profit.
   LITTER. Garbage, refuse, and rubbish and all other waste material which, if
thrown or deposited as herein prohibited, tends to create a danger to public
health, safety, and welfare.
   LOADING AND UNLOADING DOCK. Any dock space or area used by any moving
vehicle for the purpose of receiving, shipping, and transporting goods, wares,
commodities, and persons located on or adjacent to any stream, river, or land.
   PRIVATE PREMISES. All property including, but not limited to, vacant land or
any land, building, or other structure designed or used for residential,
commercial, business, industrial, institutional, or religious purposes,
together with any yard, grounds, walk, driveway, fence, porch, steps,
vestibule, mailbox, and other structures appurtenant thereto.
   PUBLIC PLACE. Any and all streets, sidewalks, boulevards, alleys, or other
public ways, lakes, rivers, watercourses, or fountains, and any and all public
parks, squares, spaces, grounds, and buildings.
   PUBLIC RECEPTACLES. Any receptacles provided by or authorized by the
village.
   VEHICLE. Every device in, upon, or by which any person or property is or may
be transported or drawn upon land or water, including devices used exclusively
upon stationary rails or tracks.
(Prior Code, § 27-5-1)
§ 132.036 LITTERING PROHIBITED.
   No person shall deposit any litter within the village except in public
receptacles, in authorized private receptacles for collection, or in any duly
licensed disposal facility.
(Prior Code, § 27-5-2) Penalty, see §
132.999
§ 132.037 PREVENTION OF SCATTERING.
   Persons placing litter in public receptacles or in authorized private
receptacles shall do so in such a manner as to prevent litter from being
carried or deposited by the elements upon any public place or private premises.
(Prior Code, § 27-5-3) Penalty, see §
132.999
§ 132.038 RECEPTACLES; UPSETTING OR TAMPERING.
   No person shall upset or tamper with a public or private receptacle designed
or used for the deposit of litter or cause or permit its contents to be
deposited or strewn in or upon any public place or private premises.
(Prior Code, § 27-5-4) Penalty, see §
132.999
§ 132.039 SIDEWALKS AND ALLEYS.
   Persons owning, occupying, or in control of any public place or private
premises shall keep the sidewalks and alleys adjacent thereto free of litter.
(Prior Code, § 27-5-5) Penalty, see §
132.999
§ 132.040 OWNER TO MAINTAIN PRIVATE PREMISES.
   (A)   The owner or person in control of any private premises shall, at all
times, maintain the premises free of litter.
   (B)   The owner or person in control of private premises shall, if public
receptacles are unavailable, maintain authorized private receptacles for
collection in such a manner that litter will be prevented from being carried or
deposited by the elements upon any public place or private premises.
(Prior Code, § 27-5-6)
Penalty, see §
132.999
§ 132.041 LITTERING FROM VEHICLES AND AIRCRAFTS.
   (A)   (1)   No person, while the operator of or passenger in a vehicle,
shall deposit litter upon any public place or private premises.
      (2)   No person shall drive or move any loaded or partly loaded truck or
other vehicle within the village, unless such vehicle is so constructed or so
loaded as to prevent any part of its load, contents, or litter from being blown
or deposited upon any public place or private premises. Nor shall any person
drive or move any vehicle or truck within the village, the wheels or tires of
which carry onto or deposit in any public place or private premises, mud, dirt,
sticky substances, litter, or foreign matter of any kind.
(Prior Code, § 27-5-7)
   (B)   No person in an aircraft shall throw out, drop, or deposit any litter
within the village.
(Prior Code, § 27-5-8) Penalty, see §
132.999
§ 132.042 LITTER IN PARKS.
   No person shall deposit litter in any park within the village except in
receptacles and in such a manner that the litter will be prevented from being
carried or deposited by the elements upon any part of the park or upon any
other public place or private premises. Where receptacles are not provided, all
such litter shall be removed from the park by the person responsible for its
presence and properly disposed of elsewhere in a lawful manner.
(Prior Code, § 27-5-9) Penalty, see §
132.999
§ 132.043 HANDBILLS; POSTING NOTICES.
   (A)   (1)   Public places. No person shall deposit or sell any handbill in
or upon any public place; provided, however, that it shall not be unlawful on
any public place for any person to hand out or distribute without charge to the
receiver, any handbill to any person willing to accept it.
      (2)   Private premises. No person shall deposit or unlawfully distribute
any handbill in or upon private premises, except by handing or transmitting any
such handbill directly to the occupant of such private premises; provided,
however, that in case of private premises which are not posted against the
receiving of handbills or similar material such person, unless requested by
anyone upon such premises not to do so, may securely place any such handbill in
such a manner as to prevent such handbill from being deposited by the elements
upon any public place or other private premises, except mailboxes may not be so
used when prohibited by federal postal law or regulations.
      (3)   Exemptions for newspapers and political literature. The provisions
of this section shall not apply to the distribution upon private premises only
of newspapers or political literature; except that newspapers and political
literature shall be placed in such a manner as to prevent their being carried
or deposited by the elements upon any public place or other private premises.
      (4)   Placing handbills on vehicles. No person shall deposit any handbill
in or upon any vehicle, unless the occupant of the vehicle is willing to accept
it.
      (5)   Cleanup. It shall be the responsibility of any person distributing
handbills to maintain the area which they are utilizing free of any litter
caused by or related to said handbill distribution.
(Prior Code, § 27-5-10)
   (B)   No person shall post or affix any notice, poster, or other paper or
device calculated to attract the attention of the public upon any public place,
except as may be authorized or required by law. No person, except the owner or
tenant, shall post any such notice on private property without the permission
of the owner or tenant.
(Prior Code, § 27-5-11)
Penalty, see §
132.999
§ 132.044 CONSTRUCTION SITES.
   (A)   Each contractor shall be responsible for the job site so that litter
will be prevented from being carried or deposited by the elements upon any
public place or other private premises.
   (B)   Litter or other debris, including dirt and mud, deposited as the
result of normal construction process upon any public place or private
premises, shall be removed by the contractor.
(Prior Code, § 27-5-12) Penalty, see §
132.999
§ 132.045 LOADING AND UNLOADING DOCKS.
   The person owning, operating, or in control of a loading or unloading dock
shall maintain private receptacles for collection of litter, and shall, at all
times, maintain the dock area free of litter in such a manner that litter will
be prevented from being carried or deposited by the elements upon any public
place or other private premises.
(Prior Code, § 27-5-13) Penalty, see §
132.999
§ 132.046 PARKING LOTS.
   (A)   Litter receptacles required. Any public place or private premises
containing any provision for parking vehicles shall be equipped with litter
receptacles in compliance with this section. Such premises shall include, but
not be limited to, such places as shopping centers, outdoor theaters, drive-in
restaurants, gasoline service stations, apartment developments, parking lots,
and any other place where provision is made for vehicles to stop or park in a
designated area for any purpose.
   (B)   Number of receptacles. All premises having parking lots shall provide
in an easily accessible location a minimum of one refuse container for every 50
parking spaces.
   (C)   Specifications.
      (1)   Litter receptacles shall have tight-fitting lids or tops and shall
be weighted or attached to the ground or other fixed structures as necessary to
prevent spillage.
      (2)   A minimum container size of 20 gallons or 75.7 liters shall be
used.
   (D)   Cleanliness. Premises used for the purpose designated herein shall be
kept in a litter-free condition and all litter shall be removed periodically
from the receptacles.
   (E)   Obligation to use receptacles. It shall be the duty and obligation of
all persons using parking areas to use such litter receptacles as hereinabove
provided for the purposes intended, and it shall be unlawful for any person or
persons to deposit any litter upon any such parking lot.
(Prior Code, § 27-5-14) Penalty, see §
132.999
§ 132.047 CLEARING OF LITTER FROM OPEN PRIVATE PROPERTY BY VILLAGE.
   (A)   The procedure for the removal of litter from private premises and the
charging of expense(s) thereof as a lien upon such property to be collected
shall be in accordance with the state statutes.
   (B)   The Mayor or his or her designated representative shall be responsible
for the implementation of this enforcement program.
(Prior Code, § 27-5-15)
OBSCENITY
§ 132.060 OFFENSE DEFINED.
   (A)   Elements of the offense. A person commits an offense when, with the
knowledge of the nature or content thereof or recklessly failing to exercise
reasonable inspection which would have disclosed the nature or content thereof,
he or she:
      (1)   Sells, delivers, provides, or offers or agrees to sell, deliver, or
provide any obscene writing, picture, record, or other representation or
embodiment of the obscene;
      (2)   Presents or directs an obscene play, dance, or other performance or
participates directly in that portion thereof which makes it obscene;
      (3)   Publishes, exhibits, or otherwise makes available anything obscene;
      (4)   Performs an obscene act or otherwise presents an obscene exhibition
of his or her body for gain;
      (5)   Creates, buys, procures, or possesses obscene matter or material
with intent to disseminate it in violation of this section, or of the penal
laws or regulations of any other jurisdiction; or
      (6)   Advertises or otherwise promotes the sale of material represented
or held out by him or her to be obscene, whether or not it is obscene.
   (B)   Obscene defined. A thing is OBSCENE if, considered as a whole, its
predominant appeal is to prurient interest; that is, shameful or morbid
interest in nudity, sex, or excretion, and if it goes substantially beyond
customary limits of candor in description or representation of such matters, a
thing is OBSCENE even though the obscenity is latent, as in the case of
undeveloped photographs.
   (C)   Interpretation of evidence.
      (1)   Obscenity shall be judged with reference to ordinary adults except
that it shall be judged with reference to children or other specially
susceptible audiences if it appears from the character of the material or the
circumstances of its dissemination to be specially designed for or directed to
such an audience.
      (2)   In any prosecution for an offense under this section, evidence
shall be admissible to show:
         (a)   The character of the audience for which the material was
designed or to which it was directed;
         (b)   What the predominant appeal of the material would be for
ordinary adults or a special audience, and what effect, if any, it would
probably have on the behavior of such people;
         (c)   The artistic, literary, scientific, educational, or other merits
of the material, or the absence thereof;
         (d)   The degree, if any, of public acceptance of the material in the
state;
         (e)   Appeal to prurient interest or absence thereof in advertising or
other promotion of the material; and
         (f)   Purpose of the author, creator, publisher, or disseminator.
   (D)   Prima facie evidence. The creation, purchase, procurement or
possession of a mold, engraved plat, or other embodiment or obscenity,
specially adapted for reproducing multiple copies, or the possession of more
than three copies of obscene material shall be prima facie evidence of an
intent to disseminate.
(Prior Code, § 27-8-1)
§ 132.061 HARMFUL MATERIAL.
   (A)   Elements of the offense. A person who, with knowledge that a person is
a child; that is, a person under 18 years of age, or who fails to exercise
reasonable care in ascertaining the true age of a child, knowingly distributes
to, or sends or causes to be sent to, or exhibits to or offers to distribute or
exhibit any harmful material to a child is guilty of a violation of this code
of ordinances.
   (B)   Definitions. For the purpose of this subchapter, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.
      DISTRIBUTE. To transfer possession of material whether with or without
consideration.
      HARMFUL. Material is HARMFUL if, to the average person applying
contemporary standards, its predominant appeal, taken as a whole, is to
prurient interest; that is, shameful or morbid interest in nudity, sex, or
excretion which goes substantially beyond customary limits of candor in
description or representation of such matters and is material, the redeeming
social importance of which is substantially less than its prurient appeal.
      KNOWINGLY. Having knowledge of the contents of the subject matter or
recklessly failing to exercise reasonable inspection which would have disclosed
the contents thereof.
      MATERIAL. Any writing, picture, record, or other representation or
embodiment.
   (C)   Interpretation of evidence.
      (1)   The predominant appeal to prurient interest of the material shall
be judged with reference to average children of the same general age of the
child to whom such material was offered, distributed, sent, or exhibited,
unless it appears from the nature of the matter or the circumstances of its
dissemination, distribution, or exhibition that it is designed for specially
susceptible groups, in which case, the predominant appeal of the material shall
be judged with reference to its intended or probable recipient group.
      (2)   In prosecutions under this section where circumstances of
production, presentation, sale, dissemination, distribution, or publicity,
indicate the material is being commercially exploited for the sake of its
prurient appeal, such evidence is probative with respect to the nature of the
material and can justify the conclusion that the redeeming social importance of
the material is, in fact, substantially less than its prurient appeal.
   (D)   Affirmative defenses.
      (1)   Nothing in this section shall prohibit any public library or any
library operated by an accredited institution of higher education from
circulating harmful material to any person under 18 years of age; provided such
circulation is in aid of a legitimate scientific or educational purpose, and it
shall be an affirmative defense in any prosecution for a violation of this
section that the act charged was committed in aid of legitimate scientific or
educational purposes.
      (2)   Nothing in this section shall prohibit any parent from distributing
to his or her child any harmful material.
      (3)   Proof that the defendant demanded, was shown, and acted in reliance
upon any of the following documents as proof of the age of a child shall be a
defense to any criminal prosecution under this section: a document issued by
the federal government or any state, county, or municipal government, or
subdivision or agency thereof, including, but not limited to, a motor vehicle
operator’s license, a registration certificate issued under the Federal
Selective Service Act, being 50 U.S.C. App. § 453, or an identification card
issued to a member of the armed forces.
      (4)   In the event an advertisement of harmful material, as defined in
this section, culminates in the sale or distribution of such harmful material
to a child, under circumstances where there was no personal confrontation of
the child by the defendant, his or her employees or agents as where the order
or request for such harmful material was transmitted by mail, telephone, or
similar means of communication and delivery of such harmful material to the
child was by mail, freight, or similar means of transport, it shall be a
defense in any prosecution for a violation of this section that the
advertisement contained the following statement or a statement substantially
similar thereto, and that the defendant required the purchaser to certify that
he or she was not under the age of 18 years and that the purchaser falsely
stated that he or she was not under the age of 18 years:
“NOTICE: It is unlawful for any person under eighteen (18) years of age to
purchase the matter herein advertised. Any person under eighteen (18) years of
age who falsely states that he is not under eighteen (18) years of age for the
purpose of obtaining the material advertised herein is guilty of a
misdemeanor.”
   (E)   Child falsifying age. Any person under 18 years of age who falsely
states, either orally or in writing, that he or she is not under the age of 18
years, or who presents or offers to any person any evidence of age and identity
which is false or not actually his or her own for the purpose of ordering,
obtaining, viewing, or otherwise procuring or attempting to procure or view any
harmful material is guilty of a misdemeanor.
(Prior Code, § 27-8-2) Penalty, see §
132.999
§ 132.062 TIE-IN SALES OF OBSCENE PUBLICATIONS TO DISTRIBUTORS.
   Any person, firm, or corporation, or any agent, officer, or employee thereof
engaged in the business of distributing books, magazines, periodicals, comic
books, or other publications to retail dealers who shall refuse to furnish to
any retail dealer such quantity of books, magazines, periodicals, comic books,
or other publications as such retail dealer normally sells because the retail
dealer refuses to sell, or offer for sale, any books, magazines, periodicals,
comic books, or other publications which are obscene, lewd, lascivious, filthy,
or indecent is guilty of an offense. Each publication sold or delivered in
violation of this chapter shall constitute a separate offense.
(Prior Code, § 27-8-3) Penalty, see §
132.999
OPEN BURNING
§ 132.075 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   AGRICULTURAL WASTE. Any refuse, except garbage and dead animals, generated
on a farm or ranch by crop and livestock production practices including such
items as bags, cartons, dry bedding, structural materials, and crop residues,
but excluding landscape waste.
   GARBAGE or HOUSEHOLD TRASH. Refuse resulting from the handling, processing,
preparation, cooking, and consumption of food or food products, including
plastic containers.
   LANDSCAPE WASTE. Any vegetable or plant refuse, except garbage and
agricultural waste. The term includes trees, tree trimmings, branches, stumps,
brush, weeds, leaves, grass, shrubbery, and yard trimmings.
   OPEN BURNING. The combustion of any matter in such a way that the products
of the combustion are emitted to the open air without originating in or passing
through equipment for which a permit could be issued under § 9(b) of the
Environmental Protection Act of the State, being 415 ILCS 5/9(b).
(Prior Code, § 27-9-1)
§ 132.076 BURNING PROHIBITED.
   It shall be unlawful to cause or allow open burning of agricultural waste,
household trash, or garbage.
(Prior Code, § 27-9-2) Penalty, see §
132.999
§ 132.077 RESTRICTIONS ON BURNING LANDSCAPE WASTE.
   The open burning of landscape waste shall be permitted only on the following
conditions:
   (A)   Landscape waste shall be burned on the premises on which such waste is
generated;
   (B)   Landscape waste shall be burned only when atmospheric conditions shall
readily dissipate contaminants;
   (C)   Landscape waste may be burned only if such burning does not create a
visibility hazard on roadways, walkways, or railroad tracks;
   (D)   Open burning of landscape waste may only take place during daylight
hours with a person over 18 years of age in attendance during the entire period
of burning;
   (E)   No open burning of landscape waste shall be permitted on any streets
or roadways; and
   (F)   No open burning shall occur during periods of time when the Fire Chief
or the Chief of Police have determined that atmospheric conditions or local
circumstances make such fires hazardous and dangerous.
(Prior Code, § 27-9-3) Penalty, see §
132.999
ALCOHOL, TOBACCO, AND DRUG OFFENSES
§ 132.090 DEFINITION.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definition shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   DRUG PARAPHERNALIA. All equipment, products, and materials of any kind which
are used, intended for use, or marketed for use with illegal cannabis or drugs,
as defined by the Illinois Compiled Statutes, or designed for use in planting,
propagating, cultivating, growing, harvesting, manufacturing, compounding,
converting, producing, processing, preparing, testing, analyzing, packaging,
repackaging, storing, containing, concealing, injecting, ingesting, inhaling,
or otherwise introducing into the human body a controlled substance in
violation of the State Controlled Substances Act, 720 ILCS 570/100 et seq.,
DRUG PARAPHERNALIA includes, but is not limited to:
      (1)   Kits used, intended for use, or designed for use in the planting,
propagating, cultivating, growing, or harvesting of any species of plant which
is a controlled substance or from which a controlled substance can be derived;
      (2)   Kits used, intended for use, or designed for use in manufacturing,
compounding, converting, producing, processing, or preparing controlled
substances;
      (3)   Isomerization devices used, intended for use, or designed for use
in increasing the potency of any species of plant which is a controlled
substance;
      (4)   Testing equipment, used, intended for use, or designed for use in
identifying or analyzing the strength, effectiveness, or purity of controlled
substances;
      (5)   Scales and balances used, intended for use, or designed for use in
weighing or measuring controlled substances;
      (6)   Diluents and adulterants, such as quinine hydrochloride, mannitol,
mannite, dextrose, and lactose, used, intended for use, or designed for use in
cutting controlled substances;
      (7)   Separation gins and sifters used, intended for use, or designed for
use in removing twigs and seeds from, or in otherwise cleaning or refining
marijuana;
      (8)   Blenders, bowls, containers, spoons, and mixing devices used,
intended for use, or designed for use in compounding controlled substances;
      (9)   Capsules, balloons, envelopes, and other containers used, intended
for use, or designed for use in packaging small quantities of controlled
substances;
      (10)   Containers and other objects used, intended for use, or designed
for use in storing or concealing controlled substances;
      (11)   Hypodermic syringes, needles, and other objects used, intended for
use or designed for use in parenterally injecting controlled substances into
the human body;
      (12)   Objects used, intended for use, or designed for use in ingesting,
inhaling, or otherwise introducing marijuana, cocaine, hashish, or hashish oil
into the human body, such as:
         (a)   Metal, wooden, acrylic, glass, stone, plastic, or ceramic pipes,
with or without screens, permanent screens, hashish heads, or punctured metal
bowls;
         (b)   Water pipes;
         (c)   Carburetion tubes and devices;
         (d)   Smoking and carburetion masks;
         (e)   Roach clips or other objects used to hold burning materials,
such as a marijuana cigarette which has become too small or short to be held in
the hand;
         (f)   Miniature cocaine spoons and cocaine vials;
         (g)   Chamber pipes;
         (h)   Carburetor pipes;
         (i)   Electric pipes;
         (j)   Air-driven pipes;
         (k)   Chilams;
         (l)   Bongs;
         (m)   Ice pipes or chillers; and
         (n)   Synthetic drugs.
(Prior Code, § 27-10-1)
§ 132.091 DETERMINATION.
   In determining whether an object is drug paraphernalia, a court or other
authority should consider, in addition to all other relevant factors, the
following:
   (A)   Statements by an owner or anyone in control of the object concerning
its use;
   (B)   Prior convictions, if any, of an owner or anyone in control of the
object, under any state or federal law relating to any controlled substances;
   (C)   The proximity of the object in time and place to a direct violation of
this subchapter;
   (D)   The proximity of the object to controlled substances;
   (E)   The existence of any residue of controlled substances on the object;
   (F)   Direct or circumstantial evidence of the intent of an owner or anyone
in control of the object to deliver it to persons whom he or she knows, or
should reasonably know, intend to use the object to facilitate a violation of
this subchapter; and the innocence of any owner or anyone in control of the
object, as to a direct violation of this subchapter, shall not prevent a
finding that the object is intended or designed for use as drug paraphernalia;
   (G)   Instructions, oral or written, provided with the object concerning its
use;
   (H)   Descriptive materials accompanying the object which explain or depict
its use;
   (I)   National and local advertising concerning the object’s use;
   (J)   The manner in which the object is displayed for sale;
   (K)   Whether the owner or anyone in control of the object is a legitimate
supplier of like or related items to the community, such as a licenses
distributor or dealer of tobacco products;
   (L)   Direct or circumstantial evidence of the ratio of sales of the object
(s) to the total sales of the business enterprise in question;
   (M)   The existence and scope of legitimate uses for the object in the
community; and
   (N)   Expert testimony concerning the object’s use.
(Prior Code, § 27-10-2)
§ 132.092 FORFEITURE OF PROPERTY.
   (A)   All articles defined in division (B)(1) below shall be subject to
forfeiture.
   (B)   Property subject to forfeiture under this subchapter may be seized by
any peace officer upon process issued by any court having jurisdiction over the
property. Seizure by any police officer without process may be made:
      (1)   If the property subject to seizure has been the subject of a prior
judgment in favor of the village in an ordinance violation proceeding; and
      (2)   If there is probable cause to believe that the property is either
directly or indirectly dangerous to health or safety.
   (C)   In the event of seizure pursuant to division (B) above, proceedings
under division (D) below shall be promptly instituted.
   (D)   Property taken or detained under this subchapter shall not be subject
to replevin, but is deemed to be in the custody of the Chief of Police, subject
only to the orders of the court having jurisdiction over the forfeiture
proceedings. When property is seized under this subchapter, the Chief of Police
may:
      (1)   Place the property under seal;
      (2)   Remove the property to a place designated by him or her; or
      (3)   Take custody of the property and remove it to an appropriate
location for destruction.
(Prior Code, § 27-10-4)
§ 132.093 PROHIBITION OF POSSESSION OF WEAPONS, LIQUOR, AND DRUGS IN VILLAGE
HALL.
   Except for evidence purposes, it shall be unlawful for any person other than
police officers to possess within the Village Hall:
   (A)   A dangerous weapon as defined in 720 ILCS 5/33A-1, as now and
hereafter amended or renumbered;
   (B)   Alcoholic liquor as defined in Chapter 115 of this code of ordinances;
   (C)   A controlled substance as defined in 720 ILCS 570/102, as now and
hereafter amended or renumbered; or
   (D)   Cannabis, as defined in the Cannabis Control Act, 720 ILCS 550/1 et
seq., as now and hereafter amended or renumbered.
(Prior Code, § 27-10-5) Penalty, see §
132.999
§ 132.094 PRODUCTS CONTAINING SYNTHETIC CANNABINOIDS.
   (A)   Definitions. For the purpose of this chapter, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.
      ILLEGAL SMOKING PRODUCT. Any substance, whether described as tobacco,
herbs, incense, spice, or any blend thereof, regardless of whether the
substance is marketed for the purpose of being smoked, which includes any one
or more of the following chemicals:
         (a)   2[(lR,3S)-hydroxycyclonehexyl]-5-(2-mehtyloctan-2-yl) phenol
(also known as CP47,497) and homologues;
         (b)   (6aS, 10aS)-9-(hydroxmethyl)-6, 6-dimethyl-3-(2-methyloctan-2-
yl)-6a, 7, 10, l0a-tetrahydrobenzo [c]chromen-l-ol) (also known as HU-211 or
Dexanabinol);
         (c)   l-Pentyl-3-(l-naphthoyl)indole (also known as JWH-018); or
         (d)   Butyl-3-(l-naphthoyl)indole (also known as JWH-037).
      PERSON. An individual, corporation, partnership, wholesaler, retailer of
any licensed or unlicensed business.
   (B)   Unlawful to sell, offer, gift, or display. It shall be unlawful for
any person to sell, offer to sell, gift, or publicly display for sale any
illegal smoking product.
   (C)   Possessing or ingesting. Possessing or ingesting of any illegal
smoking product by any person is hereby prohibited.
   (D)   Illegal. Illegal to possess distribute, sell, ingest, a look a like
substance and/or any substance purported to be or contain the ingredients
present in an illegal smoking product.
(Prior Code, § 27-10-6) Penalty, see §
132.999
§ 132.095 SYNTHETIC COCAINE.
   (A)   Definitions. For the purpose of this subchapter, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.
      BATH SALTS. A substance that contains methylenedioxypyrovalerone (MDPV)
or contains a norepinephrine-dopamine reuptake inhibitor (NDRI).
      DELIVER or DELIVERY. Actual, constructive, or attempted transfer of
possession of synthetic cocaine or substance containing cocaine, with or
without consideration, whether or not there is an agency relationship.
      KNOWLEDGE. Knows, acts knowingly, or with knowledge:
         (a)   The nature or attendant circumstances of his or her conduct
described by the section defining the offense, when he or she is consciously
aware that his or her conduct is of such nature or that such circumstances
exist. KNOWLEDGE of a material fact includes awareness of the substantial
probability that such fact exists;
         (b)   The result of his or her conduct, described by the section
defining the offense, when he or she is consciously aware that such result is
likely to be caused by his or her conduct; and
         (c)   KNOWLEDGE may be inferred from the surrounding circumstances.
      MANUFACTURE. The production, preparation, propagation, compounding,
conversion, or processing of synthetic cocaine or a substance containing
cocaine, either directly or indirectly, by extraction from substances of
natural origin, or independently by means of chemical synthesis, and includes
any packaging or repackaging of synthetic cocaine or a substance containing
cocaine or labeling of its container, except that this term does not include
the preparation, compounding, packaging, or labeling of synthetic cocaine as an
incident to lawful research, teaching, or chemical analysis and not for sale.
      PERSON. Any individual, corporation, business trust, estate, trust,
partnership, or association, or any other entity.
      POSSESSION. Possession may be either actual or constructive.
         (a)   ACTUAL POSSESSION means exercising physical dominion.
         (b)   CONSTRUCTIVE POSSESSION may be inferred if the defendant has
intent and capacity to maintain control and dominion over the cocaine or
substance containing cocaine or drug paraphernalia.
      SYNTHETIC COCAINE, BATH SALTS, or SUBSTANCES CONTAINING COCAINE. Includes
but not limited to the names, MDPK, Magic, Super Coke, PV, Ivory Wave, Ocean,
Cloud Nine, Charge Plus, White lightning, Scarface, Hurricane, Charlie Red
Dove, and White Dove. It is an herbal and chemical product which mimics the
effects of Cocaine, including, but not limited to, Methylenedioxypyrovalerone,
(a psychoactive drug), or cathinone derivatives.
   (B)   Possession of synthetic cocaine or substance containing cocaine or
bath salts prohibited.
      (1)   No person shall possess any substance containing synthetic cocaine
or a substance containing cocaine.
      (2)   In addition, any person who violates any provision of this section
and is convicted, pleads guilty, or receives court supervision or probation by
a court of law shall be ordered to pay an administrative fee of $100, to be
paid to the law enforcement agency for testing of the substance(s) collected.
      (3)   Any items which may be seized or forfeited pursuant to 720 ILCS
550/12 may be forfeited in the same manner as described therein for a violation
of this section.
      (4)   Any person who manufactures, distributes, dispenses, or is in
possession of any controlled substance or synthetic cocaine for research
purposes shall be exempt from the provisions of this section.
(Prior Code, § 27-10-7) (Ord. 11-211, passed 5-17-2011) Penalty, see §
132.999
§ 132.096 LOITERING AND DRUG ACTIVITY PROHIBITED.
   (A)   No person shall loiter in or near any thoroughfare, place open to the
public, or near any public or private place in a manner and under circumstances
manifesting the purpose to engage in drug-related activity contrary to any of
the provisions of 720 ILCS 570/100 et seq.
   (B)   Among the circumstances which may be considered in determining whether
such purpose is manifested are:
      (1)   (a)   Such person is a known unlawful drug user, possessor, or
seller.
         (b)   For purposes of this section, a KNOWN UNLAWFUL DRUG USER,
POSSESSOR, or SELLER is a person who has, within the knowledge of the arresting
officer, been convicted in any court within this state of any violation
involving the use, possession, or sale of any controlled substance as defined
in 720 ILCS 570/102 et seq., or such person has been convicted of any violation
of any of the provisions of said section or substantially similar laws of any
political subdivision of this state or of any other state; or a person who
displays physical characteristics of drug intoxication or usage, such as needle
tracks, burned, or callused thumb or index fingers, underweight, nervous, and
excited behavior;
      (2)   Such person is currently subject to a court order prohibiting his
or her presence in a high drug activity geographic area;
      (3)   Such person behaves in such a manner as to raise a reasonable
suspicion that he or she is about to engage in or is then engaged in an
unlawful drug-related activity, including, by way of example only, such person
acting as a lookout or hailing or stopping cars;
      (4)   Such person is physically identified by the officer as a member of
a gang or association which has its purpose of illegal drug activity;
      (5)   Such person transfer small objects or packages in a furtive
fashion;
      (6)   Such person takes flight or manifestly endeavors to conceal himself
upon the appearance of a police officer;
      (7)   Such person manifestly endeavors to conceal any object which
reasonably could be involved in an unlawful drug-related activity;
      (8)   Such person possesses any instrument, article, or thing whose
customary or primary purpose is for the sale, administration, or use of
controlled substances such as, but not limited to, crack pipes, push wires,
chore boys, hand scales, hypodermic needles, razor blades, or other cutting
tools;
      (9)   The area involved is by public repute known to be an area of
unlawful drug use and trafficking;
      (10)   The premises involved are known to the defendant to have been
reported to law enforcement as a place of drug activity pursuant to 720 ILCS
570/120 et seq.; or
      (11)   Any vehicle involved is registered to a known unlawful drug user,
possessor, or seller, or a person for whom there is an outstanding warrant for
a crime involving drug-related activity.
   (C)   No person shall occupy, loiter, or remain in any building, apartment,
store, automobile, boat, boat-house, airplane, or other place of any
description whatsoever where controlled substance, hypodermic syringes,
needles, or other instruments or implements are sold, dispensed, furnished,
given away, stored, or kept illegally, with the intent to unlawfully use or
possess such substance, implements, or instruments.
(Prior Code, § 27-2-31) Penalty, see §
132.999
§ 132.097 INTOXICATION IN PUBLIC.
   No person shall, in the village, be found in a state of intoxication or
drunk in any street or other public place, or shall be found drunk lying or
roving about the streets, alleys, or sidewalks of the village or the private
grounds of any of the inhabitants thereof, or being drunk as aforesaid, shall
disturb the peace, order and quiet of the village, or the peace and quiet of
the citizens thereof by loud and unusual noises, disorderly conduct, indecent
language, or behavior or in any other manner.
(Prior Code, § 27-2-16)
Statutory reference:
   Related provisions, see 65 ILCS 5/11-5-3
§ 132.098 SALE OF CIGARETTES OR TOBACCO TO MINORS.
   (A)   No minor under 18 years of age shall buy any cigar, cigarette,
smokeless tobacco, or tobacco in any of its forms. No person shall sell, buy
for, distribute samples of or furnish any cigar, cigarette, smokeless tobacco,
or tobacco in any of its forms, to any minor under 18 years of age. For the
purpose of this section, SMOKELESS TOBACCO means any tobacco products that are
suitable for dipping or chewing.
(Prior Code, § 27-2-8)
   (B)   For the purposes of this section, the term SMOKELESS TOBACCO means any
finely cut, ground, powdered, or leaf tobacco that is intended to be placed in
the oral cavity. No person shall sell any smokeless tobacco product to any
person under the age of 18. No person shall distribute or cause to be
distributed to any person under the age of 18, without charge or at a nominal
cost, any smokeless tobacco product.
(Prior Code, § 27-2-9)
Penalty, see §
132.999
Statutory reference:
   Provisions related to division (A), see 720 ILCS 675/1
§ 132.999 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which no
specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to §
10.99 of this code of ordinances.
   (B)   (1)   It is unlawful for any person to use, or possess with the intent
to use, drug paraphernalia to plant, propagate, cultivate, grow, harvest,
manufacture, compound, convert, produce, process, prepare test, analyze, pack,
repack, store, contain, conceal, inject, ingest, inhale, or otherwise introduce
into the human body a controlled substance in violation of the State Controlled
Substance Act (720 ILCS 570/100 et seq.). Any person violating this section is
guilty of a crime and, upon conviction, shall be fined not less than $100, nor
more than $500.
      (2)   It is unlawful for any person to deliver, to sell, to possess with
the intent to deliver or sell, or to manufacture with the intent to deliver or
sell, drug paraphernalia, knowing, or under circumstances where one reasonably
should know, that it will be used to plant, propagate, cultivate, grow,
harvest, manufacture, compound, convert, produce, process, prepare, test,
analyze, pack, repack, store, contain, conceal, inject, ingest, inhale, or
otherwise introduce into the human body a controlled substance in violation of
the State Controlled Substance Act (720 ILCS 570/100 et seq.). Any person
violating this division (B)(2) is guilty of a crime, and, upon conviction,
shall be fined not less than $100, nor more than $500.
      (3)   Any person 18 years of age or older who violates division (B)(2)
above by delivering, selling, or giving drug paraphernalia to a juvenile is
guilty of an additional offense, and, upon conviction, shall be fined not less
than $100, nor more than $500.
      (4)   It is unlawful for any person to place in any newspaper, magazine,
handbill, or other publication any advertisement, knowing or under
circumstances where one reasonably should know that the purpose of the
advertisement, in whole or in part, is to promote the sale of objects designed
or intended for use as drug paraphernalia. Any person violating this provision
is guilty of a crime, and, upon conviction, shall be fined not less than $100,
nor more than $500.
(Prior Code, § 27-10-3)
   (C)   Any person who pleads guilty or is found guilty of violating the
provisions of §
132.095 by a court of law shall be punished by a minimum fine of not less than
$250, nor more than $750.
(Prior Code, § 27-10-7)
(Ord. 11-211, passed 5-17-2011)
TITLE XV: LAND USAGE
   Chapter
      
150.   PROPERTY MAINTENANCE
      
151.   MOBILE HOUSING
      
152.   FLOODPLAINS
      
153.   SUBDIVISIONS
      
154.   ZONING
      
155.   GENERAL BUILDING REGULATIONS
      
156.   BUILDING CODE
      
157.   RESIDENTIAL CODE
      
158.   MECHANICAL CODE
      
159.   FUEL GAS CODE
      
160.   ENERGY CONSERVATION CODE
      
161.   ELECTRICAL CODE
      
162.   ACCESSIBILITY CODE
      
163.   PLUMBING CODE
CHAPTER 150: PROPERTY MAINTENANCE
Section
General Provisions
   
150.001   Title
   
150.002   Scope; severability
   
150.003   Intent
   
150.004   Applicability and construction
   
150.005   Referenced standards
   
150.006   Code Enforcement Officer; powers and duties
   
150.007   Definitions
   
150.008   Violations
General Requirements and Procedures
   
150.020   Approval
   
150.021   Notices and orders
   
150.022   Unsafe structures and equipment
   
150.023   Emergency measures
   
150.024   Demolition
   
150.025   Means of approval
   
150.026   Requirements; generally
   
150.027   Temporary rentals
Property Maintenance Inspection
   
150.040   Generally
   
150.041   Appointment
   
150.042   Deputies
   
150.043   Liabilities
   
150.044   Fees; filing
Exterior Property Areas
   
150.055   Sanitation
   
150.056   Grading and drainage
   
150.057   Sidewalks and driveways
   
150.058   Weeds
   
150.059   Rodent harborage
   
150.060   Exhaust vents
   
150.061   Accessory structures
   
150.062   Motor vehicles
   
150.063   Defacement of property
Swimming Pools, Spas, and Hot Tubs
   
150.075   Swimming pools
Exterior Structures
   
150.090   Generally
   
150.091   Protective treatment
   
150.092   Premises identification
   
150.093   Structural members
   
150.094   Foundation and exterior walls
   
150.095   Roofs and drainage
   
150.096   Decorative features
   
150.097   Overhang extensions
   
150.098   Stairways, decks, porches, and balconies
   
150.099   Chimneys and towers
   
150.100   Handrails and guards
   
150.101   Window, skylight, and door frames
   
150.102   Insect screens
   
150.103   Doors
   
150.104   Basement requirements
   
150.105   Building security
Interior Structures
   
150.120   General maintenance
   
150.121   Structural members
   
150.122   Interior surfaces
   
150.123   Stairs and walking surfaces
   
150.124   Handrails and guards
   
150.125   Interior doors
Sanitation Requirements
   
150.140   Accumulation of rubbish and garbage
   
150.141   Disposal of rubbish and garbage
   
150.142   Infestation
   
150.143   Extermination
Light, Ventilation, and Occupancy
   
150.155   Scope
   
150.156   Responsibility
   
150.157   Alternative devices
   
150.158   Light
   
150.159   Ventilation
   
150.160   Occupancy limitations
Plumbing Facilities and Fixture Requirements
   
150.175   Scope
   
150.176   Responsibility
   
150.177   Required facilities
   
150.178   Toilet rooms
   
150.179   Plumbing systems and fixtures
   
150.180   Water system
   
150.181   Sanitary drainage system
   
150.182   Storm drainage
Mechanical and Electrical Requirements
   
150.195   Scope
   
150.196   Responsibility
   
150.197   Heating facilities
   
150.198   Mechanical equipment
   
150.199   Electrical facilities
   
150.200   Electrical equipment
   
150.201   Elevators, escalators, and dumbwaiters
   
150.202   Duct systems
Fire Safety Requirements
   
150.215   Scope
   
150.216   Responsibility
   
150.217   Means of egress
   
150.218   Fire-resistance ratings
   
150.219   Fire protection systems
Certificate of Occupancy
   
150.230   Occupancy permit required
   
150.231   Application residential
   
150.232   Action on an application
   
150.233   Issuance of permit
   
150.234   Conditional permit
   
150.235   Rejection, suspension, or revocation of permit
 
   
150.999   Penalty
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 150.001 TITLE.
   This chapter shall be known as “the Property Maintenance Code of the Village
of Marissa,” hereinafter referred to as “this Code” or “this chapter.”
(101.1) (Prior Code, § 29-1-1)
§ 150.002 SCOPE; SEVERABILITY.
   (A)   (1)   The provisions of this chapter shall apply to all existing
residential and nonresidential structures and all existing premises and
constitute minimum requirements and standards for premises, structures,
equipment, and facilities for light, ventilation, space, heating, sanitation,
protection from the elements, life safety, safety from fire and other hazards,
and for safe and sanitary maintenance; the responsibility of owners, operators,
and occupants; the occupancy of existing structures and premises, and for
administration, enforcement, and penalties.
(101.2)
      (2)   (a)   This section establishes the broad purpose of this chapter:
to protect the public health, safety and welfare in both existing residential
and nonresidential structures and on all existing premises.
Four specific areas are addressed in greater detail in subsequent sections:
            1.   Establishing minimum maintenance standards for such elements
as basic equipment, light, ventilation, heating, sanitation, and fire safety;
            2.   Fixing responsibility among owners, operators, and occupants
for following this chapter;
            3.   Regulating the use of existing structures and premises; and
            4.   Providing for administration, enforcement, and penalties.
         (b)   These four categories provide communities with the tools to
reduce risks created by deteriorated or unsafe buildings and help communities
upgrade and maintain other existing structures.
(Prior Code, § 29-1-2)
   (B)   (1)   If a section, division, sentence, clause, or phrase of the
chapter is, for any reason, held to be unconstitutional, such decision shall
not affect the validity of the remaining portions of this chapter.
(101.4)
      (2)   Only invalid sections of this chapter (as established by the court
of jurisdiction) can be set aside. This is essential to safeguard the
application of this chapter text to situations whereby a provision of this
chapter is declared illegal or unconstitutional. This section would preserve
the legislative action that put the legal provisions in place.
(Prior Code, § 29-1-4)
§ 150.003 INTENT.
   (A)   This chapter shall be construed to secure its expressed intent, which
is to ensure public health, safety, and welfare insofar as they are affected by
the continued occupancy and maintenance of structures and premises. Existing
structures and premises that do not comply with these provisions shall be
altered or repaired to provide a minimum level of health and safety as required
herein. Repairs, alterations, additions to, and change of occupancy in existing
buildings shall comply with the International Existing Building Code.
(101.3)
   (B)   This chapter is intended to provide requirements addressing the public
health, safety, and welfare as they relate to the use and maintenance of
existing structures and premises. This chapter requires existing structures and
premises that are not in compliance with this chapter to be altered or repaired
to meet the International Existing Building Code. The International Existing
Building Code requirements are intended to represent the minimum acceptable
level of public health and safety. The International Existing Building Code®
(IEBC®) is listed as the required code for all repairs, alterations, additions,
and change of occupancies to existing structures.
(Prior Code, § 29-1-3)
§ 150.004 APPLICABILITY AND CONSTRUCTION.
   (A)   The provisions of this chapter shall apply to all matters affecting or
relating to structures and premises, as set forth in §§
150.001 through
150.003. Where, in a specific case, different sections of this chapter specify
different requirements, the most restrictive shall govern.
(102.1) (Prior Code, § 29-1-5)
   (B)   (1)   Equipment, systems, devices, and safeguards required by this
chapter or a previous regulation or code under which the structure or premises
was constructed, altered, or repaired shall be maintained in good working
order. No owner, operator, or occupant shall cause any service, facility,
equipment, or utility which is required under this division (B) to be removed
from or shut-off from or discontinued for any occupied dwelling, except for
such temporary interruption as necessary while repairs or alterations are in
progress.
      (2)   The requirements of this chapter are not intended to provide the
basis for removal or abrogation of fire protection and safety systems and
devices in existing structures. Except as otherwise specified herein, the owner
or the owner’s designated agent shall be responsible for the maintenance of
buildings, structures, and premises.
(102.2)
      (3)   This division (B) contains general maintenance requirements. The
International Existing Building Code specifically prohibits the disconnection
of any required utilities for an occupied dwelling. This helps to safeguard
persons who have a physical condition and are dependent on these systems. Some
examples of this include: a person who has to have electricity to power a
kidney dialysis machine; a patient who is on an oxygen system full-time; or
someone with particularly bad allergies who needs to have an air conditioning
system to help filter the air. Any safety system that exists in a building must
be maintained.
      (4)   A fire protection or safety system is not to be removed from a
building if it is required by this chapter or a previous regulation or code
that was in effect when the building was built, this section also specifies
that the owner or the owner’s agent is responsible for maintenance, not the
tenants of rental property.
(Prior Code, § 29-1-6)
   (C)   Repairs, additions, or alterations to a structure, or changes of
occupancy, shall be done in accordance with the procedures and provisions of
the International Existing Building Code. Nothing in this chapter shall be
construed to cancel, modify, or set aside any provision of the International
Zoning Code.
(102.3) (Prior Code, § 29-1-7)
   (D)   The provision in this chapter shall not be construed to abolish or
impair existing remedies of the jurisdiction or its officers or agencies
relating to the removal or demolition of any structure which is dangerous,
unsafe, and unsanitary.
(102.4) (Prior Code, § 29-1-8)
   (E)   Repairs, maintenance work, alterations, or installations which are
caused directly or indirectly by the enforcement of this chapter shall be
executed and installed in a workmanlike manner and installed in accordance with
the manufacturer’s installation instructions.
(102.5) (Prior Code, § 29-1-9)
   (F)   The provisions of this chapter shall not be mandatory for existing
buildings or structures designated as historic buildings when such buildings or
structures are judged by the Code Enforcement Officer to be safe and in the
public interest of health, safety, and welfare.
(102.6) (Prior Code, § 29-1-10)
   (G)   The codes and standards referenced in this chapter shall be those that
are listed in §
150.022(U) through (Y) and considered part of the requirements of this chapter
to the prescribed extent of each such reference. Where differences occur
between provisions of this chapter and the referenced standards, the provisions
of this chapter shall apply.
(102.7) (Prior Code, § 29-1-11)
   (H)   Requirements necessary for the strength, stability or proper operation
of an existing fixture, structure or equipment, or for the public safety,
health, and general welfare not specifically covered by this chapter shall be
determined by the Code Enforcement Officer.
(102.8) (Prior Code, § 29-1-12)
   (I)   Any repair, alteration, or replacement of a structure, structural
elements, or equipment in a building which may be required by the provisions of
this chapter shall be done in accordance with the applicable sections of the
Building Code, Electrical Code, Plumbing Code, or other applicable codes or
ordinances of the village, if any.
(Prior Code, § 29-10-1)
   (J)   The provisions of this chapter shall not be utilized or construed to
permit the abridgement or violation of the Zoning Code.
(Prior Code, § 29-10-2)
   (K)   Specific provisions of this chapter take precedence over and prevail
over any other provisions of other codes or ordinances in conflict herewith.
(Prior Code, § 29-10-3)
   (L)   This chapter shall be construed liberally and justly to ensure public
health, safety, and welfare insofar as they are affected by the maintenance of
structures and premises.
(Prior Code, § 29-10-4)
   (M)   The provisions of this chapter shall not be construed to prevent the
enforcement of other codes or ordinances or regulations which prescribe
standards other than those provided for herein.
(Prior Code, § 29-10-5)
   (N)   The provisions of this chapter shall not be deemed to abolish or
impair existing remedies of the village or its officers or agencies relating to
the removal or demolition of any building which is deemed to be dangerous,
unsafe, or unsanitary.
(Prior Code, § 29-10-6)
(Ord. 06-01, passed 1-3-2006)
§ 150.005 REFERENCED STANDARDS.
   (A)   This section lists the standards that are referenced in various
sections of this document. The standards are listed herein by the promulgating
agency of the standard, the standard identification, the effective date and
title, and the section or sections of this document that reference the
standard. The application of referenced standards shall be as specified in §
150.004(G).
   (B)   Referenced standards include:
                          International Code Council
ICC                       5203 Leesburg Pike, Suite 600
                          Falls Church, VA 22041
Standard Reference Number Title Referenced Section Number
                   International Code Council
ICC                5203 Leesburg Pike, Suite 600
                   Falls Church, VA 22041
Standard Reference Title                                  Referenced Section
Number                                                    Number
CC ED-03           ICC Electrical Code® - Administrative 201.3, 604.2
                   Provisions
IBC-03             International Building Code®          201.3, 302.7.1,
                                                          401.3, 702.3, 702.4
IEBC-03            International Existing Building Code® 101.3, 102.3, 201.3
IFC-03             International Fire Code®              201.3, 702.1, 702.2,
                                                          704.1, 704.2
IMC-03             International Mechanical Code®        201.3
IPC-03             International Plumbing Code®          201.3, 505.1, 602.2,
                                                          602.3
IZC-03             International Zoning Code®            102.3, 201.3
 
(Prior Code, § 29-8-1)
§ 150.006 CODE ENFORCEMENT OFFICER; POWERS AND DUTIES.
   (A)   The Code Enforcement Officer shall enforce the provisions of this
chapter.
(104.1) (Prior Code, § 29-1-21)
   (B)   The Code Enforcement Officer shall have authority as necessary in the
interest of public health, safety, and general welfare, to adopt and promulgate
rules and procedures; to interpret and implement the provisions of this
chapter; to secure the intent thereof; and to designate requirements applicable
because of local climatic or other conditions. Such rules shall not have the
effect of waiving structural or fire performance requirements specifically
provided for in this chapter, or of violating accepted engineering methods
involving public safety.
(104.2) (Prior Code, § 29-1-22)
   (C)   The Code Enforcement Officer shall make all of the required
inspections, or shall accept reports of inspection by approved agencies or
individuals. All reports of such inspections shall be in writing and be
certified by a responsible officer of such approved agency or by the
responsible individual. The Code Enforcement Officer is authorized to engage
such expert opinion as deemed necessary to report upon unusual technical issues
that arise, subject to the approval of the appointing authority.
(104.3) (Prior Code, § 29-1-23)
   (D)   (1)   The Code Enforcement Officer is authorized to enter the
structure or premises at reasonable times to inspect subject to constitutional
restrictions on unreasonable searches and seizures. If entry is refused or not
obtained, the Code Enforcement Officer is authorized to pursue recourse as
provided by law.
(104.4)
      (2)   The Code Enforcement Officer must have access to a premises so a
proper inspection can be made. If the Code Enforcement Officer does not have
access, then another inspection must be scheduled.
      (3)   This division (D) establishes the right of the Code Enforcement
Officer to enter the premises in order to make the inspections required by
division (C) above. The right to enter structures or premises is limited to
protect the right of privacy, the owner or occupant must grant the Code
Enforcement Officer permission before an interior inspection of the property
can be conducted. Permission is not required for inspections that can be
accomplished from within the public right-of-way.
         (b)   Such access may be denied by the owner or occupant.
         (c)   The Code Enforcement Officer must present proper identification
and request admittance during reasonable hours (usually the normal business
hours of the establishment) to be admitted.
         (d)   Inspections must be aimed at securing or determining compliance
with the provisions and intent of the regulations that are specifically within
the established scope of the Code Enforcement Officer’s authority.
      (4)   (a)   Many jurisdictions do not recognize the concept of an
administrative warrant and may require the Code Enforcement Officer to prove
probable or reasonable cause in order to gain access upon refusal. This burden
of proof is usually more substantial, often requiring the Code Enforcement
Officer to stipulate in advance why access is needed (usually access is
restricted to gathering evidence for seeking an indictment or making an
arrest), what specific items or information is sought, its relevance to the
case against the individual subject, how knowledge of the relevance of the
information or items sought was obtained and how the evidence sought will be
used.
         (b)   In all such cases, the right to privacy must always be weighed
against the right of the Code Enforcement Officer to conduct an inspection to
verify that the public health, safety, and welfare are not in jeopardy. Such
important and complex constitutional issues should be discussed with the
jurisdiction’s legal counsel. Jurisdictions should establish procedures for
securing the necessary court orders when an inspection is deemed necessary
following a refusal.
(Prior Code, § 29-1-24)
   (E)   The Code Enforcement Officer shall carry proper identification when
inspecting structures or premises in the performance of duties under this
chapter.
(104.5) (Prior Code, § 29-1-25)
   (F)   The Code Enforcement Officer shall issue all necessary notices or
orders to ensure compliance with this chapter.
(104.6) (Prior Code, § 29-1-26)
   (G)   The Code Enforcement Officer shall keep official records of all
business and activities of the department specified in the provisions of this
chapter. Such records shall be retained in the official records as long as the
building or structure to which such records relate remains in existence, unless
otherwise provided for by other regulations.
(104.7) (Prior Code, § 29-1-27)
   (H)   Whenever in the enforcement of this chapter or another code or
ordinance, the responsibility of more than one code official of the
jurisdiction is involved, it shall be the duty of the code officials involved
to coordinate their inspections and administrative orders as fully as
practicable so that the owners and occupants of the structure shall not be
subjected to visits by numerous inspectors or multiple or conflicting orders.
Whenever an inspector from any agency or department observes an apparent or
actual violation of some provision of some law, ordinance, or code not within
the inspector’s authority to enforce, the inspector shall report the findings
to the Code Enforcement Officer having jurisdiction.
(104.8) (Prior Code, § 29-1-28)
(Ord. 06-01, passed 1-3-2006)
§ 150.007 DEFINITIONS.
   (A)   Words stated in the present tense include the future; words stated in
the masculine gender include the feminine and neuter; the singular number
includes the plural and the plural the singular.
(201.2) (Prior Code, § 29-2-2)
   (B)   Where terms are not defined in this Code and are defined in the
International Building Code, International Fire Code, International Zoning
Code, International Plumbing Code, International Mechanical Code, International
Existing Building Code or the ICC Electrical Code, such terms shall have the
meanings ascribed to them as in those codes.
(201.3) (Prior Code, § 29-2-3)
   (C)   Where terms are not defined through the methods authorized by this
section, such terms shall have ordinarily accepted meanings such as the context
implies.
(201.4) (Prior Code, § 29-2-4)
   (D)   Whenever the words “dwelling unit,” “dwelling,” “premises,”
“building,” “rooming house,” “rooming unit,” “housekeeping unit,” or “story”
are stated in this chapter, they shall be construed as though they were
followed by the words “or any part thereof.”
(201.5) (Prior Code, § 29-2-5)
   (E)   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
(201.1) (Prior Code, § 29-2-1)
      APPROVED. Approved by the Code Enforcement Officer.
      BASEMENT. The portion of a building which is partly or completely below
grade.
      BATHROOM. A room containing plumbing fixtures including a bathtub or
shower.
      BEDROOM. Any room or space used or intended to be used for sleeping
purposes.
      CODE ENFORCEMENT OFFICER. The official who is charged with the
administration and enforcement of this chapter, or any duly authorized
representative.
      CONDEMN. To adjudge unfit for occupancy.
      DWELLING UNIT. A single unit providing complete, independent living
facilities for one or more persons, including permanent provisions for living,
sleeping, eating, cooking, and sanitation.
      EASEMENT.
         (a)   The portion of land or property reserved for present or future
use by a person or agency other than the legal fee owner(s) of the property.
         (b)   The EASEMENT shall be permitted to be for use under, on, or
above a said lot or lots.
      EXTERIOR PROPERTY. The open space on the premises and on adjoining
property under the control of owners or operators of such premises.
      EXTERMINATION. The control and elimination of insects, rats, or other
pests by eliminating their harborage places; by removing or making inaccessible
materials that serve as their food; by poison spraying, fumigating, trapping;
or by any other approved pest elimination methods.
      GARBAGE. The animal and vegetable waste resulting from the handling,
preparation, cooking, and consumption of food.
      GUARD. A building component or a system of building components located at
or near the open sides of elevated walking surfaces that minimizes the
possibility of a fall from the walking surface to a lower level.
      HABITABLE SPACE. Space in a structure for living, sleeping, eating, or
cooking. Bathrooms, toilet rooms, closets, hails, storage, or utility spaces,
and similar areas are not considered HABITABLE SPACES.
      HOUSEKEEPING UNIT. A room or group of rooms forming a single habitable
space equipped and intended to be used for living, sleeping, cooking and eating
which does not contain, within such a unit, a toilet, lavatory, and bathtub or
shower.
      IMMINENT DANGER. A condition which could cause serious or life-
threatening injury or death at any time.
      INFESTATION. The presence, within or contiguous to a structure or
premises of insects, rats, vermin, or other pests.
      INOPERABLE MOTOR VEHICLE. A vehicle which cannot be driven upon the
public streets for reasons including, but not limited to, being unlicensed,
wrecked, abandoned, in a state of disrepair, or incapable of being moved under
its own power.
      LABELED. Devices, equipment, appliances, or materials to which has been
affixed a label, seal symbol, or other identifying mark of a nationally
recognized testing laboratory, inspection agency, or other organization
concerned with product evaluation that maintains periodic inspection of the
production of the above-labeled items and by whose label the manufacturer
attests to compliance with applicable nationally recognized standards.
      LET FOR OCCUPANCY or LET. To permit, provide, or offer possession or
occupancy of a dwelling, dwelling unit, rooming unit, building, premises, or
structure by a person who is or is not the legal owner of record thereof,
pursuant to a written or unwritten lease, agreement, or license, or pursuant to
a recorded or unrecorded agreement of contract for the sale of land.
      OCCUPANCY. The purpose for which a building or portion thereof is
utilized or occupied.
      OCCUPANT. Any individual living or sleeping in a building, or having
possession of a space within a building.
      OPENABLE AREA. The part of a window, skylight, or door which is available
for unobstructed ventilation and which opens directly to the outdoors.
      OPERATOR. Any person who has charge, care, or control of a structure or
premises which is let or offered for occupancy.
      OWNER. Any person, agent, operator, firm, or corporation having a legal
or equitable interest in the property; or recorded in the official records of
the state, county, or municipality as holding title to the property; or
otherwise having control of the property, including the guardian of the estate
of any such person, and the executor or administrator of the estate of such
person if ordered to take possession of real property by a court.
      PERSON. An individual, corporation, partnership, or any other group
acting as a unit.
      PREMISES. A lot, plot or parcel of land, easement, or public way,
including any structures thereon.
      PUBLIC WAY. Any street, alley, or similar parcel of land essentially
unobstructed from the ground to the sky, which is deeded, dedicated, or
otherwise permanently appropriated to the public for public use.
      ROOMING HOUSE. A building arranged or occupied for lodging, with or
without meals, for compensation and not occupied as a one- or two-family
dwelling.
      ROOMING UNIT. Any room or group of rooms forming a single habitable unit
occupied or intended to be occupied for sleeping or living, but not for cooking
purposes.
      RUBBISH. Combustible and non-combustible waste materials, except garbage;
the term shall include the residue from the burning of wood, coal, coke and
other combustible materials, paper, rags, cartons, boxes, wood, excelsior,
rubber, leather, tree branches, yard trimmings, tin cans, metals, mineral
matter, glass, crockery, dust, and other similar materials.
      STRICT LIABILITY OFFENSE.
         (a)   An offense in which the prosecution in a legal proceeding is not
required to prove criminal intent as a part of its case.
         (b)   It is enough to prove that the defendant either did an act which
was prohibited, or failed to do an act which the defendant was legally required
to do.
      STRUCTURE. That which is built or constructed or a portion thereof.
      TENANT. A person, corporation, partnership, or group, whether or not the
legal owner of record, occupying a building or portion thereof as a unit.
      TOILET ROOM. A room containing a water closet or urinal, but not a
bathtub or shower.
      VENTILATION. The natural or mechanical process of supplying conditioned
or unconditioned air to, or removing such air from, any space.
      WORKMANLIKE. Executed in a skilled manner (e.g., generally plumb, level,
square, in line, undamaged, and without marring adjacent work).
      YARD. An open space on the same lot with a structure.
(202) (Prior Code, § 29-2-6)
§ 150.008 VIOLATIONS.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for a person, firm, or corporation to be in
conflict with or in violation of any of the provisions of this chapter.
(106.1) (Prior Code, § 29-1-35)
   (B)   The Code Enforcement Officer shall serve a notice of violation or
order in accordance with§
150.021.
(106.2) (Prior Code, § 29-1-36)
   (C)   (1)   Any person failing to comply with a notice of violation or order
served in accordance with §
150.021 shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor, and the violation shall be
deemed a strict liability offense.
      (2)   If the notice of violation is not complied with, the Code
Enforcement Officer shall institute the appropriate proceeding at law or in
equity to restrain, correct, or abate such violation, or to require the removal
or termination of the unlawful occupancy of the structure in violation of the
provisions of this chapter or of the order or direction made pursuant thereto.
      (3)   Any action taken by the authority having jurisdiction on such
premises shall be charged against the real estate upon which the structure is
located and shall be a lien upon such real estate.
(106.3) (Prior Code, § 29-1-37)
   (D)    Any person who shall violate a provision of this chapter, or fail to
comply therewith, or with any of the requirements thereof, shall be prosecuted
within the limits provided by §
10.999. Each day that a violation continues after due notice has been served
shall be deemed a separate offense.
(106.4) (Prior Code, § 29-1-38)
   (E)   (1)   The imposition of the penalties herein prescribed shall not
preclude the legal officer of the jurisdiction from instituting appropriate
action to restrain, correct, or abate a violation, or to prevent illegal
occupancy of a building, structure, or premises, or to stop an illegal act,
conduct, business, or utilization of the building, structure, or premises.
(106.5)
      (2)   Despite the assessment of a penalty in the form of a fine against a
violator, the violation itself must still be corrected. Failure to make the
necessary corrections will result in the violator being subject to additional
penalties as described in division (D) above.
(Prior Code, § 29-1-39)
   (F)   (1)   In addition to any other method authorized by law, if:
         (a)   A property owner is cited with a code violation under this
chapter, requiring the cutting of grass and weeds, the removal of garbage and
debris, the removal of inoperable motor vehicles, or rodent and vermin
abatement;
         (b)   Noncompliance is found upon reinspection of the property after
the due date for compliance with an order to correct the code violation or with
an order for abatement;
         (c)   Costs for services rendered by the municipality to correct the
code violation remain unpaid at the point in time that they would become a debt
due and owing the municipality, as provided in ILCS Art. 11, Division 31.1 of
the Illinois Municipal Code, being 65 ILCS 5/11-31.1-1 et seq.; and
         (d)   A lien has been filed of record by the municipality in the
office of the Recorder in the county in which the property is located, then
those costs may be collected as a special assessment on the property pursuant
to 65 ILCS 5/9-2-4.5.
      (2)   Upon payment of the costs by the owner of record or persons
interested in the property, the line shall be released by the municipality and
the release shall be filed of record in the same manner as the filing of notice
of the lien.
(Prior Code, § 29-1-40)
(Ord. 08-02, passed 2-19-2008) Penalty, see §
150.999
GENERAL REQUIREMENTS AND PROCEDURES
§ 150.020 APPROVAL.
   (A)    Whenever there are practical difficulties involved in carrying out
the provisions of this chapter, the Code Enforcement Officer shall have the
authority to grant modifications for individual cases; provided the Code
Enforcement Officer shall first find that special individual reason makes the
strict letter of this chapter impractical, and the modification is in
compliance with the intent and purpose of this chapter, and that such
modification does not lessen health, life, and fire safety requirements. The
details of action granting modifications shall be recorded and entered in the
department files.
(105.1) (Prior Code, § 29-1-30)
   (B)   The provisions of this chapter are not intended to prevent the
installation of any material or to prohibit any method of construction not
specifically prescribed by this chapter; provided that any such alternative has
been approved. An alternative material or method of construction shall be
approved where the Code Enforcement Officer finds that the proposed design is
satisfactory and complies with the intent of the provisions of this chapter,
and that the material, method, or work offered is, for the purpose intended, at
least the equivalent of that prescribed in this chapter in quality, strength,
effectiveness, fire resistance, durability, and safety.
(105.2) (Prior Code, § 29-1-31)
   (C)   Whenever there is insufficient evidence of compliance with the
provisions of this Code, or evidence that a material or method does not conform
to the requirements of this Code, or in order to substantiate claims for
alternative materials or methods, the Code Enforcement Officer shall have the
authority to require tests to be made as evidence of compliance at no expense
to the jurisdiction.
(105.3)
      (1)   Test methods shall be as specified in this chapter or by other
recognized test standards. In the absence of recognized and accepted test
methods, the Code Enforcement Officer shall be permitted to approve appropriate
testing procedures performed by an approved agency.
(105.3.1)
      (2)   Reports of tests shall be retained by the Code Enforcement Officer
for the period required for retention of public records.
(105.3.2)
(Prior Code, § 29-1-32)
   (D)   Materials, equipment, and devices shall not be reused unless such
elements are in good repair or have been reconditioned and tested when
necessary, placed in good and proper working condition, and approved.
(105.4) (Prior Code, § 29-1-33)
§ 150.021 NOTICES AND ORDERS.
   (A)    Whenever the Code Enforcement Officer determines that there has been
a violation of this chapter or has grounds to believe that a violation has
occurred, notice shall be given in the manner prescribed in divisions (B) and
(C) below to the person responsible for the violation as specified in this
chapter. Notices for condemnation procedures shall also comply with §
150.022(C).
(107.1) (Prior Code, § 29-1-41)
   (B)   Such notice prescribed in division (A) above shall be in accordance
with all of the following:
      (1)   Be in writing;
      (2)   Include a description of the real estate sufficient for
identification;
      (3)   Include a statement of the violation or violations and why the
notice is being issued;
      (4)   Include a correction order allowing a reasonable time to make the
repairs and improvements required to bring the dwelling unit or structure into
compliance with the provisions of this chapter;
      (5)   Inform the occupant of the right to appeal. In the event that no
one is occupying the property at the time of the violation, then the owner of
the real estate shall be informed of said right to appeal; and
      (6)   Include a statement of the right to file a lien in accordance with
§
150.008(C).
(107.2) (Prior Code, § 29-1-42)
   (C)   Such notice shall be deemed to be properly served if a copy thereof
is:
      (1)   Delivered personally;
      (2)   Sent by certified or first-class mail addressed to the last known
address; or
      (3)   If the notice is returned showing that the letter was not
delivered, a copy thereof shall be posted in a conspicuous place in or about
the structure affected by such notice.
(107.3) (Prior Code, § 29-1-43)
   (D)   Penalties for noncompliance with orders and notices shall be as set
forth in §
150.008(D).
(107.4) (Prior Code, § 29-1-44)
   (E)   (1)   It shall be unlawful for the owner of any dwelling unit or
structure who has received a compliance order or upon whom a notice of
violation has been served to sell, transfer, mortgage, lease, or otherwise
dispose of such dwelling unit or structure to another until the provisions of
the compliance order or notice of violation have been complied with, or until
such owner shall first furnish the grantee, transferee, mortgagee, or lessee a
true copy of any compliance order or notice of violation issued by the Code
Enforcement Officer and shall furnish to the Code Enforcement Officer a signed
and notarized statement from the grantee, transferee, mortgagee, or lessee
acknowledging the receipt of such compliance order or notice of violation and
fully accepting the responsibility without condition for making the corrections
or repairs required by such compliance order or notice of violation.
(107.5)
      (2)   When a property has a pending violation order, it is unlawful for
an owner to sell, transfer, mortgage, lease, or otherwise dispose of the
property without either following the order or advising the buyer, mortgagee,
or the like, of the pending violation. The owner must prove that the buyer has
received notice of pending violations by providing the Code Enforcement Officer
with a signed, notarized receipt from the new transferee.
      (3)   Determining who is the current owner of a building is a frustrating
and difficult activity. To evade code enforcement action, owners will
frequently transfer ownership of their property. This provision of the chapter
permits the Code Enforcement Officer to cite the seller if he or she did not
provide the Code Enforcement Officer with the required notification when the
property was transferred; thus, even though the seller may avoid complying with
the outstanding violation orders, he or she can still be charged with a
violation for failing to provide proof that the transferee was aware of the
pending orders.
(Prior Code, § 29-1-45)
(Ord. 16-05, passed 6-6-2016) Penalty, see §
150.999
§ 150.022 UNSAFE STRUCTURES AND EQUIPMENT.
   (A)   (1)   (a)   When a structure or equipment is found by the Code
Enforcement Officer to be unsafe, or when a structure is found unfit for human
occupancy, or is found unlawful, such structure shall be condemned pursuant to
the provisions of this chapter.
(108.1)
         (b)   This section provides a brief description of conditions where
the Code Enforcement Officer is given the authority to condemn an existing
structure or equipment. Where a structure or equipment is “unlawful,” as
described in the text of this section, that structure or equipment does not
comply with the requirements of this chapter. The deficiencies are such that an
unsafe condition or a condition that is unfit for human occupancy exists.
      (2)   An unsafe structure is one that is found to be dangerous to the
life, health, property, or safety of the public or the occupants of the
structure by not providing minimum safeguards to protect or warn occupants in
the event of fire, or because such structure contains unsafe equipment or is so
damaged, decayed, dilapidated, structurally unsafe, or of such faulty
construction or unstable foundation, that partial or complete collapse is
possible.
(108.1.1)
      (3)   Unsafe equipment includes any boiler, heating equipment, elevator,
moving stairway, electrical wiring or device, flammable liquid containers, or
other equipment on the premises or within the structure which is in such
disrepair or condition that such equipment is a hazard to life, health,
property, or safety of the public or occupants of the premises or structure.
(108.1.2)
      (4)   A structure is unfit for human occupancy whenever the Code
Enforcement Officer finds that such structure is unsafe, unlawful, or, because
of the degree to which the structure is in disrepair or lacks maintenance, is
unsanitary, vermin or rat infested, contains filth and contamination, or lacks
ventilation, illumination, sanitary or heating facilities, or other essential
equipment required by this chapter, or because the location of the structure
constitutes a hazard to the occupants of the structure or to the public.
(108.1.3)
      (5)   (a)   An unlawful structure is one found in whole or in part to be
occupied by more persons than permitted under this chapter, or was erected,
altered, or occupied contrary to law.
(108.1.4)
         (b)   An unlawful structure is one that has serious deficiencies such
that an unsafe condition or a condition that is unfit for human occupancy
exists. An unlawful structure does not mean one where there are criminal
activities.
(Prior Code, § 29-1-47)
   (B)   If the structure is vacant and unfit for human habitation and
occupancy, and is not in danger of structural collapse, the Code Enforcement
Officer is authorized to post a placard of condemnation on the premises and
order the structure closed up so as not to be an attractive nuisance. Upon
failure of the owner to close up the premises within the time specified in the
order, the Code Enforcement Officer shall cause the premises to be closed and
secured through any available public agency or by contract or arrangement by
private persons and the cost thereof shall be charged against the real estate
upon which the structure is located and shall be a lien upon such real estate
and may be collected by any other legal resource.
(108.2) (Prior Code, § 29-1-48)
   (C)   Whenever the Code Enforcement Officer has condemned a structure or
equipment under the provisions of this section, notice shall be posted in a
conspicuous place in or about the structure affected by such notice and served
on the owner or the person or persons responsible for the structure or
equipment in accordance with §
150.021(C). If the notice pertains to equipment, it shall also be placed on the
condemned equipment. The notice shall be in the form prescribed in §
150.021(B).
(Prior Code, § 29-1-49)
   (D)   (1)   Upon failure of the owner or person responsible to comply with
the notice provisions within the time given, the Code Enforcement Officer shall
post on the premises or on defective equipment, a placard bearing the word
“condemned” and a statement of the penalties provided for occupying the
premises, operating the equipment, or removing the placard.
(108.4)
      (2)   The Code Enforcement Officer shall remove the condemnation placard
whenever the defect or defects upon which the condemnation and placarding
action were based have been eliminated. Any person who defaces or removes a
condemnation placard without the approval of the Code Enforcement Officer shall
be subject to the penalties provided by this code.
(108.4.1)
      (3)   (a)   Only the Code Enforcement Officer is authorized to remove a
condemnation placard. The Code Enforcement Officer is to remove the placard
only when the defect or defects have been corrected as required by the code.
         (b)   Any other person who removes or defaces a placard is in
violation of this chapter and subject to its penalties.
(Prior Code, § 29-1-50)
   (E)   Any occupied structure condemned and placarded by the Code Enforcement
Officer shall be vacated as ordered by the Code Enforcement Officer. Any person
who shall occupy a placarded premises or shall operate placarded equipment, and
any owner or any person responsible for the premises who shall let anyone
occupy a placarded premises or operate placarded equipment shall be liable for
the penalties provided by this code.
(108.5) (Prior Code, § 29-1-51)
Penalty, see §
150.999
§ 150.023 EMERGENCY MEASURES.
   (A)   (1)   When, in the opinion of the Code Enforcement Officer, there is
imminent damage of failure or collapse of a building or structure which
endangers life, or when any structure or part of a structure has fallen and
life is endangered by the occupation of the structure, or when there is actual
or potential danger to the building, occupants, or those in the proximity of
any structure because of explosives, explosive fumes, or vapors or the presence
of toxic fumes, gases, or materials, or operation of defective or dangerous
equipment, the Code Enforcement Officer is hereby authorized and empowered to
order and require the occupants to vacate the premises forthwith.
      (2)   The Code Enforcement Officer shall cause to be posted at each
entrance to such structure a notice reading as follows: “This Structure is
Unsafe and its Occupancy has been Prohibited by the Code Enforcement Officer.”
It shall be unlawful for any person to enter such structure except for the
purpose of securing the structure, making the required repairs, removing the
hazardous condition, or of demolishing the same.
(109.1) (Prior Code, § 29-1-60)
   (B)   Notwithstanding other provisions of this chapter, whenever, in the
opinion of the Code Enforcement Officer, there is imminent danger due to an
unsafe condition, the Code Enforcement Officer shall order the necessary work
to be done, including the boarding up of openings, to render such structure
temporarily safe, whether or not the legal procedure herein described has been
instituted; and shall cause such other action to be taken as the Code
Enforcement Officer deems necessary to meet such emergency.
(109.2) (Prior Code, § 29-1-61)
   (C)   When necessary for public safety, the Code Enforcement Officer shall
temporarily close structures and close, or order the authority having
jurisdiction to close, sidewalks, streets, public ways, and places adjacent to
unsafe structures, and prohibit the same from being utilized.
(109.3) (Prior Code, § 29-1-62)
   (D)   For the purposes of this section, the Code Enforcement Officer shall
employ the necessary labor and materials to perform the required work as
expeditiously as possible.
(109.4) (Prior Code, § 29-1-63)
   (E)   Costs incurred in the performance of emergency work shall be paid by
the jurisdiction. The legal counsel of the jurisdiction shall institute
appropriate action against the owner of the premises where the unsafe structure
is or was located for the recovery of such costs.
(109.5) (Prior Code, § 29-1-64)
   (F)   Any person ordered to take emergency measures shall comply with such
order forthwith. Any affected person shall thereafter, upon petition directed
to the appeals boards, be afforded a hearing as described in this chapter.
(109.6) (Prior Code, § 29-1-65)
§ 150.024 DEMOLITION.
   (A)   The Code Enforcement Officer shall order the owner of any premises
upon which is located any structure, which in the Code Enforcement Officer’s
judgment is so old, dilapidated, or has become so out of repair as to be
dangerous, unsafe, unsanitary, or otherwise unfit for human habitation or
occupancy, and such that it is unreasonable to repair the structure, to
demolish and remove such structure; or if such structure is capable of being
made safe by repairs, to repair and make safe and sanitary or to demolish and
remove at the owner’s option; or where there has been a cessation of normal
construction of any structure for a period of more than two years, to demolish
and remove such structure.
(110.1) (Prior Code, § 29-1-67)
   (B)   (1)   All notices and orders shall comply with §
150.021.
(110.2)
      (2)   Before the Code Enforcement Officer can pursue action to demolish a
building in accordance with division (A) above or (C) below, it is imperative
that all owners and any other persons with a recorded encumbrance on the
property be given proper notice of the demolition plans. (See §
150.021 for notice and order requirements.)
(Prior Code, § 29-1-68)
   (C)   If the owner of a premises fails to comply with a demolition order
within the time prescribed, the Code Enforcement Officer shall cause the
structure to be demolished and removed, either through an available public
agency or by contract or arrangement with private persons, and the cost of such
demolition and removal shall be charged against the real estate upon which the
structure is located and shall be a lien upon such real estate.
(110.3) (Prior Code, § 29-1-69)
   (D)   When any structure has been ordered demolished and removed, the
governing body or other designated officer under said contract or arrangement
aforesaid shall have the right to sell the salvage and valuable materials at
the highest price obtainable. The net proceeds of such sale, after deducting
the expenses of such demolition and removal, shall be promptly remitted with a
report of such sale or transaction, including the items of expense and amounts
deducted, for the person who is entitled thereto, subject to any order of a
court. If such a surplus does not remain to be turned over, the report shall so
state.
(110.4) (Prior Code, § 29-1-70)
§ 150.025 MEANS OF APPROVAL.
   (A)   Any person directly affected by a decision of the Code Enforcement
Officer or a notice or order issued under this chapter shall have the right to
appeal to the Board of Appeals; provided that a written application for appeal
is filed within 20 days after the day the decision, notice, or order was
served. An application for appeal shall be based on a claim that the true
intent of this chapter or the rules legally adopted thereunder have been
incorrectly interpreted, the provisions of this chapter do not fully apply, or
the requirements of this chapter are adequately satisfied by other means.
(111.1) (Prior Code, § 29-1-72)
   (B)    The Board of Appeals shall consist of a minimum of three members who
are qualified by experience and training to pass on matters pertaining to
property maintenance and who are not employees of the jurisdiction. The Code
Enforcement Officer shall be an ex-officio member but shall have no vote on any
matter before the Board of Appeals. The Board of Appeals shall be appointed by
the chief appointing authority, and shall serve staggered and overlapping
terms.
(111.2)
      (1)   (a)   The chief appointing authority shall appoint two or more
alternate members who shall be called by the Board Chair to hear appeals during
the absence or disqualification of a member. Alternate members shall possess
the qualifications required for Board of Appeals membership.
(111.2.1)
         (b)   This section authorizes the chief appointing authority to
appoint two alternate members who are to be available if the principal members
of the Board of Appeals are absent or disqualified. Alternate members must
possess the same qualifications as the principal members.
      (2)   (a)   The Board of Appeals shall annually select one of its members
to serve as Chair. (111.2.2)
         (b)   It is customary to determine chairship annually so that a
regular opportunity is available to evaluate and either reappoint the current
Chair or appoint a new one.
      (3)   (a)   A member shall not hear an appeal in which that member has
any personal, professional, or financial interest.
(111.2.3)
         (b)   All members must disqualify themselves regarding any appeal in
which they have a personal, professional, or financial interest.
      (4)   (a)   The chief administrative officer shall designate a qualified
person to serve as Secretary to the Board of Appeals. The Secretary shall file
a detailed record of all proceedings in the office of the chief administrative
officer.
(111.2.4)
         (b)   The chief administrative officer is to designate a qualified
clerk to serve as secretary to the Board of Appeals. The Secretary is required
to file a detailed record of all proceedings in the office of the chief
administrative officer.
      (5)   (a)   Compensation of members shall be determined by law.
(111.2.5)
         (b)   Members of the Board of Appeals are not required to be
compensated unless required by the local municipality or jurisdiction.
(Prior Code, § 29-1-73)
   (C)   The Board of Appeals shall meet upon notice from the Chair within 20
days of the filing of an appeal, or at stated periodic meetings.
(111.3) (Prior Code, § 29-1-74)
   (D)   (1)   All hearings before the Board of Appeals shall be open to the
public. The appellant, that appellant’s representative, the Code Enforcement
Officer, and any person whose interests are affected shall be given an
opportunity to be heard. A quorum shall consist of not less than two-thirds of
the Board of Appeals membership.
(111.4)
      (2)   The Board of Appeals shall adopt and make available to the public
through the Secretary procedures under which a hearing will be conducted. The
procedures shall not require compliance with strict rules of evidence, but
shall mandate that only relevant information be received.
(111.4.1)
(Prior Code, § 29-1-75)
   (E)   When the full Board of Appeals is not present to hear an appeal,
either the appellant or the appellant’s representative shall have the right to
request a postponement of the hearing.
(111.5) (Prior Code, § 29-1-76)
   (F)   The Board of Appeals shall modify or reverse the decision of the Code
Enforcement Officer only by a concurring vote of a majority of the total number
of appointed Board of Appeals members. (111.6)
      (1)   The decision of the Board of Appeals shall be recorded. Copies
shall be furnished to the appellant and to the Code Enforcement Officer.
(111.6.1)
      (2)   The Code Enforcement Officer shall take immediate action in
accordance with the decision of the Board of Appeals.
(111.6.2)
      (3)   To avoid any undue hindrance in the progress of construction, the
Code Enforcement Officer is required to act without delay based on the Board of
Appeals’ decision. This action maybe to enforce the decision or to seek
judicial relief if the Board of Appeals’ action can be demonstrated to be
inappropriate.
(Prior Code, § 29-1-77)
   (G)   Any person, whether or not a previous party of the appeal, shall have
the right to apply to the appropriate court for a writ of certiorari to correct
errors of law. Application for review shall be made in the manner and time
required by law following the filing of the decision in the office of the chief
administrative officer.
(111.7) (Prior Code, § 29-1-78)
   (H)   Appeals of notice and orders (other than imminent danger notices)
shall stay the enforcement of the notice and order until the appeal is heard by
the Board of Appeals.
(111.8) (Prior Code, § 29-1-79)
§ 150.026 REQUIREMENTS; GENERALLY.
   (A)   The provisions of this chapter shall govern the minimum conditions and
the responsibilities of persons for maintenance of structures, equipment, and
exterior property.
(301.1) (Prior Code, § 29-3-1)
   (B)   (1)   The owner of the premises shall maintain the structures and
exterior property in compliance with these requirements, except as otherwise
provided for in this chapter.
      (2)   A person shall not occupy as owner-occupant or permit another
person to occupy premises which are not in a sanitary and safe condition and
which do not comply with the requirements of this chapter. Occupants of a
dwelling unit, rooming unit or housekeeping unit are responsible for keeping in
a clean, sanitary, and safe condition that part of the dwelling unit, rooming
unit, housekeeping unit, or premises which they occupy and control.
(301.2) (Prior Code, § 29-3-2)
   (C)   All vacant structures and premises thereof or vacant land shall be
maintained in a clean, safe, secure, and sanitary condition as provided herein
so as not to cause a blighting problem or adversely affect the public health or
safety.
(301.3) (Prior Code, § 29-3-3)
§ 150.027 TEMPORARY RENTALS.
   (A)   A temporary rental is defined as a residence or part thereof whereby
the owner rents to other occupant(s) for a period of less than 30 days.
(Prior Code, § 29-11-1)
   (B)   A property owner that rents rooms outside his or her primary home is
subject to at least two yearly inspections of those properties or with
reasonable cause more often, and a business license will have to be obtained.
(Prior Code, § 29-11-2)
   (C)   An owner that rents rooms in his or her primary home on a temporary
basis will not be subject to twice yearly inspections.
(Prior Code, § 29-11-3)
   (D)   Fees for inspections will be the same as §
150.044(B).
(Prior Code, § 29-11-4)
   (E)   A licensed bed and breakfast, motel, or hotel is not subject to this
section.
(Prior Code, § 29-11-5)
(Ord. 06-11, passed 7-5-2006)
PROPERTY MAINTENANCE INSPECTION
§ 150.040 GENERALLY.
   The Department of Property Maintenance Inspection is hereby created, and the
executive official in charge thereof shall be known as the Code Enforcement
Officer.
(103.1) (Prior Code, § 29-1-14)
§ 150.041 APPOINTMENT.
   The Code Enforcement Officer shall be appointed by the Mayor with the advice
and consent of the Board of Trustees; and the Code Enforcement Officer shall
not be removed from office except for cause and after full opportunity to be
heard on specific and relevant charges by and before the appointing authority.
(103.2) (Prior Code, § 29-1-15)
§ 150.042 DEPUTIES.
   In accordance with the prescribed procedures of this jurisdiction and with
the concurrence of the appointing authority, the Code Enforcement Officer shall
have the authority to appoint a deputy code official, other related technical
officers, inspectors, and other employees.
(103.3) (Prior Code, § 29-1-16)
§ 150.043 LIABILITIES.
   (A)   The Code Enforcement Officer, officer, or employee charged with the
enforcement of this chapter, while acting for the jurisdiction, shall not
thereby be rendered liable personally, and is hereby relieved from all personal
liability for any damage accruing to persons or property as a result of an act
required or permitted in the discharge of official duties.
   (B)   (1)   Any suit instituted against any officer or employee because of
an act performed by that officer or employee in the lawful discharge of duties
and under the provisions of this chapter shall be defended by the legal
representative of the jurisdiction until the final termination of the
proceedings.
      (2)   The Code Enforcement Officer or any subordinate shall not be liable
for costs in an action, suit, or proceeding that is instituted in pursuance of
the provisions of this chapter; and any officer of the Department of Property
Maintenance Inspection, acting in good faith and without malice shall be free
from liability for acts performed under any of its provisions or by reason of
any act or omission in the performance of official duties in connection
therewith.
(103.4) (Prior Code, § 29-1-17)
§ 150.044 FEES; FILING.
   (A)   The fees for activities and services performed by the Department of
Property Maintenance Inspection in carrying out its responsibilities under this
chapter shall be as indicated in the following schedule. (See Appendix A)
(103.5) (Prior Code, § 29-1-18)
   (B)   The property maintenance fees for this chapter shall be as follows.
      (1)   An inspection permit fee of $50 shall be paid prior to the village
conducting an inspection of a multi-family rental structure. It shall be the
responsibility of the property owner/agent to make advance payment of the fee
and schedule the required inspection with the village. An inspection shall be
valid for a maximum period of six months. The dwelling unit shall be
reinspected during that period, if the occupancy changes.
      (2)   An inspection permit fee of $100 shall be paid prior to the village
conducting an inspection of a single-family residence. It shall be the
responsibility of the property owner/agent to make advance payment of the fee
and schedule the required inspection with the village. An inspection shall be
valid for a maximum period of six months. The dwelling shall be reinspected
during that period, if the occupancy changes.
      (3)   An inspection permit fee of $75 shall be paid prior to the village
conducting an inspection of a manufactured/mobile home. It shall be the
responsibility of the property owner/agent to make advance payment of the fee
and schedule the required inspection with the village. An inspection shall be
valid for a maximum period of six months. The dwelling unit shall be
reinspected during that period, if the occupancy changes.
      (4)   A copy of an existing certificate of occupancy shall be a fee of
$10.
      (5)   The certificate of occupancy fee of $30 shall be paid at the time
certificate is issued. It shall be the responsibility of the tenant/occupant to
apply for certificate of occupancy after application for occupancy has been
approved.
      (6)   A re-inspection fee of $50 shall be paid when initial inspection
fails to no access to structure. It shall be the responsibility of the property
owner/agent to make the advance payment prior to scheduling a re-inspection.
      (7)   All fees shall be non-refundable.
(Prior Code, § 29-1-19)
(Ord. 05-08, passed 10-17-2005)
EXTERIOR PROPERTY AREAS
§ 150.055 SANITATION.
   (A)   All exterior property and premises shall be maintained in a clean,
safe, and sanitary condition
   (B)    The occupant shall keep that part of the exterior property which such
occupant occupies or controls in a clean and sanitary condition.
(302.1) (Prior Code, § 29-3-5)
§ 150.056 GRADING AND DRAINAGE.
   (A)   All premises shall be graded and maintained to prevent the erosion of
soil and to prevent the accumulation of stagnant water thereon, or within any
structure located thereon.
(302.2)
   (B) Exception: approved retention areas and reservoirs.
(Prior Code, § 29-3-6)
§ 150.057 SIDEWALKS AND DRIVEWAYS.
   All sidewalks, walkways, stairs, driveways, parking spaces, and similar
areas shall be kept in a proper state of repair and maintained free from
hazardous conditions.
(302.3) (Prior Code, § 29-3-7)
§ 150.058 WEEDS.
   (A)   All premises and exterior property shall be maintained free from weeds
or plant growth in excess of eight inches. All noxious weeds shall be
prohibited. WEEDS shall be defined as all grasses, annual plants and
vegetation, other than trees or shrubs provided; however, this term shall not
include cultivated flowers and gardens.
   (B)   Upon failure of the owner or agent having charge of a property to cut
and destroy weeds after service of a notice violation, they shall be subject to
prosecution in accordance with §
150.008(B) and as prescribed by the authority having jurisdiction. Upon failure
to comply with the notice of violation, any duly authorized employee of the
jurisdiction or contractor hired by the jurisdiction shall be authorized to
enter upon the property in violation and cut and destroy the weeds growing
thereon, and the costs of such removal shall be paid by the owner or agent
responsible for the property.
(302.4) (Prior Code, § 29-3-8) Penalty, see §
150.999
§ 150.059 RODENT HARBORAGE.
   All structures and exterior property shall be kept free from rodent
harborage and infestation. Where rodents are found, they shall be promptly
exterminated by approved processes which will not be injurious to human health.
After extermination, proper precautions shall be taken to eliminate rodent
harborage and prevent reinfestation.
(302.5) (Prior Code, § 29-3-9) Penalty, see §
150.999
§ 150.060 EXHAUST VENTS.
   Pipes, ducts, conductors, fans, or blowers shall not discharge gases, steam,
vapor, hot air, grease, smoke, odors, or other gaseous or particulate waste
directly upon abutting or adjacent public or private property or that of
another tenant.
(302.6) (Prior Code, § 29-3-10) Penalty, see §
150.999
§ 150.061 ACCESSORY STRUCTURES.
   All accessory structures, including detached garages, fence, and walls,
shall be maintained structurally sound and in good repair.
(302.7) (Prior Code, § 29-3-11) Penalty, see §
150.999
§ 150.062 MOTOR VEHICLES.
   (A)   Except as provided for in other regulations, no inoperative or
unlicensed motor vehicle shall be parked, kept, or stored on any premises, and
no vehicle shall at any time be in a state of major disassembly, disrepair, or
in the process of being stripped or dismantled. Painting of vehicles is
prohibited unless conducted inside an approved spray booth.
(302.8)
   (B)   Exception: a vehicle of any type is permitted to undergo major
overhaul, including body work; provided that such work is performed inside a
structure or similarly enclosed area designed and approved for such purposes.
(Prior Code, § 29-3-12) Penalty, see §
150.999
§ 150.063 DEFACEMENT OF PROPERTY.
   No person shall willfully or wantonly damage, mutilate, or deface any
exterior surface of any structure or building on any private or public property
by placing thereon any marking, carving, or graffiti. It shall be the
responsibility of the owner to restore said surface to an approved state of
maintenance and repair.
(302.9) (Prior Code, § 29-3-13) Penalty, see §
150.999
SWIMMING POOLS, SPAS, AND HOT TUBS
§ 150.075 SWIMMING POOLS.
   (A)   The term SWIMMING POOL is hereby defined as any structure or
receptacle and appurtenant equipment intended for swimming, recreational
bathing or wading that contains water over 24 inches (610 mm) deep at any
point. This includes in-ground, above ground and on-ground pools, hot tubs,
spas and fix-in-place wading pools.
   (B)   All outdoor swimming pools shall be completely enclosed by a fence,
excepting therefrom the following:
      (1)   Any above ground pool, on-ground pool, hot tub or spa that has a
barrier or sidewall that is at least 48 inches (1,219 mm) above grade measured
on the side of the barrier or sidewall that faces away from the swimming pool
and where the means of access is a ladder or steps that such ladder and/or
steps shall be capable of being secured, locked or removed to prevent access;
or
      (2)   Any swimming pool with a power safety cover or a hot tub or spa
with a safety cover complying with ASTM F1346.
   (C)   When a fence or barrier is required pursuant to division (B) above,
said fence or barrier shall be at least 48 inches (1,219 mm) in height above
the finished ground level measured on the side of the barrier away from the
pool, and if the fence or barrier contains openings or gaps between the slats/
pickets, said openings or gaps shall not be more than two inches (51 mm) wide
from the bottom to grade and not more than four inches (102 mm) wide within the
fence or barrier. All fence openings or points of entry into pool area
enclosure shall be equipped with gates. Gates and doors in such barriers shall
be self-closing and self-latching. Where the self-latching device is less than
54 inches (1,372 mm) above the bottom of the gate, the release mechanism shall
be located on the pool side of the gate. Self-closing and self-latching gates
shall be maintained such that the gate will positively close and latch when
released from an open position of six inches (152 mm) from the gatepost. The
fence and gates shall be constructed of a minimum No. 9 gauge woven wire mesh
corrosion-resistant material, aluminum, wood, vinyl, or similar material. Fence
posts shall be decay or corrosion-resistant and shall be set in concrete bases.
No existing pool enclosure shall be removed, replaced, or changed in a manner
that reduces its effectiveness as a safety barrier.
   (D)   No swimming pool, whether public or private, shall be located in any
front yard of a parcel/lot.
(Prior Code, § 29-3-15) (Ord. 05-08, passed 10-17-2005; Ord. 25-08, passed 8-
18-2025)
EXTERIOR STRUCTURES
§ 150.090 GENERALLY.
   The exterior of a structure shall be maintained in good repair, structurally
sound, and sanitary so as not to pose a threat to the public health, safety, or
welfare.
(304.1) (Prior Code, § 29-3-18)
§ 150.091 PROTECTIVE TREATMENT.
   All exterior surfaces, including, but not limited to, doors, door and window
frames, cornices, porches, trim, balconies, decks, and fences shall be
maintained in good condition. Exterior wood surfaces, other than decay-
resistant woods, shall be protected from the elements and decay by painting or
other protective covering or treatment. Peeling, flaking, and chipped paint
shall be eliminated and surfaces repainted. All siding and masonry joints as
well as those between the building envelope and the perimeter of windows,
doors, and skylights shall be maintained weather-resistant and water-tight. All
metal surfaces subject to rust or corrosion shall be coated to inhibit such
rust and corrosion and all surfaces with rust or corrosion shall be stabilized
and coated to inhibit future rust and corrosion. Oxidation stains shall be
removed from exterior surfaces. Surfaces designed for stabilization by
oxidation are exempt from this requirement.
(304.2) (Prior Code, § 29-3-19)
§ 150.092 PREMISES IDENTIFICATION.
   Buildings shall have approved address numbers placed in a position to be
plainly legible and visible from the street or road fronting the property.
These numbers shall contrast with their background. Address numbers shall be
Arabic numerals or alphabet letters. Numbers shall be a minimum of four inches
(102 millimeters) high with a minimum stroke width of one-half inch (12.7
millimeters).
(304.3) (Prior Code, § 29-3-20)
§ 150.093 STRUCTURAL MEMBERS.
   All structural members shall be maintained free from deterioration, and
shall be capable of safely supporting the imposed dead and live loads.
(304.4) (Prior Code, § 29-3-21)
§ 150.094 FOUNDATION AND EXTERIOR WALLS.
   (A)   All foundation walls shall be maintained plumb and free from open
cracks and breaks and shall be kept in such condition so as to prevent the
entry of rodents and other pests.
(304.5) (Prior Code, § 29-3-22)
   (B)   All exterior walls shall be free from holes, breaks, and loose or
rotting materials, and maintained weather-proof and properly surface coated
where required to prevent deterioration.
(304.6) (Prior Code, § 29-3-23)
Penalty, see §
150.999
§ 150.095 ROOFS AND DRAINAGE.
   (A)   The roof and flashing shall be sound, tight, and not have defects that
admit rain. Roof drainage shall be adequate to prevent dampers or deterioration
in the walls or interior portion of the structure.
   (B)   Roof drains, gutters, and downspout shall be maintained in good repair
and free from obstructions. Roof water shall not be discharged in a manner that
creates a public nuisance.
(304.7) (Prior Code, § 29-3-24)
§ 150.096 DECORATIVE FEATURES.
   All cornices, belt courses, corbels, terra cotta trim, wall facings, and
similar decorative features shall be maintained in good repair with proper
anchorage and in a safe condition.
(304.8) (Prior Code, § 29-3-25)
§ 150.097 OVERHANG EXTENSIONS.
   All overhang extensions including, but not limited to, canopies, marquees,
signs, metal awnings, fire escapes, standpipes, and exhaust ducts, shall be
maintained in good repair and be properly anchored so as to be kept in a sound
condition. When required, all exposed surfaces of metal or wood shall be
protected from the elements and against decay or rust by periodic application
of weather-coating materials, such as paint or similar surface treatment.
(304.9) (Prior Code, § 29-3-26)
§ 150.098 STAIRWAYS, DECKS, PORCHES, AND BALCONIES.
   Every exterior stairway, deck, porch, and balcony, and all appurtenances
attached thereto, shall be maintained structurally sound, in good repair, with
proper anchorage and capable of supporting the imposed loads.
(304.10) (Prior Code, § 29-3-27)
§ 150.099 CHIMNEYS AND TOWERS.
   All chimneys, cooling towers, smoke stacks, and similar appurtenances shall
be maintained structurally safe and sound, and in good repair. All exposed
surfaces of metal or wood shall be protected from the elements and against
decay or rust by periodic application of weather-coating materials, such as
paint or similar surface treatment.
(304.11) (Prior Code, § 29-3-28)
§ 150.100 HANDRAILS AND GUARDS.
   (A)   Every handrail and guard shall be firmly fastened and capable of
supporting normally imposed loads and shall be maintained in good condition.
(304.12) (Prior Code, § 29-3-29)
   (B)   (1)   Every exterior and interior flight of stairs having more than
four risers shall have a handrail on one side of the stair and every open
portion of a stair, landing, balcony, porch, deck, ramp, or other walking
surface which is more than 30 inches (762 millimeters) above the floor or grade
below shall have guards. Handrails shall not be less than 30 inches (762
millimeters) high or more than 42 inches (1,067 millimeters) high measured
vertically above the nosing of the tread or above the finished floor of the
landing or walking surfaces. Guards shall not be less than 30 inches (762
millimeters) high above the floor of the landing, balcony, porch, deck, ramp,
or other walking surface.
      (2)   Exception: guards shall not be required where exempted by the
adopted Building Code. (306.1) (Prior Code, § 29-3-44)
§ 150.101 WINDOW, SKYLIGHT, AND DOOR FRAMES.
   (A)   Every window, skylight, door, and frame shall be kept in sound
condition, good repair, and weather-tight.
(304.13)
   (B)   All glazing materials shall be maintained free from cracks and holes.
(304.13.1)
   (C)   Every window, other than a fixed window, shall be easily openable and
capable of being held in position by window hardware.
(304.13.2)
(Prior Code, § 29-3-30)
§ 150.102 INSECT SCREENS.
   (A)   During the period from April to October, every door, window, and other
outside opening required for ventilation of habitable rooms, food preparation
areas, food service areas, or any areas where products to be included or
utilized in food for human consumption are processed, manufactured, packaged,
or stored, shall be supplied with approved tightly fitting screens of not less
than 16 mesh per inch (16 mesh per 25 millimeters) and every swinging door
shall have a self-closing device in good working condition.
(304.14)
   (B)   Exception: screens shall not be required where other approved means,
such as air curtains or insect repellent fans, are employed.
(Prior Code, § 29-3-31)
§ 150.103 DOORS.
   All exterior doors, door assemblies, and hardware shall be maintained in
good condition. Locks at all entrances to dwelling units, rooming units, and
guestrooms shall tightly secure the door. Locks on means of egress doors shall
be in accordance with §
150.217(C).
(Prior Code, § 29-3-32)
§ 150.104 BASEMENT REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   Every basement hatchway shall be maintained to prevent the entrance of
rodents, rain, and surface drainage water.
(304.16) (Prior Code, § 29-3-33)
   (B)   Every basement window that is openable shall be supplied with rodent
shields, storm windows, or other approved protection against the entry of
rodents.
(304.17) (Prior Code, § 29-3-34)
§ 150.105 BUILDING SECURITY.
   (A)   Doors, windows, or hatchways for dwelling units, room units, or
housekeeping units shall be provided with devices designed to provide security
for the occupants and property within.
(304.18)
   (B)   (1)   Doors providing access to a dwelling unit, rooming unit, or
housekeeping unit that is rented, leased, or let shall be equipped with a
deadbolt lock meeting specifications set forth herein Such deadbolt locks shall
be operated only by the turning of a knob or a key and shall have a lock throw
of not less than one inch.
      (2)   For the purpose of this section, a sliding bolt shall not be
considered an acceptable deadbolt lock. Such deadbolt locks shall be installed
according to manufacturer’s specifications and maintained in good working
order. All deadbolt locks required by this section shall be designed and
installed in such a manner so as to be operable inside of the dwelling unit,
rooming unit or housekeeping unit without the use of a key, tool, combination
thereof, or any other special knowledge or effort.
(304.18.1)
   (C)   Operable windows located in whole or in part within six feet (1,828
millimeters) above ground level or a walking surface below that provide access
to a dwelling unit, rooming unit, or housekeeping unit that is rented, leased,
or let shall be equipped with a window sash locking devices.
(304.18.2)
   (D)   Basement hatchways that provide access to a dwelling unit, rooming
unit, or housekeeping unit that is rented, leased, or let shall be equipped
with devices that secure the units from unauthorized entry.
(304.18.3)
(Prior Code, § 29-3-35)
INTERIOR STRUCTURES
§ 150.120 GENERAL MAINTENANCE.
   (A)   The interior of a structure and equipment therein shall be maintained
in good repair, structurally sound, and in a sanitary condition. Occupants
shall keep that part of the structure which the occupy control in a clean and
sanitary condition.
   (B)   Every owner of a structure containing a rooming house, housekeeping
units, a hotel, a dormitory, two or more dwelling units, or two or more
nonresidential occupancies, shall maintain, in a clean and sanitary condition,
the shared or public areas of the structure and exterior property.
(305.1) (Prior Code, § 29-3-37)
§ 150.121 STRUCTURAL MEMBERS.
   All structural members shall be maintained structurally sound, and be
capable of supporting the imposed loads.
(305.2) (Prior Code, § 29-3-38)
§ 150.122 INTERIOR SURFACES.
   All interior surfaces, including windows and doors, shall be maintained in
good, clean, and sanitary condition. Peeling, chipping, flaking, or abraded
paint shall be repaired, removed, or covered. Cracked or loose plaster, decayed
wood, and other defective surface conditions shall be corrected.
(305.3) (Prior Code, § 29-3-39)
§ 150.123 STAIRS AND WALKING SURFACES.
   Every stair, ramp, landing, balcony, porch, deck, or other walking surface
shall be maintained in sound condition and good repair.
(305.4) (Prior Code, § 29-3-40)
§ 150.124 HANDRAILS AND GUARDS.
   (A)   Every handrail and guard shall be firmly fastened and capable of
supporting normally imposed loads and shall be maintained in good condition.
(305.5) (Prior Code, § 29-3-41)
   (B)   Refer to §
150.100(B) for additional requirements.
(Prior Code, § 29-3-44)
§ 150.125 INTERIOR DOORS.
   Every interior door shall fit reasonably well within its frame and shall be
capable of being opened and closed by being properly and securely attached to
jambs, headers, or tracks as intended by the manufacturer of the attachment
hardware.
(305.6) (Prior Code, § 29-3-42)
SANITATION REQUIREMENTS
§ 150.140 ACCUMULATION OF RUBBISH AND GARBAGE.
    All exterior property and premises, and the interior of every structure,
shall be free from any accumulation of rubbish or garbage.
(307.1) (Prior Code, § 29-3-46)
§ 150.141 DISPOSAL OF RUBBISH AND GARBAGE.
   (A)   Every occupant of a structure shall dispose of all rubbish in a clean
and sanitary manner by placing such rubbish in approved containers.
(307.2)
      (1)   The occupant of every occupied premises shall supply approved
covered containers for rubbish, and the owner of the premises shall be
responsible for the removal of rubbish.
(307.2.1)
      (2)   Refrigerators and similar equipment not in operation shall not be
discarded, abandoned, or stored on premises without first removing the doors.
(307.2.2)
(Prior Code, § 29-3-47)
   (B)   Every occupant of a structure shall dispose of garbage in a clean and
sanitary manner by placing such garbage in an approved garbage disposal
facility or approved garbage containers.
(307.3)
      (1)   The owner of every dwelling shall supply one of the following: an
approved mechanical food waste grinder in each dwelling unit; an approved
incinerator unit in the structure available to the occupants in each dwelling
unit; or an approved leak-proof, covered, outside garbage container.
(307.3.1)
      (2)   The operator of every establishment producing garbage shall
provide, and at all times cause to be utilized, approved leak-proof containers
provided with close-fitting covers for the storage of such materials until
removed from the premises for disposal.
(307.3.2)
(Prior Code, § 29-3-48)
§ 150.142 INFESTATION.
   All structures shall be kept free from insect and rodent infestation. All
structures in which insects or rodents are found shall be promptly exterminated
by approved processes that will not be injurious to human health. After
extermination, proper precautions shall be taken to prevent reinfestation.
(308.1) (Prior Code, § 29-3-50)
§ 150.143 EXTERMINATION.
   (A)   The owner of any structure shall be responsible for extermination
within the structure prior to renting or leasing the structure.
(308.2) (Prior Code, § 29-3-51)
   (B)   The occupant of a one-family dwelling or of a single-tenant
nonresidential structure shall be responsible for extermination on the
premises.
(308.3) (Prior Code, § 29-3-52)
   (C)   (1)   The owner of a structure containing two or more dwelling units,
a multiple occupancy, a rooming house or a nonresidential structure shall be
responsible for extermination in the public or shared areas of the structure
and exterior property.
      (2)   If infestation is caused by failure of an occupant to prevent such
infestation in the area occupied, the occupant shall be responsible for
extermination.
(308.4) (Prior Code, § 29-3-53)
   (D)   (1)   The occupant of any structure shall be responsible for the
continued rodent and pest-free condition of the structure.
      (2)   Exception: where rat infestations are caused by defects in the
structure, the owner shall be responsible for extermination.
(308.5) (Prior Code, § 29-3-54)
LIGHT, VENTILATION, AND OCCUPANCY
§ 150.155 SCOPE.
   The provisions of this subchapter shall govern the minimum conditions and
standards for light, ventilation, and space for occupying a structure.
(401.1) (Prior Code, § 29-4-1)
§ 150.156 RESPONSIBILITY.
   (A)   The owner of the structure shall provide and maintain light,
ventilation, and space conditions in compliance with these requirements.
   (B)   A person shall not occupy as owner-occupant, or permit another person
to occupy, any premises that do not comply with the requirements of this
chapter.
(401.2) (Prior Code, § 29-4-2)
§ 150.157 ALTERNATIVE DEVICES.
   In lieu of the means for natural light and ventilation herein prescribed,
artificial light, or mechanical ventilation complying with the International
Building Code be permitted.
(401.3) (Prior Code, § 29-4-3)
§ 150.158 LIGHT.
   (A)   (1)   Every habitable space shall have at least one window of approved
size facing directly to the outdoors or to a court. The minimum total glazed
area for every habitable space shall be 8% of the floor area of such room.
Wherever walls or other portions of a structure face a window of any room and
such obstructions are located less than three feet (914 millimeters) from the
window and extend to a level above that of the ceiling of the room, such window
shall not be deemed to face directly to the outdoors, nor to a court, and shall
not be included as contributing to the required minimum total window area for
the room.
      (2)   Exception: where natural light for rooms or spaces without exterior
glazing areas is provided through an adjoining room, the unobstructed opening
to the adjoining room shall be at least 8% of the floor area of the interior
room or space, but not less than 25 square feet (2.33 meters2). The exterior
glazing area shall be based on the total floor area being served.
(402.1) (Prior Code, § 29-4-5)
   (B)   Every common hall and stairway in residential occupancies, other than
in one- and two-family dwellings, shall be lighted at all times with at least a
60-watt standard, incandescent light bulb for each 200 square feet (19 meters2)
of floor area or equivalent illumination; provided that the spacing between
lights shall not be greater than 30 feet (9,144 millimeters). In other than
residential occupancies, means of egress, including exterior means of egress
stairways, shall be illuminated at all times the building space served by the
means of egress is occupied with a minimum of one footcandle (11 lux) at
floors, landings, and treads.
(402.2) (Prior Code, § 29-4-6)
   (C)   All other spaces shall be provided with natural or artificial light
sufficient to permit the maintenance of sanitary conditions, and the safe
occupancy of the space and utilization of the appliance, equipment, and
fixtures.
(402.3) (Prior Code, § 29-4-7)
§ 150.159 VENTILATION.
   (A)   (1)   Every habitable space shall have at least one openable window.
The total openable area of the window in every room shall be equal to at least
45% of the minimum glazed area required in §
150.158(A).
      (2)   Exception: where rooms and spaces without openings to the outdoors
are ventilated through an adjoining room, the unobstructed opening to the
adjoining room shall be at least 8% of the floor area of the interior room or
space, but not less than 25 square feet (2.33 meters2). The ventilation
openings to the outdoors shall be based on a total floor area being ventilated.
(403.1) (Prior Code, § 29-4-9)
   (B)   (1)   Every bathroom and toilet room shall comply with the ventilation
requirements for habitable spaces as required by division (A) above, except
that a window shall not be required in such spaces equipped with a mechanical
ventilation system.
      (2)   Air exhausted by a mechanical ventilation system from a bathroom or
toilet room shall discharge to the outdoors and shall not be recirculated.
(403.2) (Prior Code, § 29-4-10)
   (C)   (1)   Unless approved through the certificate of occupancy, cooking
shall not be permitted in any rooming unit or dormitory unit, and a cooking
facility or appliance shall not be permitted to be present in a rooming unit or
dormitory unit.
(403.3)
      (2)   Exception: where specifically approved in writing by the Code
Enforcement Officer.
(Prior Code, § 29-4-11)
   (D)   Where injurious, toxic, irritating or noxious fumes, gases, dusts, or
mists are generated, a local exhaust ventilation system shall be provided to
remove the contaminating agent at the source. Air shall be exhausted to the
exterior and not be recirculated to any space.
(403.4) (Prior Code, § 29-4-12)
   (E)   Clothes dryer exhaust systems shall be independent of all other
systems and shall be exhausted in accordance with the manufacture’s
instructions.
(403.5) (Prior Code, § 29-4-13)
§ 150.160 OCCUPANCY LIMITATIONS.
   (A)   Dwelling units, hotel units, housekeeping units, rooming units, and
dormitory units shall be arranged to provide privacy and be separate from other
adjoining spaces.
(404.1) (Prior Code, § 29-4-15)
   (B)   A habitable room, other than a kitchen, shall not be less than seven
feet (2,134 millimeters) in any plan dimension. Kitchens shall have a clear
passageway of not less than three feet (914 millimeters) between counterfronts
and appliances or counterfronts and walls.
(404.2) (Prior Code, § 29-4-16)
   (C)   (1)   Habitable spaces, hallways, corridors, laundry areas, bathrooms,
toilet rooms and habitable basement areas shall have a clear ceiling height of
not less than seven feet (2,134 millimeters).
(404.3)
      (2)   Exceptions include:
         (a)   In one- and two-family dwellings, beams or girders spaced not
less than four feet (1,219 millimeters) on center and projecting not more than
six inches (152 millimeters) below the required ceiling height;
         (b)   Basement rooms in one- and two-family dwellings occupied
exclusively for laundry, study or recreation purposes, having a ceiling height
of not less than six feet, eight inches (2,033 millimeters) with not less than
six feet, four inches (1,932 millimeters) of clear height under beams, girders,
ducts, and similar obstructions; and
         (c)   1.   Rooms occupied exclusively for sleeping, study or similar
purposes and having a sloped ceiling over all or part of the room, with a clear
ceiling height of at least seven feet (2,134 millimeters) over not less than
one-third of the required minimum floor area.
            2.   In calculating the floor area of such rooms, only those
portions of the floor area with a clear ceiling height of five feet (1,524
millimeters) or more shall be included.
(Prior Code, § 29-4-17)
   (D)   Every bedroom shall comply with the following requirements.
(404.4)
      (1)   Every bedroom occupied by one person shall contain at least 70
square feet (6.5 meters2) of floor area, and every bedroom occupied by more
than one person shall contain at least 50 square feet (4.6 meters2) of floor
area for each occupant thereof.
(404.4.1)
      (2)   (a)   Bedrooms shall not constitute the only means of access to
other bedrooms or habitable spaces and shall not serve as the only means of
egress from other habitable spaces.
(404.4.2)
         (b)   Exception: units that contain fewer than two bedrooms.
      (3)   Every bedroom shall have access to at least one water closet and
one lavatory without passing through another bedroom. Every bedroom in a
dwelling unit shall have access to at least one water closet and lavatory
located in the same story as the bedroom or an adjacent story.
(404.4.3)
      (4)   Kitchens and non-habitable spaces shall not be used for sleeping
purposes.
(404.4.4)
      (5)   Bedrooms shall comply with the applicable provisions of this
chapter, including, but not limited to, the light, ventilation, room area,
ceiling height, and room width requirements of this chapter; the plumbing
facilities, and water-heating facilities requirements of §§
150.175 through
150.182; the heating facilities and electrical receptacle requirements of §§
150.195 through
150.202; and the smoke detector and emergency escape requirements of §§
150.215 through
150.219.
(404.4.5)
(Prior Code, § 29-4-18)
   (E)   (1)   Dwelling units shall not be occupied by more occupants than
permitted by the minimum area requirements below.
(404.5)
 
Space           Minimum Area (Square Feet)
                1 to 2 occupants 3 to 5 occupants 6 or more occupants
Bedrooms        Shall comply with §
                150.160(D) above
Dining rooma, b No requirements  80               100
Living rooma, b No requirements  120              150
Notes:
For SI: 1 square foot = 0.0929 meters2
a: See §
150.160(E)(3) below for combined living room/diving room spaces
b: See §
150.160(E)(2) below for limitations on determining the minimum occupancy
area for sleeping purposes
 
      (2)   The minimum occupancy area required by the table above shall not be
included as a sleeping area in determining the minimum occupancy area for
sleeping purposes. All sleeping areas shall comply with division (D) above.
(404.5.1)
      (3)   Combined living room and dining room spaces shall comply with the
requirements of the table above if the total area is equal to that required for
separate rooms and if the space is located so as to function as a combination
living room/dining room.
(404.5.2)
(Prior Code, § 29-4-19)
   (F)   Nothing in this division (F) shall prohibit an efficiency living unit
from meeting the following requirements.
      (1)   A unit occupied by not more than two occupants shall have a clear
floor area of not less than 220 square feet (20.4 meters2).
         (b)   A unit occupied by three occupants shall have a clear floor area
of not less than 320 square feet (29.7 meters2).
         (c)   These required areas shall be exclusive of the areas required by
divisions (F)(2) and (F)(3) below.
      (2)   The unit shall be provided with a kitchen sink, cooking appliance,
and refrigeration facilities, each having a clear working space of not less
than 30 inches (762 millimeters) in front. Light and ventilation conforming to
this chapter shall be provided.
      (3)   The unit shall be provided with a separate bathroom containing a
water closet, lavatory, and bathtub or shower.
      (4)   The maximum number of occupants shall be three.
(404.6) (Prior Code, § 29-4-20)
   (G)   All spaces to be occupied for food preparation purposes shall contain
suitable space and equipment to store, prepare, and serve foods in a sanitary
manner. There shall be adequate facilities and services for the sanitary
disposal of food wastes and refuse, including facilities for temporary storage.
(404.7) (Prior Code, § 29-4-21)
PLUMBING FACILITIES AND FIXTURE REQUIREMENTS
§ 150.175 SCOPE.
   The provisions of this subchapter shall govern the minimum plumbing systems,
facilities, and plumbing fixtures to be provided.
(501.1) (Prior Code, § 29-5-1)
§ 150.176 RESPONSIBILITY.
   The owner of the structure shall provide and maintain such plumbing
facilities and plumbing fixtures in compliance with these requirements. A
person shall not occupy as owner-occupant or permit another person to occupy
any structure or premises which does not comply with the requirements of this
subchapter.
(501.2) (Prior Code, § 29-5-2)
§ 150.177 REQUIRED FACILITIES.
   (A)   Every dwelling unit shall contain its own bathroom or shower,
lavatory, water closet, and kitchen sink which shall be maintained in a
sanitary, safe working condition. The lavatory shall be placed in the same room
as the water closet or located in close proximity to the door leading directly
into the room in which such water closet is located. A kitchen sink shall not
be used as a substitute for the required lavatory.
(502.1) (Prior Code, § 29-5-4)
   (B)   At least one water closet, lavatory, and bathtub or shower shall be
supplied for each four rooming units.
(502.2) (Prior Code, § 29-5-5)
   (C)   Where private water closets, lavatories, and baths are not provided,
one water closet, one lavatory, and one bathtub or shower having access from a
public hallway shall be provided for each ten occupants.
(502.3) (Prior Code, § 29-5-6)
   (D)   (1)   A minimum of one water closet, one lavatory, and one drinking
facility shall be available to employees.
(502.4)
      (2)   Drinking facilities shall be a drinking fountain, water cooler,
bottled water cooler, or disposable cups next to a sink or water dispenser.
Drinking facilities shall not be located in toilet rooms or bathrooms.
(502.4.1)
(Prior Code, § 29-5-7)
§ 150.178 TOILET ROOMS.
   (A)   Toilet rooms and bathrooms shall provide privacy and shall not
constitute the only passageway to a hall or other space, or to the exterior. A
door and interior locking device shall be provided for all common or shared
bathrooms and toilet rooms in a multiple dwelling.
(503.1) (Prior Code, § 29-5-9)
   (B)   Toilet rooms and bathrooms serving hotel units, rooming units, or
dormitory units or housekeeping units, shall have access by traversing not more
than one flight of stairs and shall have access from a common hall or
passageway.
(503.2) (Prior Code, § 29-5-10)
   (C)   (1)   Toilet facilities shall have access from within the employees’
working area. The required toilet facilities shall be located not more than one
story above or below the employees’ working area and the path of travel to such
facilities shall not exceed a distance of 500 feet (152 meters).
      (2)   Employee facilities shall either be separate facilities or combined
employee and public facilities.
(503.3)
      (3)   Exception: facilities that are required for employees in storage
structures or kiosks, which are located in adjacent structures under the same
ownership, lease, or control, shall not exceed a travel distance of five 500
feet (152 meters) from the employees’ regular working area to the facilities.
(Prior Code, § 29-5-11)
   (D)   In other than dwelling units, every toilet room floor shall be
maintained to be a smooth, hard, nonabsorbent surface to permit such floor to
be easily kept in a clean and sanitary condition.
(503.4) (Prior Code, § 29-5-12)
§ 150.179 PLUMBING SYSTEMS AND FIXTURES.
   (A)   All plumbing fixtures shall be properly installed and maintained in
working order, and shall be kept free from obstructions, leaks and defects and
be capable of performing the function for which such plumbing fixtures are
designed. All plumbing fixtures shall be maintained in a safe, sanitary, and
functional condition.
(504.1) (Prior Code, § 29-5-14)
   (B)   Plumbing fixtures shall have adequate clearance for usage and
cleaning.
(504.2) (Prior Code, § 29-5-15)
   (C)   Where it is found that a plumbing system in a structure constitutes a
hazard to the occupants or the structure by reason of inadequate service,
inadequate venting, cross-connection, back-siphonage, improper installation,
deterioration, damage, or for similar reasons, the Code Enforcement Officer
shall require the defects to be corrected to eliminate the hazard.
(504.3) (Prior Code, § 29-5-16)
§ 150.180 WATER SYSTEM.
   (A)   Every sink, lavatory, bathtub or shower, drinking fountain, water
closet, or other plumbing fixtures shall be properly connected to either a
public water system or to an approved private water system. All kitchen sinks,
lavatories, laundry facilities, bathtubs, and showers shall be supplied with
hot or tempered and cold running water in accordance with the International
Plumbing Code.
(505.1) (Prior Code, § 29-5-18)
   (B)   The water supply shall be maintained free from contamination, and all
water inlets for plumbing fixtures shall be located above the flood level rim
of the fixture. Shampoo basin faucets, janitor sinks faucets, and other hose
bibs or faucets to which hoses are attached and left in place, shall be
protected by an approved atmospheric-type vacuum breaker or an approved
permanently attached hose connection vacuum breaker.
(505.2) (Prior Code, § 29-5-19)
   (C)   The water supply system shall be installed and maintained provide a
supply of water to plumbing fixtures, devices, and appurtenances in sufficient
volume and at pressures adequate to enable the fixture to function properly,
safely, and free from defects and leaks.
(505.3) (Prior Code, § 29-5-20)
   (D)   Water heating facilities shall be properly installed, maintained and
capable of providing an adequate amount of water to be drawn at every required
sink, lavatory, bathtub, shower, and laundry facility at a temperature of not
less than 110°F (43°C). A gas-burning water heater shall not be located in any
bathroom, toilet room, bedroom, or other occupied room normally kept closed,
unless adequate combustion air is provided. An approved combination temperature
and pressure-relief valve and relief valve discharge pipe shall be properly
installed and maintained on water heaters.
(505.4) (Prior Code, § 29-5-21)
§ 150.181 SANITARY DRAINAGE SYSTEM.
   (A)   All plumbing fixtures shall be properly connected to either a public
sewer system or to an approved private sewage disposal system.
(506.1) (Prior Code, § 29-5-23)
   (B)   Every plumbing stack, vent, waste, and sewer line shall function
properly and be kept free from obstructions, leaks, and defects.
(506.2) (Prior Code, § 29-5-24)
§ 150.182 STORM DRAINAGE.
   Drainage of roofs and paved areas, yards, and courts, and other open areas
on the premises shall not be discharged in a manner that creates a public
nuisance.
(507.1) (Prior Code, § 29-5-26)
MECHANICAL AND ELECTRICAL REQUIREMENTS
§ 150.195 SCOPE.
   The provisions of this subchapter shall govern the minimum mechanical and
electrical facilities and equipment to be provided.
(601.1) (Prior Code, § 29-6-1)
§ 150.196 RESPONSIBILITY.
   The owner of the structure shall provide and maintain mechanical and
electrical facilities and equipment in compliance with these requirements. A
person shall not occupy as an owner-occupant or permit another person to occupy
any premises which does not comply with the requirements of this subchapter.
(601.2) (Prior Code, § 29-6-2)
§ 150.197 HEATING FACILITIES.
   (A)   Heating facilities shall be provided in structures as required by this
section.
(602.1) (Prior Code, § 29-6-4)
   (B)   (1)   Dwellings shall be provided with heating facilities capable of
maintaining a room temperature of 68°F (20°C) in all habitable rooms,
bathrooms, and toilet rooms based on the winter outdoor design temperature
required for the locality indicated in Appendix D of the International Plumbing
Code.
      (2)   Cooking appliances shall not be used to provide space heating to
meet the requirements of this section.
(602.2)
      (3)   Exception: in areas where the average monthly temperature is above
30°F (-1°C), a minimum temperature of 65°F (18°C) shall be maintained.
(Prior Code, § 29-6-5)
   (C)   (1)   Every owner and operator of any building who rents, leases, or
lets one or more dwelling unit, rooming unit, dormitory, or guestroom on terms,
either express or implied, to furnish heat to the occupants thereof shall
supply heat to the occupants thereof shall supply heat during the period from
October to April to maintain a room temperature of not less than 68°F (20°C) in
all habitable rooms, bathrooms, and toilet rooms.
(602.3)
      (2)   Exceptions include:
         (a)   1.   When the outdoor temperature is below the winter outdoor
design temperature for the locality, maintenance of the minimum room
temperature shall not be required provided that the heating system is operating
at its full design capacity.
            2.   The winter outdoor design temperature for the locality shall
be as indicated in Appendix D of the International Plumbing Code; and
         (b)   In areas where the average monthly temperature is above 30°F (-
1°C) a minimum temperature of 65°F (18°C) shall be maintained.
(Prior Code, § 29-6-6)
   (D)   (1)   Indoor occupiable work spaces shall be supplied with heat during
the period from October to April to maintain a temperature of not less than
65°F (18°C) during the period the spaces are occupied.
(602.4)
      (2)   Exceptions include:
         (a)   Processing, storage, and operation areas that require cooling or
special temperature conditions; and
         (b)   Areas in which persons are primarily engaged in vigorous
physical activities.
(Prior Code, § 29-6-7)
   (E)   The required room temperatures shall be measured three feet (914
millimeters) above the floor and near the center of the room and two feet (610
millimeters) inward from the center of each exterior wail.
(602.5) (Prior Code, § 29-6-8)
§ 150.198 MECHANICAL EQUIPMENT.
   (A)   All mechanical appliances, fireplaces, solid fuel-burning appliances,
cooking appliances, and water heating appliances shall be properly installed
and maintained in a safe working condition, and shall be capable of performing
the intended function.
(603.1) (Prior Code, § 29-6-10)
   (B)   (1)   All fuel-burning equipment and appliances shall be connected to
an approved chimney or vent.
(603.2)
      (2)   Exception: fuel-burning equipment and appliances which are labeled
for unvented operation.
(Prior Code, § 29-6-11)
   (C)   All required clearances to combustible materials shall be maintained.
(603.3) (Prior Code, § 29-6-12)
   (D)   All safety controls for fuel-burning equipment shall be maintained in
effective operation.
(603.4) (Prior Code, § 29-6-13)
   (E)   A supply of air for complete combustion of the fuel and for
ventilation of the space containing the fuel-burning equipment shall be
provided for the fuel-burning equipment.
(603.5) (Prior Code, § 29-6-14)
   (F)   Devices intended to reduce fuel consumption by attachment to a fuel-
burning appliance, to the fuel supply line thereto, or to the vent outlet or
vent piping therefrom, shall not be installed unless labeled for such purpose
and the installation is specifically approved.
(603.6) (Prior Code, § 29-6-15)
§ 150.199 ELECTRICAL FACILITIES.
   (A)   Every occupied building shall be provided with an electrical system in
compliance with the requirements of this section and §
150.200.
(604.1) (Prior Code, § 29-6-17)
   (B)   The size and usage of appliances and equipment shall serve as a basis
for determining the need for additional facilities in accordance with the ICC
Electrical Code. Dwelling units shall be served by a three-wire, 120/240 volt,
single-phase electrical service having a rating of not less than 60 amperes.
(604.2) (Prior Code, § 29-6-18)
   (C)   Where it is found that the electrical system is a structure
constitutes a hazard to the occupants or the structure by reason of inadequate
service, improper fusing, insufficient receptacle and lighting outlets,
improper wiring or installation, deterioration, or damage, or, for similar
reasons, the Code Enforcement Officer shall require the defects to be corrected
to eliminate the hazard.
(604.3) (Prior Code, § 29-6-19)
§ 150.200 ELECTRICAL EQUIPMENT.
   (A)   All electrical equipment, wiring, and appliances shall be properly
installed and maintained in a safe and approved manner.
(605.1) (Prior Code, § 29-6-21)
   (B)   Every habitable space in a dwelling shall contain at least two
separate and remote receptacle outlets. Every laundry area shall contain at
least one ground-type receptacle or a receptacle with a ground fault circuit
interrupter. Every bathroom shall contain at least one receptacle. Any new
bathroom receptacle outlet shall have ground fault circuit interrupter
protection.
(605.2) (Prior Code, § 29-6-22)
   (C)   Every public hall, interior stairway, toilet room, kitchen, bathroom,
laundry room, boiler room, and furnace room shall contain at least one electric
lighting fixture.
(605.3) (Prior Code, § 29-6-23)
§ 150.201 ELEVATORS, ESCALATORS, AND DUMBWAITERS.
   (A)   (1)   Elevators, dumbwaiters, and escalators shall be maintained to
sustain safely all imposed loads, to operate properly, and to be free from
physical and fire hazards.
      (2)   The most current certificate of inspection shall be on display at
all times within the elevator or attached to the escalator or dumbwaiter; or
the certificate shall be available for public inspection in the office of the
building operator.
(606.1) (Prior Code, § 29-6-25)
   (B)   (1)   In buildings equipped with passenger elevators, at least one
elevator shall be maintained in operation at all times when the building is
occupied.
(606.2)
      (2)   Exception: buildings equipped with only one elevator shall be
permitted to have the elevator temporarily out of service for testing or
servicing.
(Prior Code, § 29-6-26)
§ 150.202 DUCT SYSTEMS.
   Duct systems shall be maintained free of obstructions and shall be capable
of performing the required function.
(607.1) (Prior Code, § 29-6-28)
FIRE SAFETY REQUIREMENTS
§ 150.215 SCOPE.
    The provisions of this subchapter shall govern the minimum conditions and
standards for fire safety relating to structures and exterior premises,
including fire safety facilities and equipment to be provided.
(701.1) (Prior Code, § 29-7-1)
§ 150.216 RESPONSIBILITY.
   (A)   The owner of the premises shall provide and maintain such fire safety
facilities and equipment in compliance with these requirements.
   (B)   A person shall not occupy as owner-occupant or permit another person
to occupy any premises that do not comply with the requirements of this
subchapter.
(701.2) (Prior Code, § 29-7-2)
§ 150.217 MEANS OF EGRESS.
   (A)   A safe, continuous, and unobstructed path of travel shall be provided
from any point in a building or structure to the public way. Means of egress
shall comply with the International Fire Code.
(702.1) (Prior Code, § 29-7-4)
   (B)   The required width of aisles in accordance with the International Fire
Code shall be unobstructed.
(702.2) (Prior Code, § 29-7-5)
   (C)   All means of egress doors shall be readily openable from the side from
which egress is to be made without the need for keys, special knowledge, or
effort, except where the door hardware conforms to that permitted by the
International Building Code.
(702.3) (Prior Code, § 29-7-6)
   (D)   (1)   Required emergency escape openings shall be maintained in
accordance with this code in effect at the time of construction, and the
following. Required emergency escape and rescue openings shall be operational
from the inside of the room without the use of keys or tools.
      (2)   Bars, grilles, grates, or similar devices are permitted to be
placed over emergency escape and rescue openings provided the minimum net clear
opening size complies with this code that was in effect at the time of
construction and such devices shall be releasable or removable from the inside
without the use of a key, tool, or force greater than that which is required
for normal operation of the escape and rescue opening.
(702.4) (Prior Code, § 29-7-7)
§ 150.218 FIRE-RESISTANCE RATINGS.
   (A)   The required fire resistance rating of fire-resistance-rated walls,
fire stops, shaft enclosures, partitions and floors shall be maintained.
(703.1) (Prior Code, § 29-7-9)
   (B)   Required opening protectives shall be maintained in an operative
condition. All fire and smokestop doors shall be maintained in operable
condition. Fire doors and smoke barrier doors shall not be blocked or
obstructed or otherwise made inoperable.
(703.2) (Prior Code, § 29-7-10)
§ 150.219 FIRE PROTECTION SYSTEMS.
   (A)   All systems, devices, and equipment to detect a fire, actuate an
alarm, or suppress or control a fire or any combination thereof shall be
maintained in an operable condition at all times in accordance with the
International Fire Code.
(704.1) (Prior Code, § 29-7-12)
   (B)   (1)   Single or multiple-station smoke alarms shall be installed and
maintained in Groups R-2, R-3, R-4, and in dwellings not regulated in Group R
occupancies, regardless of occupant load at all of the following locations:
         (a)   On the ceiling or wall outside of each separate sleeping area in
the immediate vicinity of bedrooms;
         (b)   In each room used for sleeping purposes; and
         (c)   In each story within a dwelling unit, including basements and
cellars but not including crawl spaces and uninhabitable attics. In dwellings
or dwelling units with split levels and without an intervening door between the
adjacent levels, a smoke alarm installed on the upper level shall suffice for
the adjacent lower level provided that the lower level is less than one full
story below the upper level.
      (2)   Single or multiple-station smoke alarms shall be installed in other
groups in accordance with the International Fire Code.
(704.2) (Prior Code, § 29-7-13)
   (C)   (1)   In Group R occupancies and in dwellings not regulated as Group R
occupancies, single-station smoke alarms shall receive their primary power from
the building wiring; provided that such wiring is served from a commercial
source and shall be equipped with a battery backup. Smoke alarms shall emit a
signal when the batteries are low. Wiring shall be permanent and without a
disconnecting switch other than as required for overcurrent protection.
(704.3)
      (2)   Exception: smoke alarms are permitted to be solely battery operated
in buildings where no construction is taking place, buildings that are not
served from a commercial power source and in existing areas of buildings
undergoing alterations or repairs that do not result in the removal of interior
wall or ceiling finishes exposing the structure, unless there is an attic,
crawl space, or basement available which could provide access for building
wiring without the removal of interior finishes.
(Prior Code, § 29-7-14)
   (D)   (1)   Where more than one smoke alarm is required to be installed
within an individual dwelling unit in Group R-2, R-3, R-4, and in dwellings not
regulated as Group R occupancies, the smoke alarms shall be interconnected in
such a manner that the activation of one alarm will activate all of the alarms
in the individual unit.
      (2)   The alarm shall be clearly audible in all bedrooms over background
noise levels with all intervening doors closed.
(704.4)
      (3)   Exceptions include:
         (a)   Interconnection is not required in buildings which are not
undergoing alterations, repairs, or construction of any kind; and
         (b)   Smoke alarms in existing areas are not required to be
interconnected where alterations or repairs do not result in the removal of
interior wall or ceiling finishes exposing the structure, unless there is an
attic, crawl space, or basement available which could provide access for
interconnection without the removal of interior finishes.
(Prior Code, § 29-7-15)
CERTIFICATE OF OCCUPANCY
§ 150.230 OCCUPANCY PERMIT REQUIRED.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person, owner, or agent thereof to occupy
or use, or to permit the occupancy or use of any single- or multi-family
dwelling unit for any purpose including the movement of furniture, equipment,
or other personal property into said premises until a permit of occupancy has
been issued by the Building Inspector.
   (B)   The certificate so issued shall state that the occupancy complies with
all of the provisions of this code as far as can be determined by a visual
inspection of the premises and a review of the records.
(Prior Code, § 29-9-1) (Ord. 06-01, passed 1-3-2006)
§ 150.231 APPLICATION RESIDENTIAL.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to knowingly make a false statement on
an application for an occupancy permit for a dwelling unit as to the names,
relationships, or number of occupants who will occupy the dwelling unit.
(Prior Code, § 29-9-2) (Ord. 06-01, passed 1-3-2006) Penalty, see §
150.999
§ 150.232 ACTION ON AN APPLICATION.
   (A)   The Building Inspector shall examine, or cause to be examined, all
applications for permits within a reasonable time after filing. He or she shall
cause the premises to be inspected within seven working days after filing. If
the premises are not inspected within the seven working days, then the permit
and certificate of compliance shall be automatically issued without an
inspection. If the premises are not in compliance with this code of ordinances
and all laws and ordinances applicable thereto, the Building Inspector shall
provide the applicant with a list of defects that are not in compliance. The
defects shall be listed with as much specificity as possible.
   (B)   The owner or occupant of every dwelling unit and its premises shall
give the Building Inspector free access thereto, at all reasonable time, for
the purpose of such inspection. The dwelling unit shall be inspected each time
the occupancy changes.
   (C)   A reinspection shall be made within seven working days after a written
request for reinspection has been made to the Building Inspector. If the
premises are not reinspected within the seven working days from receipt of the
written request, then the permit and certificate of compliance shall be
automatically issued without a reinspection. If specific defects are found in
the original inspection, the Building Inspector shall not require additional
defects to be corrected that were discovered on a reinspection unless the new
defects occurred after the original inspection. There shall be a fee of $50 for
every reinspection after the first one.
(Prior Code, § 29-9-3) (Ord. 06-01, passed 1-3-2006)
§ 150.233 ISSUANCE OF PERMIT.
   If all the fees are paid and the Building Inspector is satisfied that the
premises and its occupancy are in compliance with this code of ordinances and
all laws and ordinances applicable thereto, the Building Inspector shall issue
the occupancy permit as soon as practicable.
(Prior Code, § 29-9-4) (Ord. 06-01, passed 1-3-2006)
§ 150.234 CONDITIONAL PERMIT.
   (A)   Occupancy shall be permitted on a conditional basis when, in the
judgment of the Building Inspector, practical difficulties interfere with
completing all repairs required to bring the premises into full compliance with
this Code prior to permitting occupancy. However, no conditional permit shall
be issued when there is a condition on the premises which can threaten the
health or safety of an occupant. No conditional permit shall be issued under
the provisions of this code of ordinances for premises which have been newly
constructed, newly altered, or on which a change in use is proposed unless a
certificate of use and occupancy has first been issued under the provisions of
the Building Code and/or Zoning Code.
   (B)   A temporary permit may be issued, provided all outstanding fees and
debts to the village are paid, for the purpose of cleaning, remodeling, or
rehabilitating a premises. However, an inspection and an occupancy permit must
be issued for a resident to inhabit a premises.
(Prior Code, § 29-9-5) (Ord. 06-01, passed 1-3-2006)
§ 150.235 REJECTION, SUSPENSION, OR REVOCATION OF PERMIT.
   (A)   If the application does not comply with the requirements of all
pertinent laws, the Building Inspector shall reject such application in
writing, stating the reasons therefor.
(Prior Code, § 29-9-6)
   (B)   Any permit issued shall become invalid if the occupancy is not
commenced within six months after issuance of the permit or if the occupancy is
terminated.
(Prior Code, § 29-9-7)
   (C)   The Building Inspector may revoke a permit in case of any false
statement or misrepresentation of facts in the application on which a permit
was based, or in the event a structure or part thereof is condemned pursuant to
this code.
(Prior Code, § 29-9-8)
(Ord. 06-01, passed 1-3-2006)
§ 150.999 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which no
specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to §
10.999 of this code of ordinances.
   (B)   Any owner or occupier of any premises violating §§
150.230 through
150.235 shall, upon conviction, be fined $100. Each day an occupancy continues
without complying with this chapter shall be considered a separate offense, and
is subject to a separate fine.
(Prior Code, § 29-9-9) (Ord. 06-01, passed 1-3-2006)
CHAPTER 151: MOBILE HOUSING
Section
General Provisions
   
151.001   Definitions
   
151.002   State requirements adopted by reference
   
151.003   Manufactured Housing Act adopted
   
151.004   Manufactured Home Community Code adopted
   
151.005   National safety standards
Living Requirements
   
151.020   Reserved
   
151.021   Skirting
   
151.022   Fire extinguishers
   
151.023   Inspection
   
151.024   Off-street parking
Immobilized Mobile Homes
   
151.035   Generally; classification
   
151.036   Permit; fee
   
151.037   Lot size
   
151.038   Dependent mobile homes
   
151.039   Concrete pads
   
151.040   Limit of units
Mobile Home Park Administration
   
151.055   Compliance with statutes; applicability
   
151.056   Planning
   
151.057   Local government requirements
   
151.058   Permit; required
   
151.059   Inspection of mobile home parks
   
151.060   Violation proceedings
   
151.061   Travel trailers
   
151.062   License fee
Mobile Home Park Design and Construction Requirements
   
151.075   Plan document
   
151.076   Application
   
151.077   Location
   
151.078   Roadways and parking
   
151.079   Lot size
   
151.080   Miscellaneous restrictions
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 151.001 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   AFFIDAVIT. An oath in writing, sworn before and attested by an individual
who has authority to administer an oath.
   APPLICANT. Any person making application for a license or permit.
   IMMOBILIZED MOBILE HOME.
      (1)   A mobile home served by individual utilities, resting on a
permanent perimeter foundation which extends below the established frost depth
with the wheels, tongue, and hitch removed and the home secured in compliance
with the Mobile Home Tie-Down Act, 210 ILCS 120/1 et seq.
      (2)   The foundation shall extend into the ground below the frost line so
as to attach and become a part of the real estate. Materials such as concrete,
mortared concrete block, or mortared brick extending into the ground below the
frost line shall satisfy the requirement for a permanent foundation.
(210 ILCS 115/2.10)
   LICENSE. A license certificate issued by the village allowing a person to
operate and maintain a mobile home park under the provisions of this chapter
and the rules and regulations issued hereunder.
   LICENSEE. Any person having a license or permit under this chapter.
   MOBILE HOME. A structure designed for permanent habitation and so
constructed as to permit its transport on wheels, temporarily or permanently
attached to its frame, from the place of its construction to the location or
subsequent location at which it is intended to be a permanent habitation and
designed to permit the occupancy thereof as a dwelling place for one or more
persons. MOBILE HOME shall include manufactured homes constructed after June
30, 1976, in accordance with the Federal National Manufactured Housing
Construction and Safety Standards Act of 1974, being 42 U.S.C. §§ 5401-5426;
provided that any such structure resting on a permanent foundation with wheels,
tongue, and hitch permanently removed shall not be construed as a MOBILE HOME,
but shall be an immobilized mobile home. A MOBILE HOME should not be confused
with a camping trailer or recreational vehicle.
(210 ILCS 115/2.1)
      (1)   MOBILE HOME, DEPENDENT. A mobile home which does not have a toilet
and bath or shower facilities.
(210 ILCS 115/2.3)
      (2)   MOBILE HOME, DOUBLE-WIDE. Consists of two mobile units joined at
the side into a single home, but kept on their separate chassis for repeated
transportation to a site.
      (3)   MOBILE HOME, INDEPENDENT. A mobile home which has self-contained
toilet and bath or shower facilities.
(210 ILCS 115/2.4)
   MOBILE HOME LOT. A parcel of land for the placement of a mobile home and the
exclusive use of its occupants.
   MOBILE HOME MODULE. A factory-fabricated building unit transported to a
building site, mounted on a permanent foundation supporting the outside
perimeter walls, and is designed for residential use.
   MOBILE HOME PAD. Part of an individual mobile home space or lot beneath the
mobile home, including the concrete portion of the pad.
   MOBILE HOME PARK.
      (1)   A tract of land or two or more contiguous tracts of land upon which
contain sites with the necessary utilities for two or more independent mobile
homes for permanent habitation either free of charge or for revenue purposes,
and shall include any building, structure, vehicle, or enclosure used or
intended for use as a part of the equipment of such MOBILE HOME PARK.
      (2)   Separate ownership of contiguous tracts of land shall not preclude
the tracts of land from common licensure as a mobile home park if they are
maintained and operated jointly.
      (3)   Neither an immobilized mobile home nor a motorized recreational
vehicle shall be construed as being a part of a MOBILE HOME PARK.
(210 ILCS 115/2.5)
   MOBILE HOME SALES AREA. A parcel of land used for the display, sale, and
repair of new or used mobile homes.
   MOBILE HOME SPACE. A portion of a mobile home park designed for the use or
occupancy of one mobile home.
   OWNER or OPERATOR. The licensee.
   PERMANENT HABITATION. A period of two or more months.
(210 ILCS 115/2.2)
   PERMIT. A certificate issued by the village, permitting the construction,
alteration, or reduction in number of spaces of a mobile home park under the
provisions in this code of ordinances.
   PERSON. Any individual, group of individuals, association, trust,
partnership, corporation, person doing business under an assumed name, county,
municipality, the state, or any political subdivision or department thereof or
any other entity.
   REVOCATION. To declare invalid a permit or license issued to the applicant
or licensee by the village for an indefinite period of time.
   SITE. The lot on which the mobile home is located for permanent habitation.
(210 ILCS 115/2.7)
   SPACE. Shall be synonymous with MOBILE HOME SPACE.
   SUSPENSION. To declare invalid a permit or license issued to the applicant
or licensee by the village for a temporary period of time with an expectation
of resumption.
(Prior Code, § 23-1-1)
§ 151.002 STATE REQUIREMENTS ADOPTED BY REFERENCE.
   The State Mobile Home Park Act, being 210 ILCS 115/1 et seq., and the Mobile
Home Tie-Down Act, being 210 ILCS 120/1 and the Manufactured Home Installation
Code, as found in 77 Ill. Admin. Code pt. 870, of the 210 ILCS 115/1 et seq.,
as passed, approved, and amended by the State General Assembly are hereby
adopted by the village. The applicable provisions as they pertain to mobile
homes and immobilized mobile homes shall be controlling within the corporate
limits of the village.
(Prior Code, § 23-1-2)
§ 151.003 MANUFACTURED HOUSING ACT ADOPTED.
   The Illinois Modular Dwelling and Mobile Structure Safety Act, as passed and
approved by the State General Assembly, are hereby adopted by the village, the
applicable provisions as they pertain to mobile homes and immobilized mobile
homes shall be controlling within the village.
(Prior Code, § 23-1-3)
Statutory reference:
   Related provisions, see 430 ILCS 115/1 et seq.
§ 151.004 MANUFACTURED HOME COMMUNITY CODE ADOPTED.
   The Manufactured Home Community Code, as approved by the State Department of
Public Health, being 77 Ill. Adm. Code pt. 860.10 et seq., is hereby adopted by
the village. The applicable provisions as they pertain to manufactured home
communities shall be controlling within the corporate limits.
(Prior Code, § 23-1-4)
§ 151.005 NATIONAL SAFETY STANDARDS.
   From and after the effective date of this chapter, no mobile home,
immobilized mobile home, or manufactured home shall be located in the village
unless the unit has the National Manufactured Housing Construction and Safety
Standards metal seal affixed thereto.
(Prior Code, § 23-1-5)
LIVING REQUIREMENTS
§ 151.020 RESERVED.
§ 151.021 SKIRTING.
   Skirting shall be used to conceal all underpinning, plumbing, and support
piers, whether on permanent foundation or otherwise. All skirting shall be
installed on all mobile housing units within 90 days of the placement of the
unit.
(Prior Code, § 23-1-7)
§ 151.022 FIRE EXTINGUISHERS.
   All mobile housing units located in the village shall be equipped with a
fire extinguishing apparatus capable of extinguishing all types of fires. Such
extinguishers shall be of sufficient size so that they will reasonably protect
the mobile housing units. All fire extinguishers shall be approved by the Fire
Chief or his or her designated representative prior to installation.
(Prior Code, § 23-1-8)
§ 151.023 INSPECTION.
   (A)   Each mobile housing unit located in the village shall be subject to
reasonable inspection by an official or officials designated by the Board of
Trustees, such inspection to be made if at all possible at a time mutually
convenient to the occupant of the unit and the village official or officials
authorized to make such inspection.
   (B)   If such mutually convenient time cannot be established, then such
inspection shall be made at a time set by the official or officials and by
giving the occupant of the mobile housing unit two days’ notice thereof. Notice
of such inspection shall be given by mail addressed to the occupant or by
posting such notice on the main entrance door of the unit to be inspected. When
a unit becomes vacant, it shall be inspected.
(Prior Code, § 23-1-9)
§ 151.024 OFF-STREET PARKING.
   Every owner of an immobilized mobile home shall provide for a dustless, off-
street parking area of 400 square feet.
(Prior Code, § 23-1-10)
IMMOBILIZED MOBILE HOMES
§ 151.035 GENERALLY; CLASSIFICATION.
   (A)   All immobilized mobile homes located in the village shall be
classified as real estate; therefore, it is mandatory for all persons owning,
operating, renting, or leasing an existing mobile home outside a mobile home
park to remove or cause to have removed the wheels or any other transportation
device from the mobile home.
   (B)   The owner or lessor shall permanently fix it to the ground in a manner
that conforms to the definition of an immobilized mobile home in this code of
ordinances. All existing mobile homes, when replaced, shall comply with the
immobilization provisions of this code of ordinances.
(Prior Code, § 23-2-1)
§ 151.036 PERMIT; FEE.
   All persons seeking to locate or replace a mobile home or an immobilized
mobile home outside a mobile home park shall obtain a building permit from the
Board of Trustees. A zoning occupancy permit shall be obtained from the Zoning
Administrator as specified in the Zoning Code. No utility services shall be
connected to the unit until the Zoning Administrator has issued the building
and zoning occupancy permit. The fee to locate or relocate a mobile home or an
immobilized mobile home is listed in §
160.001.
(Prior Code, § 23-2-2)
§ 151.037 LOT SIZE.
   The minimum lot size for the location of an immobilized mobile home shall be
7,000 square feet. All immobilized mobile homes shall be located in the
village, according to the requirements and restrictions of this code. They
shall not exceed 40% coverage of the lot.
(Prior Code, § 23-2-3)
§ 151.038 DEPENDENT MOBILE HOMES.
   No dependent mobile home, as defined in §
151.003, shall be permitted in the village unless in a licensed travel trailer
park. At no time shall anyone use a dependent mobile home as a permanent
residence or dwelling.
(Prior Code, § 23-2-4) Penalty, see §
10.999
§ 151.039 CONCRETE PADS.
   (A)   All immobilized mobile homes shall be placed on either a reinforced
concrete pad at least 14 feet wide by 60 feet in length, two reinforced
concrete runners four feet wide by 60 feet in length, or on concrete piers
approved by the Board of Trustees. The concrete pads shall consist of four
inches of reinforced concrete or six inches of concrete. A concrete footing is
optional.
   (B)   All piers and footings for immobilized mobile homes shall comply with
this code of ordinances.
   (C)   Expandable units shall be provided with approved piers or their
equivalent at each corner of the units.
(Prior Code, § 23-2-5)
§ 151.040 LIMIT OF UNITS.
   There shall be only one immobilized mobile home or mobile home per lot in
the village. See §
151.037 for required lot size.
(Prior Code, § 23-2-6)
MOBILE HOME PARK ADMINISTRATION
§ 151.055 COMPLIANCE WITH STATUTES; APPLICABILITY.
   (A)   Every mobile home park hereafter established in the village shall, at
a minimum, conform to the requirements of:
      (1)   “An Act to Provide for, License, and Regulate Mobile Homes and
Mobile Home Parks;”
      (2)   Rules and Regulations for Mobile Home Parks, State Department of
Public Health, Consumer Protection Division, as now or hereafter amended; and
      (3)   This code of ordinances.
   (B)   In case of conflict between any provisions of the above, the more
stringent requirement shall prevail.
   (C)   Mobile home parks may be allowed by a special use permit in accordance
with the Zoning Code.
(Prior Code, § 23-3-1)
Statutory reference:
   Related provisions, see 210 ILCS 115/1 et seq.
§ 151.056 PLANNING.
   (A)   Any person seeking to establish, operate, alter, or expand a mobile
home park shall obtain a permit to construct or a license to operate a mobile
home park.
   (B)   “Construct or operate a mobile home park,” as used in this chapter,
shall include, but not necessarily be limited to, supplying or maintaining
common water, sewer, or other utility supplies or services, or the collection
of rents directly or indirectly from two or more independent mobile homes. (All
plans shall be submitted to the Plan Commission for approval prior to the
granting of a permit.)
(Prior Code, § 23-3-2)
§ 151.057 LOCAL GOVERNMENT REQUIREMENTS.
   A permit does not relieve the applicant from complying with this code of
ordinances or other ordinances applicable thereto.
(Prior Code, § 23-3-3)
§ 151.058 PERMIT; REQUIRED.
   (A)   (1)   The Plan Commission shall review each application and plan
documents submitted. When the application and plan documents are found to be in
compliance with the Rules and Regulations for Mobile Home Parks, as promulgated
by the State Department of Public Health, the Plan Commission may recommend
that the Board of Trustees issue the proper permit to construct or alter a
mobile home park to the applicant.
      (2)   Permits shall be valid for one year from date of issue.
(Prior Code, § 23-3-4)
   (B)   (1)   Each mobile home that locates on a lot in a mobile home park
shall secure an appropriate building permit from the village.
      (2)   All future units located on the same lot shall be exempt from the
fee.
(Prior Code, § 23-3-7)
§ 151.059 INSPECTION OF MOBILE HOME PARKS.
   Upon completion of the proposed construction of a mobile home park or the
proposed alteration of a mobile home park, the applicant shall notify the Mayor
in order that an inspection of the complete facilities can be made.
(Prior Code, § 23-3-5)
§ 151.060 VIOLATION PROCEEDINGS.
   Any license granted hereunder shall be subject to revocation or suspension
by the Mayor. However, the Mayor shall first serve or cause to be served upon
the licensee a written notice in which shall be specified the way or ways in
which such licensee has failed to comply with the statutes, or any rules or
regulations promulgated by the village pertaining thereto. The notice shall
require the licensee to remove or abate such nuisance, unsanitary, or
objectionable condition, specified in such notice within five days or within a
longer period of time as may be allowed by the Mayor. If the licensee fails to
comply with the terms and conditions of the notice within the time specified or
such extended period of time, the Mayor may revoke or suspend such license.
(Prior Code, § 23-3-6) Penalty, see §
10.999
§ 151.061 TRAVEL TRAILERS.
   (A)   Travel trailers/recreational vehicles (RV) that have a current and
valid license registration shall be permitted to temporarily park in a
designated location of any mobile home park inside the village’s corporate
limits that is currently licensed and approved by the state.
   (B)   No more than one travel trailer/RV shall be permitted on any
designated lot.
   (C)   No designated travel trailer/RV lot shall be used as a permanent
residence.
   (D)   Maximum usage of any travel trailer/RV parked on a designated lot
shall not exceed 90 days without prior approval of the Mayor or his or her
designated representative.
   (E)   Every owner/operator of a mobile home park located inside the
village’s corporate limits and licensed by the state shall provide the Mayor or
his or her designated representative a detailed list of all designated travel
trailer/RV lots under his or her control.
   (F)   Each designated lot shall be inspected on a semi-annual basis at a
cost of $25 per inspection.
   (G)   No more than 20% of the lots in a mobile home park may be used for
travel trailers/RVs.
   (H)   All travel trailers/RVs in a mobile home park must be master metered.
(Prior Code, § 23-3-8) (Ord. 06-17, passed 9-18-2006)
§ 151.062 LICENSE FEE.
   The annual license fee per mobile home park shall be $50, and shall be due
and payable on or before May 1 of each year. The funds shall be placed in the
General Fund and be applied to the administrative costs of the inspections.
(Prior Code, § 23-3-21)
MOBILE HOME PARK DESIGN AND CONSTRUCTION REQUIREMENTS
§ 151.075 PLAN DOCUMENT.
   In order to obtain a permit to construct or an original license to operate a
mobile home park, the applicant shall file with the Zoning Administrator a
written application and plan documents and such plan documents shall be
prepared by a registered engineer or architect licensed to practice in the
state, with registration seal affixed. Two copies of the plan document shall
accompany the application filed with the village to obtain a permit to
construct or alter a mobile home park or an original license to operate a
mobile home park, not previously licensed by the Building and Zoning
Department. These plans shall include, but not be limited to, the design and
construction criteria set forth herein.
(Prior Code, § 23-3-10) (Ord. 2024-19, passed 12-2-2024)
§ 151.076 APPLICATION.
   (A)   Every applicant shall file with the Zoning Administrator a written
application and plan documents for the proposed construction or alteration of a
mobile home park. The plan documents shall be prepared by a registered engineer
or architect licensed to practice in the state, with registration seal affixed
to the plan.
   (B)   The application shall be completed by the applicant and the engineer
or architect and shall include:
      (1)   The full name and address of the applicant or applicants, or names
and addresses of the partners if the applicant is a partnership, or the names
and addresses of the officers if the applicant is a corporation, and the
present or last occupation of the applicant at the time of the filing of the
application. If the applicant is a corporation, a copy of the certificate of
incorporation must be filed with the application;
      (2)   The proposed method of lighting the structures and land upon which
the mobile home park is to be located;
      (3)   The plot plans of the mobile home park, building plans, and
specifications for existing buildings and facilities, and the plans and
specifications for new buildings and facilities, or the proposed alterations in
existing facilities;
      (4)   An affidavit of the applicant as to the truth of the matters
contained in the application shall be attached; and
      (5)   Each application shall be accompanied by an application fee of $50
for a permit to construct, or an application fee of $25 for a permit to alter
or increase the size of the park.
(Prior Code, § 23-3-11)
§ 151.077 LOCATION.
   (A)   Sites selected for mobile home development shall be well-drained and
free from topographical or geological hindrances and from other conditions
unfavorable to a proper residential environment. The mobile home development
shall not be located near swamps, marshes, or other breeding places of insects,
rats, and mice. When a good, natural drainage is not available, storm drainage
shall be provided and such drainage shall not endanger any water supply or
surface watercourse.
   (B)   The Zoning Administrator may conduct a side survey to ascertain that
the proposed location complied with the above requirements.
(Prior Code, § 23-3-12)
§ 151.078 ROADWAYS AND PARKING.
   (A)   All streets and driveways in every park shall be constructed in
compliance with the Subdivision Code.
   (B)   All streets in parks constructed shall have a minimum road width of 30
feet for the purpose of this chapter, and shall be considered private streets
to be maintained by the park owner or operator. If a mobile home park has more
than 50 units, a 32-foot width may be required by the Plan Commission.
   (C)   Sidewalks and walkways shall be constructed abutting a street in a
mobile home park and shall be a minimum of four feet in width; provided,
however, there shall be no minimum width requirement for sidewalks for each
individual lot. No portion of a mobile home shall block, in any way, the
pedestrian traffic on the walkways.
(Prior Code, § 23-3-13) Penalty, see §
10.999
§ 151.079 LOT SIZE.
   The minimum lot size for a mobile home pad shall be 7,500 square feet, with
a minimum frontage of 50 feet.
(Prior Code, § 23-3-17)
§ 151.080 MISCELLANEOUS RESTRICTIONS.
   (A)   No mobile home parked in a mobile home park shall be immobilized.
   (B)   Not more than one mobile home shall be parked in one space.
   (C)   No travel-trailer shall be permitted in any mobile home park for
longer than a month.
(Prior Code, § 23-3-18) Penalty, see §
10.999
CHAPTER 152: FLOODPLAINS
Section
   
152.001   Purpose
   
152.002   Definitions
   
152.003   Base flood elevation
   
152.004   Duties of the FEMA Administrator
   
152.005   Development permit
   
152.006   Preventing increased flood heights and resulting damage
   
152.007   Protecting business
   
152.008   Subdivision requirements
   
152.009   Public health and other standards
   
152.010   Variances
   
152.011   Disclaimer of liability
   
152.012   Abrogation and greater restrictions
 
   
152.999   Penalty
§ 152.001 PURPOSE.
   This Floodplain Code is enacted pursuant to the police powers granted to the
village by the State Municipal Code, (65 ILCS 5/1-2-1, 5/11-12-12, 5/11-30-2,
5/11-30-8, and 5/11-31-2) in order to accomplish the following purposes:
   (A)   To prevent unwise developments from increasing flood or drainage
hazards to others;
   (B)   To protect new buildings and major improvements to buildings from
flood damage;
   (C)   To promote and protect the public health, safety, and general welfare
of the citizens from the hazards of flooding;
   (D)   To lessen the burden on the taxpayer for flood control repairs to
public facilities and utilities, and flood rescue and relief operations;
   (E)   To maintain property values and a stable tax base by minimizing the
potential for creating blight areas;
   (F)   To make federally subsidized flood insurance available; and
   (G)   To preserve the natural characteristics and functions of watercourses
and floodplains in order to moderate flood and storm water impacts, improve
water quality, reduce soil erosion, protect aquatic and riparian habitat,
provide recreational opportunities, provide aesthetic benefits, and enhance
community and economic development.
(Prior Code, § 14-1-1)
Statutory reference:
   Related provisions, see 65 ILCS 5/1-2-1, 5/11-12-12, 5/11-30-2, 5/11-30-8,
and 5/11-31-2
§ 152.002 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   BASE FLOOD. The flood having a 1% probability of being equaled or exceeded
in any given year. The BASE FLOOD is also known as the 100-YEAR FLOOD. The BASE
FLOOD elevation at any location is as defined in §
152.003.
   BASE FLOOD ELEVATION (BFE). The elevation in relation to mean sea level of
the crest of the base flood.
   BUILDING. A structure that is principally aboveground and is enclosed by
walls and a roof including manufactured homes, prefabricated buildings, and gas
or liquid storage tanks. The term also includes recreational vehicles and
travel trailers to be installed on a site for more than 180 days per year.
   CRITICAL FACILITY. Any public or private facility which, if flooded, would
create an added dimension to the disaster or would increase the hazard to life
and health. Examples include public buildings, emergency operations and
communication centers, health care facilities and nursing homes, schools, and
toxic waste treatment, handling, or storage facilities.
   DEVELOPMENT.
      (1)   Any human-made change to real estate including, but not necessarily
limited to:
         (a)   Demolition, construction, reconstruction, repair, placement of a
building, or any structural alteration to a building;
         (b)   Substantial improvement of an existing building;
         (c)   Installation of a manufactured home on a site, preparing a site
for a manufactured home, or installing a travel trailer on a site for more than
180 days per year;
         (d)   Installation of utilities, construction of roads, bridges,
culverts, or similar projects;
         (e)   Construction or erection of levees, dams, walls, or fences;
         (f)   Drilling, mining, filling, dredging, grading, excavating,
paving, or other alterations of the ground surface;
         (g)   Storage of materials including the placement of gas and liquid
storage tanks; and
         (h)   Channel modifications or any other activity that might change
the direction, height, or velocity of flood or surface waters.
      (2)   DEVELOPMENT does not include routine maintenance of existing
buildings and facilities; resurfacing roads; or gardening, plowing, and similar
practices that do not involve filling, grading, or construction of levees.
   FEMA. Federal Emergency Management Agency.
   FLOOD. A general and temporary condition of partial or complete inundation
of normally dry land areas from the overflow, the unusual and rapid
accumulation, or the runoff of surface waters from any source.
   FLOOD FRINGE. The portion of the floodplain outside of the regulatory
floodway.
   FLOOD INSURANCE RATE MAP. A map prepared by the Federal Emergency Management
Agency that depicts the floodplain or special flood hazard area (SFHA) within a
community. This map includes insurance rate zones and may or may not depict
floodways and show base flood elevations.
   FLOODPLAIN and SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD AREA (SFHA). These terms are synonymous;
includes:
      (1)   The lands within the jurisdiction of the village that are subject
to inundation by the base flood. The FLOODPLAINS of the Mud Creek are generally
identified as such on the Flood Insurance Rate Map of the village prepared by
the Federal Emergency Management Agency and dated November 5, 2003; and
      (2)   The FLOODPLAINS of those parts of unincorporated village that are
within the extraterritorial jurisdiction of the village or that may be annexed
into the village are generally identified as such on the Flood Insurance Rate
Map prepared for St. Clair County by the Federal Emergency Management Agency
and dated November 5, 2003. FLOODPLAIN also includes those areas of known
flooding as identified by the community.
   FLOOD-PROOFING. Any combination of structural or nonstructural additions,
changes, or adjustments to structures which reduce or eliminate flood damage to
real estate, property, and their contents.
   FLOOD-PROOFING CERTIFICATE. A form published by the Federal Emergency
Management Agency that is used to certify that a building has been designed and
constructed to be structurally dry flood-proofed to the flood protection
elevation.
   FLOOD PROTECTION ELEVATION (FPE). The elevation of the base flood plus one
foot of freeboard at any given location in the floodplain.
   FLOODWAY. The portion of the floodplain required to store and convey the
base flood. The FLOODWAYS for the floodplains of the village shall be according
to the best data available from federal, state, or other sources.
   IDNR/OWR. Illinois Department of Natural Resources/Office of Water
Resources.
   MANUFACTURED HOME. A structure transportable in one or more sections, that
is built on a permanent chassis and is designed to be used with or without a
permanent foundation when connected to required utilities.
   NFIP. National Flood Insurance Program.
   REPETITIVE LOSS. Flood-related damages sustained by a structure on two
separate occasions during a ten-year period for which the cost of repairs at
the time of each such flood event on the average equals or exceeds 25% of the
market value of the structure before the damage occurred.
   SFHA. See definition of FLOODPLAIN.
   SUBSTANTIAL DAMAGE.
      (1)   Damage of any origin sustained by a structure whereby the cost of
restoring the structure to its before damage condition would equal or exceed
50% of the market value of the structure before the damage occurred regardless
of actual repair work performed.
      (2)   Volunteer labor and materials must be included in this
determination.
   SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVEMENT.
      (1)   Any reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, or improvement of a
structure, the cost of which equals or exceeds 50% of the market value of the
structure before the improvement or repair is started.
      (2)   SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVEMENT is considered to occur when the first
alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of the
building commences, whether or not that alteration affects the external
dimensions of the structure. The term does not, however, include either:
         (a)   Any project for improvement of a structure to comply with
existing state or local health, sanitary, or safety code specifications which
are solely necessary to assure safe living conditions; or
         (b)   Any alteration of a structure listed on the National Register of
Historic Places or the State Register of Historic Places.
   TRAVEL TRAILER or RECREATIONAL VEHICLE. A vehicle which is:
      (1)   Built on a single chassis;
      (2)   Four-hundred square feet or less in size;
      (3)   Designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a light
truck; and
      (4)   Designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling but as
temporary living quarters for recreational, camping, travel, or seasonal use.
(Prior Code, § 14-1-2)
§ 152.003 BASE FLOOD ELEVATION.
   (A)   This chapter protection standard is the base flood.
   (B)   The best available base flood elevation data are listed below.
Whenever a party disagrees with the best available data, the party shall
finance the detailed engineering study needed to replace the existing data with
better data and submit it to the FEMA and IDNR/OWR for approval prior any
development of the site.
      (1)   The base flood elevation for the floodplains of Mud Creek shall be
according to the best data available from federal, state, or other sources.
Should no other data exist, an engineering study must be financed to determine
base flood elevations.
      (2)   The base flood elevation for each floodplain delineated as an AH
Zone or AO Zone shall be that elevation (or depth) delineated on the Flood
Insurance Rate Map of the village.
      (3)   (a)   The base flood elevation for each of the remaining
floodplains delineated as an A Zone on the Flood Insurance Rate Map of the
village shall be according to the best data available from federal, state, or
other sources.
         (b)   Should no other data exist, an engineering study must be
financed to determine base flood elevations.
      (4)   The base flood elevation for the floodplains of those parts of the
unincorporated county that are within the extraterritorial jurisdiction of the
village, or that may be annexed into the village, shall be as delineated on the
100-year flood profiles of the county-wide flood insurance study of the county
prepared by the Federal Emergency Management Agency and dated November 5, 2003.
(Prior Code, § 14-1-3)
§ 152.004 DUTIES OF THE FEMA ADMINISTRATOR.
   The FEMA Administrator shall be responsible for the general administration
of this chapter and ensure that all development activities within the
floodplains under the jurisdiction of the village meet the requirements of this
chapter. Specifically, the FEMA Administrator shall:
   (A)   Process development permits in accordance with §
152.005;
   (B)   Ensure that all development in a floodway (or a floodplain with no
delineated floodway meets the damage prevention requirements of §
152.006;
   (C)   Ensure that the building protection requirements for all buildings
subject to §
152.007 are met and maintain a record of the “as-built” elevation of the lowest
floor (including basement) or flood-proof certificate;
   (D)   Assure that all subdivisions and annexations meet the requirements of
§
152.008;
   (E)   Ensure that water supply and waste disposal systems meet the Public
Health standard of §
152.009;
   (F)   If a variance is requested, ensure that the requirements of §
152.010 are met and maintain documentation of any variances granted;
   (G)   Inspect all development projects and take any and all actions outlined
in §
152.012 as necessary to ensure compliance with this chapter;
   (H)   Assure that applicants are aware of and obtain any and all other
required local, state, and federal permits;
   (I)   Notify IDNR/OWR and any neighboring communities prior to any
alteration or relocation of a watercourse;
   (J)   Provide information and assistance to citizens upon request about
permit procedures and floodplain construction techniques;
   (K)   Cooperate with state and federal floodplain management agencies to
coordinate base flood data and to improve the administration of this chapter;
   (L)   Maintain for public inspection base flood data, floodplain maps,
copies of state and federal permits, and documentation of compliance for
development activities subject to this chapter;
   (M)   Perform site inspections and make substantial damage determinations
for structures within the floodplain; and
   (N)   Maintain the accuracy of floodplain maps, including notifying IDNR/OWR
and/or submitting information to FEMA within six months whenever a modification
of the floodplain may change the base flood elevation or result in a change to
the floodplain map.
(Prior Code, § 14-1-4)
§ 152.005 DEVELOPMENT PERMIT.
   (A)   No person, firm, corporation, or governmental body not exempted by law
shall commence any development in the floodplain without first obtaining a
development permit from the FEMA Administrator. The FEMA Administrator shall
not issue a development permit if the proposed development does not meet the
requirements of this chapter.
   (B)   The application for development permit shall be accompanied by:
      (1)   Drawings of the site, drawn to scale showing property line
dimensions;
      (2)   Existing grade elevations and all changes in grade resulting from
excavation or filling;
      (3)   The location and dimensions of all buildings and additions to
buildings;
      (4)   The elevation of the lowest floor (including basements) of all
proposed buildings subject to the requirements of §
152.007 of this chapter; and
      (5)   Cost of project or improvements as estimated by a licensed engineer
or architect. A signed estimate by a contractor may also meet this requirement.
   (C)   (1)   Upon receipt of an application for a development permit, the
FEMA Administrator shall compare the elevation of the site to the base flood
elevation. Any development located on land that can be shown by survey data to
be higher than the current base flood elevation and which has not been filled
after the date of the site’s first Flood Insurance Rate Map is not in the
floodplain and therefore not subject to the requirements of this chapter.
      (2)   Conversely, any development located on land shown to be below the
base flood elevation and hydraulically connected, but not shown on the current
Flood Insurance Rate Map is subject to the provisions of this chapter. The FEMA
Administrator shall maintain documentation of the existing ground elevation at
the development site and certification that this ground elevation existed prior
to the date of the site’s first Flood Insurance Rate Map identification.
(Prior Code, § 14-1-5)
§ 152.006 PREVENTING INCREASED FLOOD HEIGHTS AND RESULTING DAMAGE.
   Within all floodplains where a floodway has not been delineated, the
following standards shall apply.
   (A)   Except as provided in §
152.006(B), no development shall be allowed which, acting in combination with
existing and anticipated development, will cause any increase in flood heights
or velocities or threat to public health and safety. The following specific
development activities shall be considered as meeting this requirement:
      (1)   Barge fleeting facilities meeting the conditions of IDOT/DWR
Statewide Permit No. 3;
      (2)   Aerial utility crossings meeting the conditions of IDOT/DWR
Statewide Permit No. 4;
      (3)   Minor boat docks meeting the conditions of IDOT/DWR Statewide
Permit No. 5;
      (4)   Minor, non-obstructive activities meeting the conditions of IDOT/
DWR Statewide Permit No. 6;
      (5)   Outfall structures and drainage ditch outlets meeting the
conditions of IDOT/DWR Statewide Permit No. 7;
      (6)   Underground pipeline and utility crossings meeting the conditions
of IDOT/DWR Statewide Permit No. 8;
      (7)   Bank stabilization projects meeting the conditions of IDOT/DWR
Statewide Permit No. 9;
      (8)   Accessory structures and additions to existing residential
buildings meeting the conditions of IDOT/DWR Statewide Permit No. 10;
      (9)   Minor maintenance dredging activities meeting the conditions of
IDOT/DWR Statewide Permit No. 11;
      (10)   Bridge and culvert replacement structures and bridge widenings
meeting the conditions of IDNR/OWR Statewide Permit No. 12;
      (11)   Temporary construction activities meeting the conditions of IDNR/
OWR Statewide Permit No. 13; and
      (12)   Any development determined by IDOT/DWR to be located entirely
within a flood fringe area.
   (B)   Other development activities not listed in division (A) above may be
permitted only if:
      (1)   A permit has been issued for the work by IDOT/DWR (or written
documentation is provided that an IDOT/DWR permit is not required); and
      (2)   Sufficient data has been provided to FEMA when necessary, and
approval obtained from FEMA for a revision of the regulatory map and base flood
elevation.
(Prior Code, § 14-1-6)
Statutory reference:
   Related provisions, see 615 ILCS 5/5 through 29a
§ 152.007 PROTECTING BUSINESS.
   (A)   In addition to the damage prevention requirements of §
152.006, all buildings located in the floodplain shall be protected from flood
damage below the flood protection elevation. This building protection
requirement applies to the following situations:
      (1)   Construction or placement of a new building valued at more than
$1,000, or 70 square feet;
      (2)   Substantial improvements made to an existing building. This
alteration shall be figured cumulatively beginning with any alteration which
has taken place subsequent to the adoption of this chapter;
      (3)   Repairs made to a substantially damaged building. These repairs
shall be figured cumulatively beginning with any repairs which have taken place
subsequent to the adoption of this chapter;
      (4)   Structural alterations made to an existing building that increase
the floor area by more than 20%;
      (5)   Installing a manufactured home on a new site or a new manufactured
home on an existing site (the building protection requirements do not apply to
returning a manufactured home to the same site it lawfully occupied before it
was removed to avoid flood damage);
      (6)   Installing a travel trailer or recreational vehicle on a site for
more than 180 days per year; and
      (7)   Repetitive loss to an existing building as defined in §
152.002.
   (B)   Residential or non-residential buildings can meet the building
protection requirements by one of the following methods:
      (1)   The building may be constructed on permanent land fill in
accordance with the following:
         (a)   The lowest floor (including basement) shall be at or above the
flood protection elevation;
         (b)   The fill shall be placed in layers no greater than six inches
before compaction and should extend at least ten feet beyond the foundation
before sloping below the flood protection elevation;
         (c)   The fill shall be protected against erosion and scour during
flooding by vegetative cover, riprap, or other structural measure;
         (d)   The fill shall be composed of rock or soil and not incorporated
debris or refuse materials; and
         (e)   The fill shall not adversely affect the flow of surface drainage
from or onto neighboring properties and, when necessary, storm water management
techniques such as swales or basins shall be incorporated.
      (2)   The building may be elevated in accordance with the following:
         (a)   The building or improvements shall be elevated on stilts, piles,
walls, or other foundation that is permanently open to flood waters;
         (b)   The lowest floor and all electrical, heating, ventilating,
plumbing, and air conditioning equipment and utility meters shall be located at
or above the flood protection elevation;
         (c)   If walls are used, all enclosed areas below the flood protection
elevation shall address hydrostatic pressures by allowing the automatic entry
and exit of flood waters. Designs must either be certified by a registered
professional engineer or by having a minimum of one permanent opening on each
wail no more than one foot above grade. The openings shall provide a total net
area of not less than one square inch for every one square foot of enclosed
area subject to flooding below the base flood elevation;
         (d)   The foundation and supporting members shall be anchored,
designed, and certified so as to minimize exposure to hydrodynamic forces such
as current, waves, ice, and floating debris;
         (e)   The finished interior grade shall not be less than the finished
exterior grade;
         (f)   All structural components below the flood protection elevation
shall be constructed of materials resistant to flood damage;
         (g)   Water and sewer pipes, electrical, and telephone lines,
submersible pumps, and other service facilities may be located below the flood
protection elevation provided they are water-proofed; and
         (h)   The area below the flood protection elevation shall be used
solely for parking or building access and not later modified or occupied as
habitable space.
   (C)   Manufactured homes or travel trailers to be permanently installed on
site shall be:
      (1)   Elevated to or above the flood protection elevation; and
      (2)   Anchored to resist flotation, collapse, or lateral movement by
being tied down in accordance with the rules and regulations for the State
Mobile Home Tie-Down Act, being 210 ILCS 115/1 et seq., and the Manufactured
Home installation Code as found in 77 I.A.C. 870.
   (D)   Travel trailers and recreational vehicle on site for more than 180
days shall meet the elevation requirements of §
152.007(C) unless the following conditions are met:
      (1)   The vehicle must be either self-propelled or towable by a light
duty truck. The hitch must remain on the vehicle at all times;
      (2)   The vehicle must not be attached to external structures such as
decks and porches;
      (3)   The vehicle must be designed solely for recreation, camping,
travel, or seasonal use rather than as a permanent dwelling;
      (4)   The vehicles largest horizontal projections must be no larger than
400 square feet; and
      (5)   The vehicle’s wheels must remain on axles and inflated;
      (6)   Air conditioning units must be attached to the frame so as to be
safe for movement out of the floodplain;
      (7)   Propane tanks, electrical, and sewage connections must be quick-
disconnect and above the 100-year flood elevation;
      (8)   The vehicle must be licensed and titled as a recreational vehicle
or park model; and
      (9)   The vehicle must be either:
         (a)   Entirely supported by jacks rather than blocks; or
         (b)   Have a hitch jack permanently mounted, have the tires touching
the ground, and be supported by blocks in a manner that will allow the blocks
to be easily removed by use of the hitch jack.
   (E)   (1)   Non-residential buildings may be structurally flood-proofed (in
lieu of elevation); provided, a registered professional engineer or architect
certifies that:
         (a)   Below the flood protection elevation, the structure and
attendant utility facilities are water-tight and capable of resisting the
effects of the base flood;
         (b)   The building design accounts for flood velocities, duration,
rate of rise, hydrostatic and hydrodynamic forces, the effects of buoyancy, and
the impact from debris and ice; and
         (c)   Flood-proofing measures will be incorporated into the building
design and operable without human intervention and without an outside source of
electricity.
      (2)   Levees, berms, floodwalls, and similar works are not considered
flood-proofing for the purpose of this section.
   (F)   Garages or sheds constructed ancillary to a residential use may be
permitted; provided, the following conditions are met:
      (1)   The garage or shed must be non-habitable;
      (2)   The garage or shed must be used only for the storage of vehicles
and tools and cannot be modified later into another use;
      (3)   The garage or shed must be located outside of the floodway;
      (4)   The garage or shed must be on a single-family lot and be accessory
to an existing principal structure on the same lot;
      (5)   Below the base flood elevation, the garage or shed must be built of
materials not susceptible to flood damage;
      (6)   All utilities, plumbing, heating, air conditioning, and electrical
must be elevated above the flood protection elevation;
      (7)   The garage or shed must have at least one permanent opening on each
wall no more than one foot above grade with one square inch of opening for
every square foot of floor area;
      (8)   The garage or shed must be less than $7,500 in market value or
replacement cost, whichever is greater, or less than 500 square feet;
      (9)   The structure shall be anchored to resist flotation and
overturning;
      (10)   All flammable or toxic materials (gasoline, paint, insecticides,
fertilizers, and the like) shall be stored above the flood protection
elevation; and
      (11)   The lowest floor elevation should be documented and the owner
advised of the flood insurance implications.
   (G)   A building may be constructed with a crawlspace located below the
flood protection elevation; provided, the following conditions are met:
      (1)   The building must be designed and adequately anchored to resist
flotation, collapse, and lateral movement of the structure resulting from
hydrodynamic and hydrostatic loads, including the effects of buoyancy;
      (2)   Any enclosed area below the flood protection elevation shall have
openings that equalize hydrostatic pressures by allowing for the automatic
entry and exit of floodwaters. A minimum of one opening on each wall having a
total net area of not less than one square inch per one square foot of enclosed
area. The openings shall be no more than one foot above grade;
      (3)   The interior grade of the crawlspace below the flood protection
elevation must not be more than two feet below the lowest adjacent exterior
grade;
      (4)   The interior height of the crawlspace measured from the interior
grade of the crawl to the top of the foundation wall must not exceed four feet
at any point;
      (5)   An adequate drainage system must be installed to remove floodwaters
from the interior area of the crawlspace within a reasonable period of time
after a flood event;
      (6)   Portions of the building below the flood protection elevation must
be constructed with materials resistant to flood damage; and
      (7)   Utility systems within the crawlspace must be elevated above the
flood protection elevation.
(Prior Code, § 14-1-7)
§ 152.008 SUBDIVISION REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   The Board of Trustees shall take into account flood hazards, to the
extent that they are known, in all official actions related to land management
use and development.
   (B)   New subdivisions, manufactured home parks, annexation agreements,
planned unit developments, and additions to manufactured home parks and
subdivisions shall meet the damage prevention and building protection standards
of §§
152.006 and
152.007. Any proposal for such development shall include the following data:
      (1)   The base flood elevation and the boundary of the floodplain (where
the base flood elevation is not available from an existing study, the applicant
shall be responsible for calculating the base flood elevation);
      (2)   The boundary of the floodway when available; and
      (3)   A signed statement by a Registered Professional Engineer that the
proposed plat or plan accounts for changes in the drainage of surface waters in
accordance with the Plat Act, being 765 ILCS 205/0.01 et seq.
(Prior Code, § 14-1-8) Penalty, see §
152.999
Statutory reference:
   Related provisions, see 765 ILCS 205/2
§ 152.009 PUBLIC HEALTH AND OTHER STANDARDS.
   (A)   Public health standards must be met for all floodplain development. In
addition to the requirements of §§
152.006 and
152.007, the following standards apply.
      (1)   No development in the floodplain shall include locating or storing
chemicals, explosives, buoyant materials, flammable liquids, pollutants, or
other hazardous or toxic materials below the flood protection elevation unless
such materials are stored in a flood-proofed and anchored storage tank and
certified by a professional engineer or flood-proofed building constructed
according to the requirements of §
152.007.
      (2)   Public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, and electric
shall be located and constructed to minimize or eliminate flood damage.
      (3)   Public sanitary sewer systems and water supply systems shall be
located and constructed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of flood waters
into the systems and discharges from the systems into flood waters.
      (4)   New and replacement on-site sanitary sewer lines or waste disposal
systems shall be located and constructed to avoid impairment to them or
contamination from them during flooding. Manholes or other aboveground openings
located below the flood protection elevation shall be water-tight.
      (5)   Critical facilities shall be protected to the 500-year flood
elevation. In addition, all ingress and egress from any critical facility must
be protected to the 500-year flood elevation.
   (B)   All other activities defined as development shall be designed so as
not to alter flood flows or increase potential flood damages.
(Prior Code, § 14-1-9) Penalty, see §
152.999
§ 152.010 VARIANCES.
   (A)   Whenever the standards of this chapter place undue hardship on a
specific development proposal, the applicant may apply to the Zoning Board for
a variance. The Zoning Board shall review the applicant’s request for a
variance and shall submit its recommendation to the Board of Trustees. The
Board of Trusees may attach such conditions to granting of a variance as it
deems necessary to further the intent of this code.
   (B)   No variance shall be granted unless the applicant demonstrates that
all of the following conditions are met:
      (1)   The development activity cannot be located outside the floodplain;
      (2)   An exceptional hardship would result if the variance were not
granted;
      (3)   The relief requested is the minimum necessary;
      (4)   There will be no additional threat to public health or safety, or
creation of a nuisance;
      (5)   There will be no additional public expense for flood protection,
rescue or relief operations, policing, or repairs to roads, utilities, or other
public facilities;
      (6)   The applicant’s circumstances are unique and do not establish a
pattern inconsistent with the intent of the NFIP; and
      (7)   All other required state and federal permits have been obtained.
   (C)   The Zoning Board shall notify an applicant in writing that a variance
from the requirements of the building protection standards of §
152.007 would lessen the degree of protection to a building will:
      (1)   Result in increased premium rates for flood insurance up to $25 per
$100 of insurance coverage;
      (2)   Increase the risks to life and property; and
      (3)   Require that the applicant proceed with knowledge of these risks
and that the applicant acknowledge in writing the assumption of the risk and
liability.
   (D)   Variances to the building protection requirements of §
152.007 requested in connection with the reconstruction, repair, or alteration
of a site or building included on the National Register of Historic Places or
the State Register of Historic Places may be granted using criteria more
permissive than the requirements of § 14-1-19(A)(l-5).
(Prior Code, § 14-1-10)
§ 152.011 DISCLAIMER OF LIABILITY.
   The degree of protection required by this code of ordinances is considered
reasonable for regulatory purposes and Is based on available information
derived from engineering and scientific methods of study. Larger floods may
occur or flood heights may be increased by human-made or natural causes. This
chapter does not imply that development either inside or outside of the
floodplain will be free from flooding or damage. This chapter does not create
liability on the part of the village or any officer or employee thereof for any
flood damage that results from reliance on this chapter or any administrative
decision made lawfully thereunder.
(Prior Code, § 14-1-11)
§ 152.012 ABROGATION AND GREATER RESTRICTIONS.
   This chapter repeals and replaces other ordinances adopted by the Board of
Trustees to fulfill the requirements of the National Flood Insurance Program.
However, this chapter does not repeal the original resolution or ordinance
adopted to achieve eligibility in the National Flood Insurance Program. Nor
does this chapter repeal, abrogate, or impair any existing easements.
(Prior Code, § 14-1-13)
§ 152.999 PENALTY.
   (A)   Failure to obtain a permit for development In the floodplain or
failure to comply with the conditions of a permit or a variance shall be deemed
to be a violation of this chapter. Upon due investigation, the Village Attorney
may determine that a violation of the minimum standards of this chapter exist.
The Village Attorney shall notify the owner in writing of such violation.
   (B)   If such owner fails, after ten days’ notice, to correct the violation:
      (1)   The village may make application to the circuit court for an
injunction requiring conformance with this chapter or make such other order as
the court deems necessary to secure compliance with this chapter;
      (2)   Any person who violates this chapter shall, upon conviction
thereof, be fined not less than $50, nor more than $500 for each offense;
      (3)   A separate offense shall be deemed committed upon each day during
or on which a violation occurs or continues; and
      (4)   The village shall record a notice of violation on the title to the
property.
   (C)   The village shall inform the owner that any such violation is
considered a willful act to increase flood damages and therefore may cause
coverage by a standard flood insurance policy to be suspended.
   (D)   Nothing herein shall prevent the village from taking such other lawful
action to prevent or remedy any violations. All costs connected therewith shall
accrue to the person or persons responsible.
(Prior Code, § 14-1-12)
CHAPTER 153: SUBDIVISIONS
Section
General Provisions
   
153.001   Title
   
153.002   Purpose
   
153.003   Jurisdiction
   
153.004   Instances when plats will not be required
   
153.005   Interpretation
   
153.006   Disclaimer of liability
   
153.007   Language and definitions
   
153.008   Violations
Administration
   
153.020   Enforcement officers; duties
   
153.021   Subdivision variances
   
153.022   Review of Plan Commission
   
153.023   Action by Board of Trustees; variance standards
   
153.024   Amendments
   
153.025   Schedule of fees; payment
Plats and Plans; Preliminary Plats
   
153.040   General procedure
   
153.041   Filing procedure; exception
   
153.042   Information required
   
153.043   Plan Commission action
   
153.044   Review by Board of Trustees; time constraints
   
153.045   Rights and privileges of subdivider
Improvement Plans
   
153.060   Submission of plans
   
153.061   Information required
   
153.062   Inspections required
   
153.063   Filing as-built records
Completion of Required Information
   
153.075   Completion prior to acceptance
   
153.076   Forms of assurance; term and extensions
   
153.077   Amount of bond or deposit
   
153.078   Eligible sureties
   
153.079   Release of bond/escrow deposit
   
153.080   Failure to complete improvements
Final Plats
   
153.095   Generally
   
153.096   Filing; time limits
   
153.097   Information required
   
153.098   Certificates required
   
153.099   Administrative review; advisory report
   
153.100   Action by Board of Trustees
   
153.101   Changes in approved final plats
Maintenance and Acceptance of Improvements
   
153.115   Subdivider’s responsibility of improvements
   
153.116   Maintenance bond
   
153.117   Acceptance of improvements
   
153.118   Vacation of plats
Street Design and Improvement Standards
   
153.130   Applicability; suitability for development
   
153.131   Lot requirements
   
153.132   Comprehensive Plan integration
   
153.133   Right-of-way and pavement widths; excess required
   
153.134   Topographical considerations
   
153.135   Through traffic discouraged
   
153.136   Limited access to arterials
   
153.137   Street design specifications
   
153.138   Dead-end streets
   
153.139   Intersections
   
153.140   Reverse curves
   
153.141   Improvements to existing streets
   
153.142   Improvement standards
   
153.143   Curb and gutter
   
153.144   Blocks
   
153.145   Sidewalks
   
153.146   Streetlights
   
153.147   Street name signs
   
153.148   Utilities
   
153.149   Water facilities
   
153.150   Sanitary sewers
   
153.151   Drainage and storm sewers
Guidelines
   
153.165   Applicability
   
153.166   Affidavit of disclosure of property interest
   
153.167   Method of evaluation
   
153.168   Detention of differential runoff
   
153.169   Flows from upstream areas
   
153.170   Facilities in floodplains
   
153.171   Land credit for detention areas
Design Criteria
   
153.185   General requirements; references
   
153.186   Storm water runoff
   
153.187   Hydraulic considerations for detention storage
   
153.188   Plan requirements
   
153.189   Construction alternatives
   
153.190   Inspection, maintenance, and acceptance
 
   
153.999   Penalty
   
Appendix A: Street diagrams
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 153.001 TITLE.
   These regulations shall be known as and may be referred to as “the Land
Subdivision and Development Code” or the “Subdivision Code.”
(Prior Code, § 34-1-1)
§ 153.002 PURPOSE.
   (A)   In accordance with state law (65 ILCS 5/11-12-5, 5/11-12-8, and 5/11-
12-12 and 765 ILCS 205/1 et seq.) this chapter regulates the subdivision and
development of land in order to implement the Comprehensive Plan and Official
Map duly adopted by the village.
   (B)   This chapter assists in achieving the following specific objectives:
      (1)   To preserve, protect, and promote the public health, safety, and
welfare;
      (2)   To provide a pleasant living environment by, furthering the orderly
and efficient layout and use of land and by facilitating aesthetic urban
design;
      (3)   To establish accurate legal records, to avoid development in
wetland areas, and to avoid legal and other problems by requiring that
subdivided land be properly monumented and recorded;
      (4)   To conserve and increase the value of land, improvements, and
buildings throughout the village;
      (5)   To preserve the natural beauty and topography of the village to the
maximum feasible extent, including preservation of such features as stands of
trees, streams, significant archaeological sites, and historical landmarks;
      (6)   To provide adequate light, air, and privacy for all residents of
new developments by preventing undue concentration of population;
      (7)   To protect against injury or damage caused by fire, pollution,
flooding, storm water runoff, or erosion and sedimentation;
      (8)   To provide safe and convenient access to new developments and to
avoid traffic congestion and unnecessary public expenditures by requiring the
proper location, design, and construction of streets and sidewalks;
      (9)   To provide an environment whereby the cost of installing and
maintaining adequate water mains, sanitary sewers, storm water sewers, and
other utilities and services can be kept at a minimum; and
      (10)   To ensure that adequate parks, schools, and similar facilities can
be made available to serve the residents.
(Prior Code, § 34-1-2)
§ 153.003 JURISDICTION.
   The provisions of this chapter shall apply to all planned developments
whether residential, commercial, or otherwise in nature, and to any other
developments, whether a plat is required or not under the law, statutes,
ordinances, or regulations of the governmental body or agency having
jurisdiction or control, and regardless of whether the same is labeled a
subdivision or not, it being the intent of this chapter to apply to all types
of development, both within the village and to areas lying within one and one-
half miles of the corporate limits of the village.
(Prior Code, § 34-1-3)
§ 153.004 INSTANCES WHEN PLATS WILL NOT BE REQUIRED.
   The provision of these regulations do not apply and no plat is required in
any of the following instances:
   (A)   The division or subdivision of land into parcels or tracts of five
acres or more in size which does not involve any new streets or easements of
access or add special utility easements;
   (B)   The division of lots or blocks of less than one acre in any recorded
subdivision which does not involve any new streets or easements of access or
add special utility easements;
   (C)   The sale or exchange of parcels of land between owners of adjoining
and contiguous land;
   (D)   The conveyancy of parcels of land or interests therein for use as a
right-of-way for railroads or other public utility facilities and other
pipelines which does not involve any new streets or easements of access or add
special utility easements;
   (E)   The conveyancy of land for highway or other public purposes or grants
or conveyance relating to the dedication of land for public use or instruments
relating to the vacation of land impressed with a public use;
   (F)   Conveyance made to correct description in prior conveyances;
   (G)   The sale or exchange of parcels or tracts of land following the
division into no more than two parts of a particular parcel or tract of land
recorded on or before July 17, 1959, and not involving any new streets or
easements of access or add special utility easements;
   (H)   The conveyance of land owned by a railroad or other public utility
which does not involve any new streets or easements of access or add special
utility easements; or
   (I)   The sale of a single lot of less than five acres from a larger tract
when a survey is made by a registered surveyor; provided, however, that this
exemption shall not apply to the sale of any subsequent lots from the same
larger tract of land, as determined by the dimensions and configuration of the
larger tract existing as of October 1, 1973.
(Prior Code, § 34-1-4)
§ 153.005 INTERPRETATION.
   (A)   Every provision of this chapter shall be construed liberally in favor
of the village, and every regulation set forth herein shall be considered the
minimum requirement for the promotion of the public health, safety, and
welfare.
   (B)   Whenever the requirements of this chapter differ from those of any
statute, lawfully adopted ordinance or regulation, easement, covenant, or deed
restriction, the more stringent requirement shall prevail. Thus, in accordance
with state law 65 ILCS 5/11-12-11.
   (C)   Whenever this chapter imposes higher standards they shall supersede
the county regulations in the unincorporated territory located within the
village’s subdivision jurisdiction.
(Prior Code, § 34-1-5) (Ord. 06-07, passed 6-19-2006)
§ 153.006 DISCLAIMER OF LIABILITY.
   (A)   Except as may be provided otherwise by statute or ordinance, no
officer, board member, agent, or employee of the village shall render himself
or herself personally liable for any damage that may accrue to persons or
property as a result of any act required or permitted in the discharge of his
or her duties under this chapter.
   (B)   Any suit brought against any officer, board member, agent, or employee
of the village, as a result of any act required or permitted in the discharge
of his or her duties under this chapter, shall be defended by the Village
Attorney until the final determination of the legal proceedings.
(Prior Code, § 34-1-6)
Statutory reference:
   Local Governmental and Governmental Employees Tort Immunity Act, see 745
ILCS 10/1-101
§ 153.007 LANGUAGE AND DEFINITIONS.
   (A)   In construing the intended meaning of terminology used in this
chapter, the following rules shall be observed:
      (1)   Unless the context clearly indicates otherwise, words and phrases
shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them in division (B) below;
terms not defined in division (B) below shall have the meanings respectively
ascribed to them in the village’s Zoning Code; if any term is not defined
either in divisions (B) below or in the Zoning Code, said term shall have its
standard English dictionary meaning;
      (2)   Words denoting the masculine gender shall be deemed to include the
feminine and neuter genders;
      (3)   Words used in the present tense shall include the future tense;
      (4)   Words used in the singular number shall include the plural number,
and vice versa;
      (5)   The word “shall” is mandatory; the word “may” is discretionary;
      (6)   Captions (e.g., titles of sections, divisions, and the like) are
intended merely to facilitate general reference and in no way limit the
substantive application of the provisions set forth thereunder;
      (7)   References to sections shall be deemed to include all sections
within that section; but a reference to a particular section designates only
that section; and
      (8)   A general term that follows or is followed by enumerations of
specific terms shall not be limited to the enumerated class unless expressly
limited.
(Prior Code, § 34-2-1)
   (B)   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
      ADMINISTRATOR. The official appointed by the Mayor and the Board of
Trustees to administer the Subdivision and Development Code.
      ALLEY. A public right-of-way which affords a secondary means of vehicular
access to the side or rear of premises that front on a nearby street, and which
may be used for utility purposes.
      AMENDMENT. A change in the provisions of this chapter, properly effected
in accordance with state law and the procedures set forth herein.
      AREA, BUILDING. The total of areas taken on a horizontal plane at the
main grade level of the principal building and all accessory buildings
exclusive of unenclosed patios, terraces, and steps.
      AREA, GROSS. The entire area within the lot lines of the property
proposed for subdivision/development, including any areas to be dedicated/
reserved for street and alley rights-of-way and for public uses.
      AREA, NET. The entire area within the boundary lines of the territory
proposed for subdivision, less the area to be dedicated for street and alley
rights-of-way and public use.
      ARTERIAL STREET. A street designed or utilized primarily for high
vehicular speeds or for heavy volumes of traffic on a continuous route with
intersections at grade, and on which traffic control devices are used to
expedite the safe movement of through traffic.
      BARRIER (NATURAL OR ARTIFICIAL). Any street, highway, river, pond, canal,
railroad, levee, embankment, or screening by a fence or hedge.
      BLOCK. An area of land entirely bounded by streets, highways, barriers,
or rights-of-ways (except alleys, pedestrian ways, or exterior boundaries of a
subdivision unless exterior boundary is a street, highway, or R.O.W.) or
bounded by a combination of streets, public parks, cemeteries, railroad rights-
of-way, waterways, or corporate boundary lines.
      BUILDING. Any structure, whether temporary, semi-permanent, or permanent,
designed, or intended for the support, enclosure, shelter, or protection of
persons or property.
      BUILDING LINE. See the definition of SETBACK LINE.
      CATCH BASIN. A receptacle, located where a street gutter opens into a
storm sewer, designed to retain matter that would not easily pass through the
storm sewer.
      CENTERLINE. Includes:
         (a)   The centerline of any right-of-way having a uniform width;
         (b)   The original centerline, where a right-of-way has been widened
irregularly; or
         (c)   The new centerline, whenever a road has been relocated.
      CENTERLINE OFFSET. The distance between the centerlines of two roughly
parallel streets, measured along the third street with which both said parallel
streets intersect.
      CLUSTER DEVELOPMENT. A subdivision planned and constructed so as to group
housing units into relatively dense patterns while providing a unified network
of open space and wooded areas, and meeting the requirements of the Subdivision
Code and the Zoning Code.
      COLLECTOR STREET. A street which carries or is proposed to carry
intermediate volumes of traffic from local streets to arterial streets and
which may or may not be continuous.
      COMMON LAND.
         (a)   That land set aside for open space or recreational use for the
owners of the lots of a subdivision, which land is conveyed by the developer in
fee simple absolute title by warranty to trustees whose trust indenture shall
provide that said COMMON LAND be used for the sole benefit, use, and enjoyment
of the lot owners present and future.
         (b)   No lot owner shall have the right to convey his or her interest
in the COMMON LAND except as an incident of the ownership of a regularly
platted lot.
      COMPREHENSIVE PLAN.
         (a)   The plan or any portion thereof adopted by the Board of Trustees
to guide and coordinate the physical and economic development of the village.
         (b)   The village’s COMPREHENSIVE PLAN may include, but is not limited
to, plans and programs regarding the location, character, and extent of
highways, bridges, public buildings, or uses, utilities, schools, residential,
commercial, or industrial land uses, parks, drainage facilities, and the like.
      CROSS-SLOPE. The degree of inclination measured across a right-of-way
rather than in the direction traffic moves on said right-of-way.
      CUL-DE-SAC. A short minor local street having only one outlet for
vehicular traffic and having the other end permanently terminated by a turn-
around for vehicles; the term may also be used to refer solely to said turn-
around.
      CURB AND GUTTER, INTEGRAL. The rim forming the edge of a street plus the
channel for leading off surface water, constructed of concrete as a single
facility.
      DEDICATE. To transfer the ownership of a right-of-way, parcel of land, or
improvement to the village or other appropriate government entity without
compensation.
      DENSITY, GROSS. The total number of dwelling units divided by the total
project area, expressed as gross dwelling units per acre.
      DENSITY, NET. The total number of dwelling units divided by the net
acreage. See the definition of “area, net.”
      DESIGN. The arrangement of uses on the land and the arrangement of
easements, lots, and rights-of-way, including specifications of materials,
alignment, grade, and width of these elements.
      DEVELOP. To erect any structure or to install any improvements on a tract
of land, or to undertake any activity (such as grading) in preparation
therefor.
      DIMENSIONS. Refers to both lot depth and lot width.
      DISTRICT, ZONING. A portion of the territory of the village wherein
certain uniform requirements or various combinations thereof apply to
structures, lots, and uses under the terms of the village’s Zoning Code.
      DRAINAGEWAY. A watercourse, gully, dry stream, creek, or ditch which
carries storm water runoff or which is fed by street or building gutters or by
storm water sewers, or which serves the purpose of draining water from the
lands adjacent to such watercourse, gully, dry stream, creek, or ditch.
      EASEMENT. A grant by the property owner to the public, a corporation, or
a person of the use of land for limited and specifically named purpose.
      ESCROW DEPOSIT. A deposit in cash or other approved securities to assure
the completion of improvements within a subdivision.
      FILING DATE. The date that the applicant has filed the last item of
required data or information with the Village Clerk and has paid the necessary
fees for review by the Plan Commission.
      FLOOD HAZARD AREA. All land subject to periodic inundation from overflow
of natural waterways.
      FRONTAGE. The lineal extent of the front (street-side) of a lot.
      FRONTAGE ROAD. A minor street fronting on an arterial street or highway
(usually a limited access highway), used for access to abutting lots.
      GRADE. The degree of inclination of the site or right-of-way, expressed
as a percentage; synonym for SLOPE.
      HILLSIDE AREA. An area with an average slope of 20% or more.
      IMPROVEMENT.
         (a)   Refers to site grading, street work, and utilities (including
water, sewer, electric, gas, storm water, telephone, and cable television) to
be installed or agreed to be installed by the subdivider on land to be used for
public or private streets, and easements or other purposes as are necessary for
the general use of lot owners in the subdivision.
         (b)   Including the furnishing of all materials, equipment, work, and
services, such as engineering, staking, and supervision, necessary to construct
all the improvements required in §§
153.130 through
153.150 and
153.165 through
153.189 or any other improvements that may be provided by the subdivider.
         (c)   All of such materials, equipment and services shall be provided
at the subdivider’s cost and expense, although he or she may enter into a
contract with individuals and firms to complete such improvements, and the
improvements shall be subject to the final approval of the Plan Commission and
the Board of Trustees.
      IMPROVEMENT PLANS. The engineering plans showing types of materials and
construction details for earth moving and for the structures and facilities to
be installed both in, or in conjunction with, a subdivision. PLANS must include
drainage, streets, alleys, and utility locations to be installed in or in
conjunction with a subdivision; also, includes overall drainage plan and its
effect on contiguous land and source of effluent or discharge.
      INLET. A receptacle located where surface and/or ground water can run to
by gravity to be received by the storm sewer.
      INTERSECTION. The point at which two or more public rights-of-way
(generally streets) meet.
      LAND USE PLAN. The comprehensive long-range plan for the desirable use of
land, the purpose of such plan being, among other things, to serve as a guide
to the zoning and progressive subdividing and use of undeveloped land.
      LOCAL STREET. A street serving limited amounts of residential traffic,
and for access to abutting property, and on which the speed limit is low and
the traffic volume minimal.
      LOT. A tract of land intended as a unit for the purpose (whether
immediate or future) of development or transfer of ownership. A LOT may or may
not coincide with a lot of record.
         (a)   LOT AREA. The area of a horizontal plane bounded by the front,
side, and rear lines of a lot, exclusive of any land designated for street
right-of-way.
         (b)   LOT, BUTT. A lot at the end of a block and located between two
corner lots.
         (c)   LOT, CORNER. A lot having at least two adjacent sides that abut
for their full length upon streets. Both such side lines shall be deemed front
lot lines.
         (d)   LOT DEPTH. The mean horizontal distance between the front end
and the rear lot lines measured in the general direction of the side lot lines.
         (e)   LOT, INTERIOR. A lot whose side lines do not abut any street.
         (f)   LOT LINE, FRONT. The line separating the lot from the street. On
a corner lot, the front lot line shall be the frontage having the least
dimension.
         (g)   LOT LINE, REAR. The lot line most nearly parallel to and most
remote from the front lot line.
         (h)   LOT LINE, SIDE. Any lot line other than front or rear lot line.
A corner side lot line separating a lot from a street is called a street side
lot line. A SIDE LOT LINE separating a lot from another lot or lots is called
an interior side lot line.
         (i)   LOT, THROUGH. A lot having a part of approximately parallel lot
lines that abut two approximately parallel streets. Both such lot lines shall
be deemed front lot lines.
      LOT WIDTH. The mean horizontal width of the lot measured at right angle
to the general direction of the side lot lines.
      LOT OF RECORD. An area of land designated as a lot on a plat of
subdivision recorded with the County Recorder of Deeds in accordance with state
law.
      MAINTENANCE BOND. A surety bond, posted by the developer and approved by
the village, guaranteeing the satisfactory condition of installed improvements
for the one year period following their dedication.
      MASTER DEVELOPMENT PLAN. A combination of maps, drawings, site plans,
charts, and supportive narrative material that portrays total development to be
achieved in the overall project area; which provides sufficient detailed
information to both illustrate and describe the intended character and
configuration, of development to be accomplished.
      METES AND BOUNDS. A description of real property which is not described
by reference to a lot or block shown on a map, but is described by starting at
a known point and description of the lines forming the boundaries of the
property or delineates a fractional portion of a section, lot, or area by
describing lines or portions thereof.
      OFFICIAL MAP. A graphic statement of the existing and proposed capital
improvements planned by the village which require the acquisition of land-such
as streets, drainage systems, parks, and the like.
      OWNER. A person having sufficient proprietary interest in the land sought
to be subdivided to commence and maintain proceedings to subdivide the same
under these regulations.
      PARKING LANE. An auxiliary lane of a street and primarily used for
vehicular parking.
      PEDESTRIAN WAY. A right-of-way dedicated to public use which cuts across
a block to facilitate safe pedestrian access to adjacent streets and
properties.
      PERFORMANCE BOND. A surety bond posted by the developer and approved by
the village, guaranteeing the installation of required improvements within, or
in conjunction with a subdivision.
      PERSON. Any agent, individual, firm, association, partnership,
corporation, syndicate, or trust.
      PLAN COMMISSION. The Plan Commission of the village.
      PLANNED DEVELOPMENT. A development of land that is under unified control
and is planned and developed as a whole in a single development operation or
programmed series of development phases. Planned developments are subject to
evaluation and approval by the Board of Trustees pursuant to the requirements
of the Zoning Code.
      PLANS. All of the drawings including plats, cross-sections, profiles,
working details, and specifications, which the subdivider prepares or has
prepared to show the character, extent, and details of improvements required in
this chapter and which plans shall conform to any requirements of the Plan
Commission as to scale and details for submittal to the approval officials of
the village for consideration, approval, or disapproval.
      PLAT, FINAL. The final engineering and architectural maps, drawings, and
supporting material indicating the subdivider’s plan of the subdivision which,
if approved, may be filed with the County Recorder of Deeds.
      PLAT, PRELIMINARY. Preliminary engineering and architectural maps,
drawings, and supportive material indicating the proposed layout of a
subdivision.
      PROJECT AREA. The territory intended to be subdivided or developed, and
portrayed and defined in the preliminary and final plats.
      RESERVE. To set aside a parcel of land in anticipation of its acquisition
by the village or other appropriate government entity for public purposes.
      RESERVE STRIP. A narrow strip of land between a public street and
adjacent lots which is designated on a recorded subdivision plat or property
deed as land over which vehicular travel is not permitted.
      RE-SUBDIVISION. See the definition of SUBDIVISION.
      RETENTION AREA. An area of land designed to capture water runoff from a
developed parcel and release it at a specified rate of flow as determined by
engineering studies. (See §
153.186.)
      REVERSE CURVE. A curve in a street heading in approximately the opposite
direction from the curve immediately preceding it so as to form an S-shape.
      RIGHT-OF-WAY, PUBLIC. A strip of land which the owner/subdivider has
dedicated to the village or other appropriate government entity for streets,
alleys, and other public improvements; sometimes abbreviated as R.O.W.
      ROADBED. The graded portion of a street upon which the base course,
surface course, shoulders, and median are constructed.
      ROADWAY. The entire improved portion of the street, including shoulders,
parking lanes, travel way, curbs, and gutter.
      SETBACK LINE. A line that is usually parallel to the front, side, or rear
lot line establishing the minimum space to be provided as the front, side, or
rear yard.
      SIDEWALK. A pedestrian way constructed in compliance with the standards
of this code, generally abutting or near the curb line of the street.
      SLOPE. The degree of inclination of site or right-of-way expressed as a
percentage; synonym for GRADE.
      SOIL AND WATER CONSERVATION DISTRICT. The County Soil and Water
Conservation District.
      STREET. A public or private way for motor vehicle travel. The term STREET
includes a highway, thoroughfare, parkway, through way, road, pike, avenue,
boulevard, lane, place, drive, court, and similar designations, but excludes an
alley or a way for pedestrian or bicycle use only.
         (a)   STREET, AREA SERVICE HIGHWAY. Area service highways interconnect
collectors and land access streets with the principal system and vice versa,
brings all developed areas within a reasonable distance of principal streets,
connects and provides direct access to major traffic generators, provides
secondary service to smaller communities, may provide access to abutting
property, and have a medium volume design capacity and travel speeds.
         (b)   STREET, CUL-DE-SAC. A short, land-access street, having only one
end open for vehicular traffic, and the other permanently terminated by a turn-
around for vehicles.
         (c)   STREET, DEAD-END. Land access streets similar to cul-de-sacs,
except that they provide no turn-around circle at their closed end, and are not
permitted in any proposed subdivision.
         (d)   STREET, LAND ACCESS. Land access streets provide access to
abutting properties, have a relatively short travel distance, and have a low
volume design capacity and travel speeds.
         (e)   STREET, LOOPED. Land access streets having two open ends, each
end generally connecting with the same street, no other streets intersecting
between its ends, and property fronts on both sides of the street.
         (f)   STREET, MARGINAL ACCESS OR SERVICE ROAD. A land access street
parallel and adjacent to area service highways providing access to abutting
properties.
      STRUCTURE. Anything constructed or erected which requires permanent or
temporary location on or in the ground, or is attached to something having a
fixed location on or in the ground. All buildings are structures but not all
structures are buildings (e.g., a fence).
      STUB OR BUTT STREET. A street that is temporarily terminated, but that is
planned for future continuation.
      SUBDIVIDER. Any person, firm, partnership, association, corporation,
estate, or other group or combination acting as a unit, dividing or proposing
to divide land in a manner that constitutes a subdivision as defined in this
subchapter.
      SUBDIVISION.
         (a)   The division of land into two or more lots or parcels for the
purpose of either immediate or future sale, rental, or building development or
use(s) other than agricultural use or production.
         (b)   Establishment or dedication of a public street or alley through
a tract of land regardless of size. The term SUBDIVISION shall also include all
resubdivisions of land or lots.
      SWALE. A grading of land in a manner designed to channel surface water
runoff to a desired location.
      TOPOGRAPHY. The relief features or surface configuration of an area of
land.
      TRAVELWAY. The portion of a street used for the movement of vehicles,
exclusive of shoulders and auxiliary lanes.
      TYPICAL DETAIL. A drawing illustrating information that is commonly
applied to building construction or improvements to land.
      VACATE. To terminate the legal existence of right-of-way or subdivision,
and to so note on the final plat recorded with the County Recorder of Deeds.
      VARIANCE, SUBDIVISION. A relaxation in the strict application of the
design and improvement standards set forth in this chapter.
      YARD, FRONT. A yard extending across the full width of the lot, the depth
of which is set forth in the Zoning Code.
      YARD, REAR. A yard extending across the full width of the lot between the
nearest rear main building and the rear lot lines. The depth of the required
REAR YARD shall be measured horizontally from the nearest part of the main
building toward the nearest point of the rear lot lines.
      YARD, SIDE. A yard between a main building and the side lot line,
extending from the front yard or front lot lines, where no front yard is
required, to the rear yard. The width of the required SIDE YARD shall be
measured horizontally from the nearest point of the side lot line toward the
nearest part of the main building.
      ZONING CODE. The zoning code of the village, if any.
(Prior Code, § 34-2-2) (Ord. 06-07, passed 6-19-2006)
§ 153.008 VIOLATIONS.
   (A)   Violation of the provisions of this chapter or failure to comply with
any of its requirements, including conditions and safeguards established shall
constitute a misdemeanor. Each day such violation continues shall be considered
a separate offense.
(Prior Code, § 34-5-69)
   (B)   (1)   Nothing herein contained shall prevent the village from taking
such other lawful actions as is necessary to forbid or remedy any violations.
      (2)   All such costs connected therewith shall accrue to the person or
persons responsible.
(Prior Code, § 34-5-70)
Penalty, see §
153.999
ADMINISTRATION
§ 153.020 ENFORCEMENT OFFICERS; DUTIES.
   The Administrator is hereby authorized and directed to administer and
enforce the provisions of this chapter. This broad responsibility encompasses,
but is not limited to, the following specific duties:
   (A)   To review and forward preliminary plats to the Plan Commission (see §§
153.040 through
153.045);
   (B)   To transmit improvement plans to the Village Engineer for his or her
review (see §§
153.060 through
153.063);
   (C)   To review and forward final plats to the Board of Trustees (see §
153.099);
   (D)   To issue stop orders as necessary when the Village Engineer determines
that approved improvements are being constructed in violation of this chapter
(see §
153.062);
   (E)   To pursue actions authorized at §
153.080 when a developer fails to complete required improvements;
   (F)   To evaluate and pass upon proposed changes in approved final plats
(see §
153.101);
   (G)   To review and forward applications for subdivision variances to the
Plan Commission (see §
153.021);
   (H)   To maintain up-to-date records of matters pertaining to this chapter
including, but not limited to, preliminary plats, as-built records of completed
improvements (see §
153.063), final plats, variances, and amendments; and
   (I)   To provide information to subdividers/developers and to the general
public on matters related to this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 34-4-1) (Ord. 06-07, passed 6-19-2006)
§ 153.021 SUBDIVISION VARIANCES.
   Any subdivider/developer desiring a variance from the requirements of this
chapter shall file a written application therefor with the Administrator at the
same time that he or she files his or her preliminary plat or at the time of
filing the application for approval of a final development plan under the PD
provisions of the Zoning Code. The application shall fully explain the grounds
for the variance request, and specify the section(s) of this chapter which, if
strictly applied, would cause great practical difficulties or hardship. The
Administrator shall prepare an advisory report on every variance application
and submit it, together with the completed application, to the Plan Commission.
(Prior Code, § 34-4-2) (Ord. 06-07, passed 6-19-2006)
§ 153.022 REVIEW OF PLAN COMMISSION.
   The Plan Commission shall review the variance application and the
Administrator’s comments, perform on-site review when appropriate, and submit
their advisory report to the Board of Trustees together with its recommendation
on preliminary plat approval (see §
153.041). The Plan Commission’s advisory report shall be responsive to all the
variances standards set forth in §
153.023.
(Prior Code, § 34-4-3)
§ 153.023 ACTION BY BOARD OF TRUSTEES; VARIANCE STANDARDS.
   (A)   At the same meeting at which they take action on the application for
preliminary plat approval (see §
153.042), the Board of Trustees shall decide by resolution whether to grant or
deny the requested subdivision variance. A copy of its decision, clearly
stating its reasons therefor and the exact terms of any variance granted, shall
be attached to both the preliminary and final plats.
   (B)   The Board of Trustees shall not grant any subdivision variance unless,
based upon the information presented to them, they determine that:
      (1)   The proposed variance is consistent with the general purposes of
this chapter (see §
153.001);
      (2)   Strict application of the subdivision requirements (see §
153.130) would result in great practical difficulties or hardship to the
applicant, not a mere inconvenience;
      (3)   The proposed variance is the minimum deviation from the subdivision
requirements that will alleviate the difficulties/hardship;
      (4)   The plight of the applicant is due to peculiar circumstances not of
his or her own making;
      (5)   The peculiar circumstances creating the variance request are not
applicable to other tracts and, therefore, that a variance would be a more
appropriate remedy than a code amendment; and
      (6)   The variance, if granted, will not materially frustrate
implementation of the village’s Comprehensive Plan including the Official Map.
(Prior Code, § 34-4-4)
§ 153.024 AMENDMENTS.
   (A)   Proposal. Amendments to this chapter may be proposed by the
Administrator, any member of the Board of Trustees, any Plan Commission member,
or any party in interest. Every amendment proposal shall be filed on a
prescribed form in the Administrator’s office. The Administrator shall promptly
transmit each proposal, together with any comments or recommendations he or she
may wish to make, to the Plan Commission for a public hearing.
   (B)   Public hearing, notice. The Plan Commission shall hold a public
hearing on every amendment proposal within a reasonable time after said
proposal is submitted to them. At the hearing any interested party may appear
and testify, either in person or by duly authorized agent or attorney. Notice
indicating the time, date, and place of the hearing, and the nature of the
proposed amendment shall be given not more than 30 days, nor less than 15 days,
before the hearing by publication in a newspaper of general circulation within
the village.
   (C)   Advisory report; action by the Board of Trustees. Within a reasonable
time after the public hearing, the Plan Commission shall submit an advisory
report to the Board of Trustees. The Board of Trustees shall act on the
proposed amendment at its next regularly scheduled meeting following submission
of this report. Without another public hearing, the Board of Trustees may
either pass or reject the proposed amendment or may refer it back to the Plan
Commission for further consideration.
(Prior Code, § 34-4-5)
§ 153.025 SCHEDULE OF FEES; PAYMENT.
   (A)   (1)   The review for the preliminary plat shall be $50, plus the then
current hourly rate of the Village Engineer.
      (2)   The final plat (for each phase if submitted in separate phases)
shall be $50. If no variation from the preliminary plat, otherwise $50, plus
the then current hourly rate of the Village Engineer.
      (3)   The improvement plans (for each phase if submitted in separate
phases) shall be $500, plus the then current hourly rate of the Village
Engineer.
      (4)   Inspection of the installed improvements and reporting findings to
the village shall be the then current hourly rate of the Village Engineer or as
otherwise arranged for via a mutual agreement between the subdivider/developer
and the village.
(Prior Code, § 34-4-6)
   (B)   All fees listed in division (A) above shall be paid by the subdivider/
developer or the applicant to the Village Clerk’s office at the time of
submission of documents or in the case of inspections, within 30 days of
receipt of the invoice from the village for Village Engineer’s inspection
services.
(Prior Code, § 34-4-7)
(Ord. 06-07, passed 6-19-2006)
PLATS AND PLANS; PRELIMINARY PLATS
§ 153.040 GENERAL PROCEDURE.
   (A)   Before preparing a proposed plat for an area, the owner, developer, or
their representatives should have a pre-application meeting with the Plan
Commission and/or the Village Planner to determine applicable ordinance
regulations and standards which must be complied with. After the preapplication
meeting(s), the subdivider should then prepare the preliminary plat.
   (B)   As defined in this chapter, the preliminary plat shall contain a
substantial amount of data, and will thus be incomplete and cannot be
considered as filed until all required data are submitted.
   (C)   The preliminary plat is received with filing fees by the Village
Clerk’s office, who, in turn, will forward the same to the Plan Commission for
their review. Following its review as well as comments from other appropriate
agencies when required, the Plan Commission forwards its recommendations to the
Board of Trustees, who then either approve, disapprove, or approve with
modifications the preliminary plat.
(Prior Code, § 34-3-1)
§ 153.041 FILING PROCEDURE; EXCEPTION.
   (A)   Except as specifically provided otherwise within this section, every
person who proposes to subdivide any land located within the subdivision
jurisdiction of the village shall file six copies of the preliminary plat of
said subdivision with the Village Clerk.
   (B)   He or she shall also file one copy of the preliminary plat and
supporting data with the appropriate Soil and Water Conservation District. The
district shall have not more than 30 days to submit any comments it might wish
to make to the Administrator.
   (C)   (1)   Within three business days after the preliminary plat has been
submitted for approval, the Administrator shall notify the president of the
school board that the plat has been submitted for approval and that it is
available for inspection.
      (2)   The notice shall also give the date, time, and place of the hearing
on approval or disapproval of the preliminary plat. The notice shall be served
by certified mail, return receipt requested, or by personal delivery. Failure
to notify the school board as required by this section does not invalidate the
plat.
   (D)   (1)   In the event the preliminary plat proposes access to a state
highway or non-village controlled street, or if any part of the platted land
will not be served by a public sewer system, then the applicant shall
simultaneously file with the State Department of Transportation, relevant local
highway authority, or health department, as appropriate, a copy of the
application for preliminary approval of a proposed plat.
      (2)   The department or authority receiving the application shall review
the application based solely upon safety or access control standards and
provide written approval or disapproval to the Plan Commission and the Board of
Trustees not later than 90 days from the date the application was received. The
90-day period may be changed by mutual agreement.
      (3)   If disapproved, the department or authority shall provide reasons
for the disapproval related to safety or access control standards and identify
improvements that will remove the disapproval. The Board of Trustees may
approve the plat once the improvements have been incorporated into the
application or in the event the department or authority fails to respond in
writing to the village within the 90-day period or other period established by
mutual agreement.
   (E)   Whenever a large tract is to be developed in stages and only a portion
of that tract is to be submitted for final plat approval, nonetheless, a master
development plan of the entire tract shall be submitted.
   (F)   All the preliminary plats shall be reviewed and acted upon in
accordance with 65 ILCS 5/11-12-8 and the provisions of the sections below.
   (G)   The provision of this section shall not apply to:
      (1)   Minor subdivisions as defined at §
153.007(B); or
      (2)   Land that is specifically exempted from the State Plats Act as now
or hereafter amended.
(Prior Code, § 34-3-2) (Ord. 06-07, passed 6-19-2006)
Statutory reference:
   Exceptions; State Plats Act, see 765 ILCS 205/l(b)
   Related provisions, see 70 ILCS 405/22.02a
§ 153.042 INFORMATION REQUIRED.
   (A)   Every preliminary plat shall be presented at any scale from one inch
equals 20 feet through one inch equals 100 feet, except for preliminary plats
associated with planned developments greater than 120 acres in size may be
presented at a scale of one inch equals 200 feet.
   (B)   Preliminary plat shall include the following information:
      (1)   Small key map showing the relation of the proposed subdivision to
section or United States survey lines and to platted subdivisions and dedicated
roads within 300 feet of the proposed subdivision;
      (2)   Names and addresses of the owner, subdivider (if not the owner),
and registered professional engineer;
      (3)   Proposed name of the subdivision;
      (4)   Zoning district classification of the tract to be subdivided, and
of the adjacent land;
      (5)   North arrow, graphic scale, and date of map;
      (6)   The gross and net acreage area of the proposed subdivision, the
acreage of streets, and of any areas reserved for the common use of the
property owners within the subdivision and/or for public use;
      (7)   All lot lines adjacent to and abutting the subdivision;
      (8)   Tract boundary lines showing dimensions, bearings, angles, and
references to known land lines;
      (9)   Topography of the tract to be subdivided as indicated by two-foot
contour data for land having slopes of 0% and 4%, five-foot contour data for
land having slopes between 4% and 12%, and ten-foot contour data for land
having slopes of 12% or more;
      (10)   Sufficient information on any proposed alteration, adjustment, or
change in the elevation or topography of property so as to be able to determine
how storm water runoff will be handled;
      (11)   Locations of such features as bodies of water, ponding areas,
natural drainageways, railroads, cemeteries, bridges, parks, schools, and the
like;
      (12)   Streets and rights-of-way on and adjoining the site of the
proposed subdivision, showing the names and including street right-of-way and
paving widths, approximate gradients, types and widths of pavement, curbs,
sidewalks, crosswalks, planting strips, and other pertinent data, including
classification of all existing or proposed streets as to function as collector,
major, minor or county road;
      (13)   A copy of the results of any tests made to ascertain subsurface
rock and soil conditions and the water table;
      (14)   Locations, widths, and purposes of all existing and proposed
easements, except that easements for lots to be created for detached or
attached single-family dwellings may be illustrated via typical details;
      (15)   Location and size of existing and proposed sanitary and storm
sewers;
      (16)   Locations, types, and approximate sizes of all other existing and
proposed utilities;
      (17)   Building setback or front yard lines and dimensions, except that
setback lines for lots to be created for detached or attached single-family
dwellings may be illustrated via typical details;
      (18)   Locations, dimensions, and areas of all parcels to be reserved or
dedicated for schools, parks/playgrounds, and other public purposes; and
      (19)   Locations, dimensions, and areas of all proposed or existing lots
within the subdivision;
      (20)   Information as defined in §
153.043(B); and
      (21)   A certification from an state registered land surveyor or
professional engineer that the preliminary plat is a correct representation of
existing and proposed land divisions.
(Prior Code, § 34-3-3) (Ord. 06-07, passed 6-19-2006)
§ 153.043 PLAN COMMISSION ACTION.
   (A)   The Plan Commission shall either approve or disapprove the application
for preliminary plat approval within 60 days from the date of said application
or the filing of the last item of required supporting data, whichever date is
later, unless the Plan Commission and the subdivider mutually agree to extend
this time limit. If the Plan Commission disapproves the preliminary plat, they
shall furnish to the applicant within the 60-day period a written statement
specifying the aspects in which the proposed plat fails to conform to this
chapter and/or the Official Map. If the Plan Commission approves the
preliminary plat, they shall inform the Board of Trustees that action can be
taken at the next regularly scheduled Board of Trustees meeting.
   (B)   The Plan Commission shall give notice of its consideration of any
preliminary plat and allow the opportunity to be heard to the following person
(s) or groups during its preliminary review time span:
      (1)   Any person requesting notification of the meeting;
      (2)   Any property owner whose property is contiguous to the property,
including property across the streets, railroads, creeks, and similar barriers;
said information shall be provided by the applicant to the Village Clerk’s
office when filing the plat; and
      (3)   Any governmental or taxing body which requests notification of the
meeting.
(Prior Code, § 34-3-4)
§ 153.044 REVIEW BY BOARD OF TRUSTEES; TIME CONSTRAINTS.
   (A)   The Board of Trustees shall review the preliminary plat, along with
the Plan Commission recommendations and approve, disapprove, or approve subject
to certain conditions and/or modifications said preliminary plat within 30 days
after its next regularly scheduled meeting following receipt of the written
Plan Commission recommendations, unless variances from Zoning Code requirements
are needed, in which case, the Board of Trustees’ 30 days commence the day
after the Board of Appeals hearing is held, as required by the Zoning Code.
   (B)   If the Board of Trustees rejects the preliminary plat, its resolution
shall specify the aspects in which the plat fails to comply with this chapter
and/or the Official Map. The Village Clerk shall attach a certified copy of the
Board of Trustees’ resolution of approval or disapproval to the preliminary
plat. One copy of the resolution and plat shall be retained by the Village
Clerk, one copy shall be filed with the Administrator, and one copy shall be
sent to the subdivider by return receipt mail.
(Prior Code, § 34-3-5)
§ 153.045 RIGHTS AND PRIVILEGES OF SUBDIVIDER.
   Preliminary plat approval shall confer the following rights and privileges
upon the subdivider.
   (A)   (1)   The preliminary plat will remain in effect for a one-year period
from the day the Board of Trustees approves the same. The applicant may, during
this period, submit all, part, or parts of said preliminary plat for final
approval. In the event that the subdivision is being developed in phases, the
applicant may, by written mutual agreement with the Board of Trustees, have
final approval of the various phases of the plat delayed for a period not to
exceed five years from the date of the preliminary plat approval.
      (2)   For subdivisions greater than 120 gross acres in size, by written
mutual agreement with the Board of Trustees, may have final approval of the
various phases of the plat delayed for a period of not to exceed ten years from
the date of the preliminary plat approval. Any part of a subdivision which is
being developed in stages shall contain a tract of land at least one block in
area or five gross acres.
   (B)   The general terms and conditions under which the preliminary plat
approval was granted will not be changed for final approval.
   (C)   (1)   The applicant may also proceed with any detailed improvement
plans required for all facilities or utilities intended to be provided. Actual
construction of such facilities and improvements may commence prior to final
plat approval if the detailed improvement plans have been recommended by the
Village Engineer and approved by the Board of Trustees; provided that such
facilities and improvements will be inspected throughout their construction,
and final plat approval will be contingent in part upon acceptable compliance
to village improvement and facilities standards.
      (2)   If the applicant does not submit the improvement plans prior to the
submission of the final plat, then he or she shall submit the improvement plans
to the Village Clerk’s office at the time that the final plat is submitted.
(Prior Code, § 34-3-6) (Ord. 06-07, passed 6-19-2006)
IMPROVEMENT PLANS
§ 153.060 SUBMISSION OF PLANS.
   (A)   After the Board of Trustees has approved the preliminary plat, but
prior to submission of the final plat, the developer shall furnish six copies
of the plans and specifications for all improvements to be installed within or
in conjunction with the proposed development to the Village Clerk, pay all
associated filing fees before review by the Village Engineer. These plans and
specifications shall be signed and sealed by the registered professional
engineer responsible for their preparation.
   (B)   Until the Village Engineer certifies in writing that the proposed
improvements conform to generally accepted engineering practices and to the
standards in this chapter:
      (1)   The Administrator shall not issue any building permit to allow
construction of said improvements; and
      (2)   The Board of Trustees shall not act upon the application for final
plat approval.
(Prior Code, § 34-3-10)
§ 153.061 INFORMATION REQUIRED.
   Improvement plans shall be presented on prints or plots not larger than 30
inches by 42 inches. These plans and the related specifications shall provide
all of the following information:
   (A)   topography of the tract, both before and after development at the same
scale as the approved preliminary plat, but in no case shall be less than one
inch equals 100 feet;
   (B)   Existing and proposed elevations along the centerlines of all streets;
   (C)   Radii of all curves and lengths of tangents on all streets;
   (D)   Locations and typical cross-section of street pavements including
curbs/gutters, catch basins, and inlets;
   (E)   Locations and typical cross-section of sidewalks and driveway aprons;
   (F)   Locations, sizes, and invert elevations of all existing and proposed
sanitary sewers, storm sewers, and fire hydrants, showing connections to any
existing or proposed utility systems;
   (G)   Locations and sizes of all water, gas, electric, and other utilities
(plans may be submitted separately for each utility);
   (H)   Locations of street lighting standards and street signs;
   (I)   One or more bench marks, when requested by the Village Engineer, in or
near the subdivision, to which the subdivision is referenced; the identity and
elevation shall be based on sea level datum;
   (J)   All proposed measures to control erosion and sedimentation;
   (K)   One-hundred-year flood hazard elevations of all lakes/streams
adjoining or within the tract, and define and show location of emergency outlet
structures for any isolated bodies of water;
   (L)   Such other information as the Village Engineer may reasonably require
to perform his or her duties under this section; and
   (M)   Existing and proposed survey monuments on street plans or on the
proposed final plat as required by this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 34-3-11) (Ord. 06-07, passed 6-19-2006)
§ 153.062 INSPECTIONS REQUIRED.
   (A)   The subdivider/developer shall notify the Administrator and the
Village Engineer of both the start and completion of construction. The Village
Engineer shall inspect said improvements while they are under construction. If
he or she or his or her designated deputy determines that they are being built
in violation of this chapter, he or she shall request that the Administrator
promptly issue a stop order.
   (B)   The Village Engineer shall inspect improvements upon their completion.
The village shall not accept any completed improvement until the Village
Engineer has stated in writing that it complies with this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 34-3-12) (Ord. 06-07, passed 6-19-2006)
§ 153.063 FILING AS-BUILT RECORDS.
   The subdivider/developer shall file with the Administrator a set of revised
drawings (in both hard copy and digital form as specified by the Administrator)
showing the as-built details and any deviations from the approved plans upon
the completion of improvements. In lieu of revised drawings, a set of clearly
annotated drawings showing as-built conditions, accompanied by digitally
scanned images of the same annotated drawings in a form acceptable to the
Administrator, may be submitted. If the Administrator finds the as-builts to be
unacceptable, building permits shall be discontinued until such time as the
information is acceptable.
(Prior Code, § 34-3-13) (Ord. 06-07, passed 6-19-2006)
COMPLETION OF REQUIRED INFORMATION
§ 153.075 COMPLETION PRIOR TO ACCEPTANCE.
   The Board of Trustees shall not approve any final plat of subdivision (and,
hence, said final plat shall not be entitled to recording) until:
   (A)   All improvements required in the improvements plan have been completed
by the subdivider/developer at his or her expense, inspected by the Village
Engineer, and dedicated to the village or other appropriate entity; or
   (B)   In accordance with the sections below, the subdivider/developer has
provided the village with legal assurance to guarantee the satisfactory
completion and dedication of all required improvements.
(Prior Code, § 34-3-16) (Ord. 06-07, passed 6-19-2006)
§ 153.076 FORMS OF ASSURANCE; TERM AND EXTENSIONS.
   (A)   (1)   At the option of the Board of Trustees, the required legal
assurance may be either a performance bond, an escrow deposit, irrevocable
letters of credit, or other form of guarantee approved by the Village Attorney.
      (2)   All funds to be held in escrow shall be deposited with the Village
Clerk.
(Prior Code, § 34-3-17)
   (B)   The initial term of any performance bond or escrow agreement shall not
exceed two years. If all the required improvements have not been completed by
the end of the two year period, the Plan Commission, with the advice and
consent of the Board of Trustees, may either extend said bond/escrow agreement
for one year only, or may proceed as per §
153.080.
(Prior Code, § 34-3-20)
(Ord. 06-07, passed 6-19-2006)
§ 153.077 AMOUNT OF BOND OR DEPOSIT.
   The amount of the performance bond, escrow deposit, or other form or
guarantee shall be equal to the Village Engineer’s opinion of probable costs of
constructing the uncompleted portion of the required improvements plus all
required inspection fees. Any escrow deposit may be in the form of:
   (A)   Cash;
   (B)   An irrevocable letter of credit or commitment from a lending
institution guaranteeing to the village the availability of the escrow funds
from time to time upon demand; or
   (C)   Certificates of deposit, treasury bills, or other readily negotiable
instruments approved by the Village Clerk and made payable to the village.
(Prior Code, § 34-3-18) (Ord. 06-07, passed 6-19-2006)
§ 153.078 ELIGIBLE SURETIES.
   No person shall be eligible to act as surety unless he or she has been
approved by the Village Clerk. The Village Clerk shall conduct or cause to be
conducted spot audits of all sureties. Any surety who fails to perform shall be
ineligible for two years thereafter to act as surety for any subdivision
improvement within the village’s jurisdiction.
(Prior Code, § 34-3-19)
§ 153.079 RELEASE OF BOND/ESCROW DEPOSIT.
   (A)   (1)   The Village Clerk may release up to 90% of the amount of the
performance bond/escrow deposit upon receipt of written authorization from the
Village Engineer.
      (2)   The amount which the Village Engineer authorizes to be released
shall be equal to the value of improvements actually completed in accordance
with approved plans.
   (B)   The balance of the amount of the performance bond/escrow deposit shall
not be released by the Village Clerk until:
      (1)   The Village Engineer has certified to the Administrator, in
writing, that all required improvements have been satisfactorily completed; and
      (2)   Said improvements have been accepted by and dedicated to the
village or other appropriate entity.
(Prior Code, § 34-3-21) (Ord. 06-07, passed 6-19-2006)
§ 153.080 FAILURE TO COMPLETE IMPROVEMENTS.
   If all the required improvements have not been completed by the end of the
two-year period (or three-year period, in the case of an extension), the
Administrator, with the assistance of the Village Attorney, may:
   (A)   Require the surety to perform on the bond, and to pay to the village
an equal amount to the cost of completing the required improvements or the
amount of the bond not theretofore released, whichever is less;
   (B)   Order the Village Clerk to retain all escrowed funds needed to
complete the required improvements, and to return the balance (if any) of such
funds to the subdivider/developer; or
   (C)   Require the subdivider/developer to submit a new performance bond/
escrow deposit in an amount sufficient to cover any increase in the cost of
constructing the required improvements.
(Prior Code, § 34-3-22)
FINAL PLATS
§ 153.095 GENERALLY.
   The Board of Trustees shall not approve any final plat unless they determine
that it is in compliance with all pertinent requirements of this chapter
including those set forth in this section.
(Prior Code, § 34-3-25)
§ 153.096 FILING; TIME LIMITS.
   (A)   (1)   The subdivider of every subdivision, whether major or minor, but
excluding land specifically exempted from the State Plats Act, as now or
hereafter amended (765 ILCS 205/l(b)), who desires final plat approval shall
file six copies of the final plat and supporting data with the Village Clerk
and pay all associated filing fees not later than one year after preliminary
plat approval has been granted. However, with the consent of the Board of
Trustees, the subdivider may delay application for final approval of part(s) of
the tract shown on the preliminary plat for successive one-year periods. In the
event that the subdivision is being developed in phases, the applicant may, by
written mutual agreement with the Board of Trustees, have final approval of the
various phases of the plat delayed for a period not to exceed five years from
the date of the preliminary plat approval.
      (2)   For subdivisions greater than 120 gross acres in size, by written
mutual agreement with the Board of Trustees, may have final approval of the
various phases of the plat delayed for a period not to exceed ten years from
the date of the preliminary plat approval. Any part of a subdivision which is
being developed in stages shall contain a tract of land at least one block in
area or five gross acres. No subdivision plat or re-plat shall be filed for
record or recorded in the office of the County Recorder of Deeds, unless and
until the approval of the village is endorsed thereon.
      (3)   No lot shall be sold for such subdivision plat or re-plat until it
has been approved by the Board of Trustees and filed for record in the office
of the County Recorder of Deeds as required by state statutes.
   (B)   For official filings, the subdivider shall file the approved final
plat with the County Recorder of Deeds within 60 days after the Board of
Trustees has approved the same and the Mayor has affixed his or her signature
thereto. One copy of the final plat shall be given to the Village Clerk’s
office by the subdivider bearing the official stamp of the County Recorder
attesting its recording within 20 days of such action.
(Prior Code, § 34-3-26) (Ord. 06-07, passed 6-19-2006)
§ 153.097 INFORMATION REQUIRED.
   (A)   Every final plat shall be prepared by an state registered land
surveyor on drawings at a scale not greater than 100 feet equals one inch,
provided that the resultant drawing shall not exceed 24 inches by 36 inches.
   (B)   The final plat and supporting data shall portray/provide all of the
following information:
      (1)   North arrow, graphic scale, and date;
      (2)   Name of subdivider, subdivision, identification of the portion of
the public lands survey in which the subdivision is located;
      (3)   Accurate metes and bounds or other adequate legal description of
the tract, and the included area of the subdivision to the nearest one one-
hundredth of an acre;
      (4)   Accurate boundary lines, with dimensions and bearings or angles
which provide a survey of the tract, closing with an error of closure of not
more than one foot in 10,000 feet;
      (5)   All dimensions shall be shown in feet and decimals of a foot;
      (6)   Reference to recorded plats of adjoining platted land within 300
feet, by record name, plat book, and page number;
      (7)   Accurate locations of all existing streets intersecting the
boundaries of the subdivision;
      (8)   Right-of-way lines of all streets, other rights-of-way, easements,
and lot lines with accurate dimensions, angles, or bearings and curve data,
including radii, arcs or chords, points of tangency, and central angles;
      (9)   Name and right-of-way width of every proposed street;
      (10)   Purpose of any existing or proposed easements;
      (11)   Number of each lot, lot dimensions, and (in a separate list) lot
areas;
      (12)   Purpose(s) for which sites, other than private lots, are reserved;
      (13)   Building or setback lines with accurate dimensions;
      (14)   Restrictions of all types which will run with the land, and become
covenants in the deeds of lots;
      (15)   Home owner’s association covenants and bylaws evidencing the means
by which common areas will be maintained;
      (16)   Certification of dedication of all public areas;
      (17)   Accurate distances and directions to the nearest established
official monument; reference corners shall be accurately described on the final
plat;
      (18)   Reference to known and permanent monuments and bench marks from
which future surveys may be made together with elevations of any bench marks;
and the surveyor must, at the time of making his or her survey, establish
permanent monuments (set in such a manner that they will not be moved by frost)
which mark the external boundaries of the tract to be divided or subdivided and
must designate upon the plat the locations where they may be found;
      (19)   Location, type, material, and size of all monuments and lot
markers;
      (20)   A signed statement of an state registered professional engineer,
and the owner of the land or his or her duly authorized attorney, to the effect
that to the best of their knowledge and belief the drainage of surface waters
will not be changed by the construction of such subdivision or any part
thereof, or, that if such surface water drainage will be changed, reasonable
provision has been made for collection and diversion of such surface waters
into public areas, or drains which the subdivider has a right to use, and that
such surface waters will be planned for in accordance with generally accepted
engineering practices so as to reduce the likelihood of damage to the adjoining
property because of the construction of the subdivision. Any topographical and
drainage studies that may be required to make such statements shall not be
recorded, but shall be retained and filed with the village as permanent public
documents; and
      (21)   For projects that are 120 acres or larger in size, the final plat
shall also be in AutoCAD- format.
(Prior Code, § 34-3-27) (Ord. 06-07, passed 6-19-2006)
§ 153.098 CERTIFICATES REQUIRED.
   As required by state law (65 ILCS 5/11-12-8 and 765 ILCS 205/2), the
following certificates shall be executed on the final plat.
   (A)   Owner’s certificate.
OWNER’S CERTIFICATE
   We,
                                                                               
, the Owners of  (description)  have caused the said tract to be surveyed and
subdivided in the manner shown, and said tract to be hereinafter known as
                                                 . All rights-of-way and
easements shown hereon are here dedicated to the use of the public forever
including the release and waiver of the right of homestead under the Homestead
Exemption laws of the State of Illinois.
   Dated this        day of                                         , 20    .
________________________________(Seal)
________________________________(Seal)
   (B)   Notary public’s certificate.
NOTARY PUBLIC’S CERTIFICATE
State of Illinois    )
) ss.
County of    )
   I,                                          , a Notary Public in and for the
County aforesaid, do hereby certify that  (owners)  are personally known to me
to be the same persons whose names are subscribed to the foregoing instrument,
and that they appeared before me this day in person and acknowledged that they
signed and sealed the same as their free and voluntary act for the uses and
purposes therein set forth, including the release of waiver of the right of
homestead.
Given under my hand and Notarial Seal          this day of
                          , 20    .
                                                                        
Notary Public
   (C)   Surveyor’s certificate.
SURVEYOR’S CERTIFICATE
   I,                                                      , an Illinois
Registered Land Surveyor, do hereby certify that this plat is a correct
representation of a survey made under my direct supervision at the request of
                                                          for the purpose of
subdividing the tract lots as shown.
                                                                                 
Land Surveyor
                                                                                
Illinois Registration Number
                                                                                
Date
   (D)   County Clerk’s certificate.
COUNTY CLERK’S CERTIFICATE
   I,                                                                    ,
County Clerk of                                                            
County, Illinois, do hereby certify that I find no unpaid or forfeited taxes
against any of the real estate included within this plat.
                                                                
County Clerk
                                                                
Date
   (E)   Certificate of Board of Trustees.
CERTIFICATE OF VILLAGE BOARD
   I,                                                                   , Mayor
of the Village of                                                   
do hereby certify that the plat shown herein was duly presented to the Village
Board and approved at a meeting of same held on  (date) .
                                                                
Mayor
                                                                
Village Clerk
(Prior Code, § 34-3-28)
§ 153.099 ADMINISTRATIVE REVIEW; ADVISORY REPORT.
   (A)   Within 30 days from the date of application for final plat approval,
the Village Engineer and the Administrator shall review said final plat (and
supporting data), and shall each advise the Board of Trustees, in writing,
whether it substantially conforms to the approved preliminary plat and
improvement plans.
   (B)   A copy of their advisory report shall be forwarded to the Plan
Commission. The Plan Commission may prepare an addendum to said report (should
they so desire), and forward same to the Board of Trustees.
(Prior Code, § 34-3-29) (Ord. 06-07, passed 6-19-2006)
§ 153.100 ACTION BY BOARD OF TRUSTEES.
   (A)   The Board of Trustees shall either approve or disapprove the
application for final plat approval by resolution within 60 days from the date
of said application or the filing of the last item of required supporting data,
whichever date is later, unless the Board of Trustees and the subdivider
mutually agree to extend this time limit.
   (B)   The Board of Trustees shall not approve any final plat, unless:
      (1)   The final plat substantially conforms to the approved preliminary
plat;
      (2)   The final plat manifests substantial compliance with the design and
improvements standards of this chapter, the Zoning Code, and the Official Map;
      (3)   To the Board of Trustees’ knowledge and belief, the final plat
complies with all pertinent requirements of state law; or
      (4)   Either of the following has been met:
         (a)   All required improvements have been completed, inspected,
accepted, and dedicated; or
         (b)   The subdivider/developer has posted a performance bond or
deposited funds in escrow to guarantee the satisfactory completion and
dedication of all required improvements.
   (C)   If the Board of Trustees disapproves the final plat, its resolution
shall specify the aspects in which the plat fails to meet the above conditions
for approval. The Village Clerk shall attach a certified copy of the Board of
Trustees’ resolution of approval or disapproval to the final plat. One copy of
the resolution and plat shall be retained by the Village Clerk, one copy shall
be filed with the Administrator, and one copy shall be given to the subdivider.
(Prior Code, § 34-3-30)
§ 153.101 CHANGES IN APPROVED FINAL PLATS.
    Once a final plat is approved by the Board of Trustees, it shall not
thereafter be modified; provided, however, that minor changes may be made upon
written application to the Administrator. Major changes require the filing of a
new final plat and complete review.
(Prior Code, § 34-3-31)
MAINTENANCE AND ACCEPTANCE OF IMPROVEMENTS
§ 153.115 SUBDIVIDER’S RESPONSIBILITY OF IMPROVEMENTS.
   The subdivider/developer shall maintain all the improvements in the
subdivision until they have been accepted by and dedicated to the village or
other appropriate entity.
(Prior Code, § 34-3-35)
§ 153.116 MAINTENANCE BOND.
   (A)   Prior to dedication, the subdivider/developer shall post a maintenance
bond or other form of security with the Village Clerk in the form approved by
the Village Attorney. This security shall be in the amount that is equal to 10%
of the construction costs associated with the public improvements that are
being dedicated tn order to guarantee the satisfactory condition of the
required improvements for a period of one year from the date of their
acceptance and dedication. If at any time during the one-year period the
improvements are found to be defective, they shall be repaired/replaced at the
subdivider/developer’s expense.
   (B)   If the subdivider/developer fails or refuses to pay such costs within
90 days after demand is made upon him or her by the Village Engineer, the
village shall use the maintenance security to make the necessary repairs/
replacement. If the cost of repairs/repiacement exceeds the security amount,
the subdivider/developer shall be liable for the excess. At the end of the one-
year period, the maintenance security shall be released.
(Prior Code, § 34-3-36) (Ord. 06-07, passed 6-19-2006)
§ 153.117 ACCEPTANCE OF IMPROVEMENTS.
   Subsequent to completion of street construction by the subdivider, the
Village Engineer shall make a final inspection of all streets to ascertain the
acceptability of structural condition, earth slopes, drainage structures, and
the like. If said inspection indicates no deficient items, the village shall
take formal action to accept the completed streets for maintenance based upon
the Village Engineer’s recommendation. Should any item need correction or
repair, the subdivider will be notified in writing of each deficiency. No
street(s) will be accepted in a subdivision until all streets comply with the
village’s requirements and the posting of the maintenance bond pursuant to §
153.116.
(Prior Code, § 34-3-37) (Ord. 06-07, passed 6-19-2006)
§ 153.118 VACATION OF PLATS.
   (A)   In accordance with state law (765 ILCS 205/6, 205/7, and 205/8), any
plat or part thereof may be vacated by the owner of the tract, at any time
before the sale of any lot therein, by a written vacation instrument to which a
copy of the plat is attached. If there are public service facilities in any
street, other public way, or easement shown on said plat, the instrument shall
reserve to the village, or other public entity or utility owning such
facilities, the property, rights-of-way, and easements necessary for continuing
public service by means of those facilities and for maintaining or
reconstructing the same.
   (B)   The vacation instrument shall be approved by the Board of Trustees in
the same manner as plats of subdivision and shall also be approved by the
County Superintendent of Highways, the Highway Commissioner of the appropriate
township, the District Engineer of the State Department of Public Works and
Buildings, and the public utilities. In the case of the platted tracts wherein
any lots have been sold, the written vacation instrument must also be signed by
all the owners of lots in said tracts.
(Prior Code, § 34-3-40)
STREET DESIGN AND IMPROVEMENT STANDARDS
§ 153.130 APPLICABILITY; SUITABILITY FOR DEVELOPMENT.
   (A)    (1)   No land within the subdivision and development jurisdiction of
the village shall be subdivided or developed except in compliance with the
regulations of this subchapter and the applicable provisions of state law.
      (2)   No lot in any subdivision shall be conveyed until:
         (a)   The final plat of said subdivision has been approved by the
Board of Trustees and recorded in the office of the County Recorder of Deeds;
and
         (b)   The portion of said subdivision in which the lot is located has
been improved in accordance with the requirements of this subchapter or until a
performance bond or other security has been posted to assure the completion of
such improvements.
      (3)   The village shall not issue a building permit for any lot conveyed
in violation of this division (A).
(Prior Code, § 34-5-1)
   (B)   Land that is unsuitable for development due to flooding, poor
drainage, rough topography, adverse soil conditions, or other features which
will be harmful to the health, safety, and general welfare of the inhabitants
of the development and/or its surrounding areas shall not be subdivided or
developed unless the subdivider/developer formulates adequate plans/methods to
solve the problems caused by the adverse land conditions.
(Prior Code, § 34-5-2)
(Ord. 06-07, passed 6-19-2006)
Statutory reference:
   Related provisions, see 65 ILCS 5/11-12-8 and 765 ILCS 205/1 et seq.
§ 153.131 LOT REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   All lots in a subdivision shall conform to the minimum lot area and
dimensions requirements of the zoning district in which said subdivision is
located; land that is under water or reserved for street improvements shall not
be counted to satisfy these minimum requirements. Every corner and through lot
shall be large enough to permit compliance with the district’s front setback
requirements on every side of the lot that faces a street. All lot remnants
shall be added to adjacent lots to avoid the creation of unbuildable parcels.
All lots shall contain adequate space for required off-street parking and
loading.
(Prior Code, § 34-5-4)
   (B)   (1)   Land shall be subdivided in such a way that each lot abuts a
street meeting the requirements of §
153.132.
      (2)   All side lot lines shall be at right angles to straight street
right-of-way lines or radial to curved street right-of-way lines, except where
a deviation from this rule will provide a better street and lot design or as
otherwise approved by the Board of Trustees under the planned development (PD)
provisions of the Zoning Code.
(Prior Code, § 35-5-5)
   (C)   (1)   Stone or reinforced concrete reference monuments, set in the
ground in such a manner that they will not be moved by frost, shall be placed
in the field in accordance with the State Plats Act, as now or hereafter
amended. All lot corners shall be marked by one-half inch iron pins not less
than 24 inches long.
      (2)   These pins shall be driven into the ground deep enough that they do
not protrude above the ground surface more than one-half inch.
(Prior Code, § 34-5-6)
(Ord. 06-07, passed 6-19-2006)
Statutory reference:
   Provisions related to division (C), see 765 ILCS 205/1
§ 153.132 COMPREHENSIVE PLAN INTEGRATION.
   All streets shall be properly integrated with the existing and proposed
street system indicated in the village’s Comprehensive Plan, and shall meet the
specifications set forth in §
153.137.
(Prior Code, § 34-5-7)
§ 153.133 RIGHT-OF-WAY AND PAVEMENT WIDTHS; EXCESS REQUIRED.
   (A)   (1)   Every right-of-way established for subdivision purposes is to be
separate and distinct from the lots or parcels adjoining such right-of-way and
not included within the dimensions or areas of such lots or parcels.
      (2)   All rights-of-way shall be dedicated to the public by the
developer. The minimum pavement widths shall be as noted in §
153.137.
(Prior Code, § 34-5-8)
   (B)   Right-of-way width in excess of the standards set forth in the Table
of Street Design Specifications in §
153.137 shall be required where:
      (1)   Due to topography, additional width is necessary to provide
adequate earth slopes; or
      (2)   Due to the location of railroad tracks, additional width is needed
to construct overpasses, underpasses, and approaches thereto.
(Prior Code, § 34-5-16)
§ 153.134 TOPOGRAPHICAL CONSIDERATIONS.
   Grades of street shall conform as closely as possible to the natural
topography, but shall not exceed the maximum grade, nor be less than the
minimum grade, indicated in the Table of Street Design Specifications in §
153.137. All streets shall be arranged so that as many as possible of the
building sites are at or above street grade.
(Prior Code, § 34-5-9)
§ 153.135 THROUGH TRAFFIC DISCOURAGED.
   Marginal access and local streets shall be laid out so as to discourage use
by through traffic. The rigid rectangular gridiron street pattern shall be
avoided, and the use of curvilinear streets, cul-de-sacs, or U-shaped streets
shall be encouraged to effect a more desirable street layout.
(Prior Code, § 34-5-10)
§ 153.136 LIMITED ACCESS TO ARTERIALS.
   Where a development abuts or contains an existing or proposed arterial
street, the Plan Commission may recommend to the Board of Trustees that access
to said arterial street be limited by one of the following means:
   (A)   By subdividing lots so they back onto the arterial street and front
onto a parallel local street (double frontage lots), coupled with the
installation of screening in a reserve (access-restricting) strip along the
rear lot lines of such lots;
   (B)   A series of cul-de-sacs, U-shaped streets, or short loops entered from
and generally at right angles to the arterial street, with the rear lot lines
of the lots at the termini of such streets backing onto the arterial street; or
   (C)   A frontage road separated from the arterial street by a planting
strip, but having access thereto at suitable points.
(Prior Code, § 34-5-11)
§ 153.137 STREET DESIGN SPECIFICATIONS.
Table of Street Design Specifications
               Maximum                         Minimum
Residential    Number of Permitted  Required   Pavement Maximum   Minimum
Street         Dwelling  On- Street Right-of   Width    Gradient  Gradient (%)
Classification Units/Net Parking    Way (feet) (feet)   (%)
               Acre
Table of Street Design Specifications
               Maximum                           Minimum
Residential    Number of   Permitted  Required   Pavement Maximum   Minimum
Street         Dwelling    On- Street Right-of   Width    Gradient  Gradient
Classification Units/Net   Parking    Way (feet) (feet)   (%)       (%)
               Acre
               Over 250
Collectord     dwelling    None       70         28c      6         1.0a
               units
               served
Marginal       To 1.99     None       40         20       10        1.3a
access
Local          2.0 to 4.50 Both sides 45         30b      10        1.0a
Local          4.50/       Both sides 50         34c      6         1.0a
collector      greater
                           Permitted  Required   Minimum  Maximum   Minimum
Commercial and Industrial  On- Street Right-of   Pavement Gradient  Gradient
Street Classification      Parking    Way (feet) Width    (%)       (%)
                                                 (feet)
Collector                  None       80         44       8         1.0
                           Both sides 60         42       10        1.0
Local                      One side   60         34       10        1.0
                           None       60         26       10        1.0
Notes:
a: 0.5% if ditches are used as may only be approved under the Planned
Development (PD) procedures under the Zoning Code.
b: 26 feet if no parking is allowed.
c: “or two 16-foot lanes if separated with a landscaped median.”
d: Parking land width, add 10 feet.
 
(Prior Code, Ch. 34, Table 5-A)
§ 153.138 DEAD-END STREETS.
   (A)   Temporary stub streets. Streets shall be so arranged to provide for
the continuation of principal streets between adjacent properties when such
continuation is necessary for convenient movement of traffic, effective fire
and police protection, and efficient provision of utilities, and where such
continuation comports with the village’s Official Map. If the adjacent property
is undeveloped and the street must dead-end temporarily, the right-of-way shall
be extended to the property line, and no strip that would prevent connections
with future streets shall be reserved. A temporary turnabout shall be provided
at the terminus of any temporary dead-end street.
   (B)   Permanent dead-end streets. For greater convenience to traffic and
more effective police and fire protection, permanent dead-end streets shall be
limited to 500 feet in length, except as may be approved by the Board of
Trustees under the Planned Development (PD) procedures of the Zoning Code.
   (C)   Turnaround. The terminus of a permanent dead-end street shall not be
closer than 50 feet to the boundary of an adjacent tract. A cul-de-sac
turnaround, having a minimum right-of-way radius of 50 feet and a minimum
pavement radius of 42 feet, shall be provided at the end of every permanent
dead-end street.
(Prior Code, § 34-5-12) (Ord. 06-07, passed 6-19-2006)
§ 153.139 INTERSECTIONS.
   (A)   Only two streets. Not more than two streets intersect at any one
point.
   (B)   Right angles. Streets shall be laid out so as to intersect as nearly
as possible at right angles; in no case shall two streets intersect at an angle
of less than 75 degrees. An oblique street shall be curved approaching an
intersection and shall be approximately at right angles with said intersection
for at least 40 feet therefrom.
   (C)   Proper alignment.
      (1)   Proposed new intersections along one side of an existing street
shall, whenever practicable, coincide with any existing intersections on the
opposite side of such street.
      (2)   treet jogs with centerline offsets of less than 125 feet shall not
be permitted, except where the intersected street has divided lanes without
median breaks at either intersection. Intersections involving collector or
arterial streets shall be at least 800 feet apart.
   (D)   Curb radii. To permit safe vehicular movements at corners, the minimum
right-of-way radius at the intersection of two streets shall be 20 feet, and
the minimum radius at the back of the curb shall be 30 feet.
   (E)   Flat grade. Intersections shall be designed with a flat grade wherever
practical. In hilly terrain, an area having not greater than a 3% slope for a
distance of 50 feet from the nearest right-of-way line of the intersecting
street shall be provided at the approach to an intersection.
   (F)   Maximum cross-slope. The cross-slopes on all streets, including
intersections, shall not exceed 3%.
   (G)   Adequate sight-lines. Where any street intersection will involve earth
banks or existing vegetation on the triangular area shown in Chapter 154,
Appendix B, the developer shall cut such ground and/or vegetation (including
trees) in connection with the grading of the public right-of-way to the extent
necessary to provide an adequate sight distance.
(Prior Code, § 34-5-13) (Ord. 06-07, passed 6-19-2006)
§ 153.140 REVERSE CURVES.
   A tangent at least 100 feet long shall be introduced between reverse curves
on local collector and collector streets.
(Prior Code, § 34-5-14) (Ord. 06-07, passed 6-19-2006)
§ 153.141 IMPROVEMENTS TO EXISTING STREETS.
    Whenever any development abuts an existing street that is narrower than the
standards indicated in the Table of Street Design Specifications in §
153.137, the subdivider shall dedicate sufficient right-of-way on the side
abutting the development to permit compliance with those standards. The
developer shall improve said street to the standards imposed at §§
153.140 and
153.141 and pay one-half the cost of said improvements, exceptions may
otherwise be arranged for and approved by the Board of Trustees under the
Planned Development (PD) provisions of the Zoning Code.
(Prior Code, § 34-5-15) (Ord. 06-07, passed 6-19-2006)
§ 153.142 IMPROVEMENT STANDARDS.
   (A)   Developer’s expense.
      (1)   All streets and alleys shall be improved solely at the expense of
the developer in accordance with the requirements set forth herein. Typical
roadway and pavement sections are shown in Appendix A of this chapter.
      (2)   Requirements for pavement materials, equipment, and methods of
construction for bituminous concrete and other types of flexible pavement and
portland cement concrete (rigid) pavements are contained in the table in
division (B)(2)(c) below. Existing streets that adjoin the development on one
side only will be improved to meet the current street standards, and this cost
will be shared equally between the village and the developer. Existing streets
that join the development on both sides shall be improved at the developer’s
expense.
      (4)   The extent of the improvement of existing streets will be
determined by the village and the developer during improvement plan approval
process. All streets shall meet IDOT’s Roads and Bridges Standard
Specifications.
(Prior Code, § 34-5-20)
   (B)   Pavement structure. All streets and alleys shall be paved across the
entire surface width specified in § 153.133(A). The structural composition of
the pavement shall conform to the minimum requirements set forth in the table
in division (B)(2)(c) below. Design requirements for both rigid and flexible
pavements are set forth hereinafter.
      (1)   Except as otherwise authorized by the Board of Trustees under the
planned development (PD) provisions of the Zoning Code, flexible pavements are
to be constructed as multi-layered structures combining hot-mix bituminous
concrete/bituminous base/crushed stone base/subbase.
         (a)   Each layer of material is to be constructed in lifts not to
exceed the maximum lift thickness (compacted) specified under Flexible Pavement
Alternative 1 and 2 in division (B)(2)(c) below.
         (b)   The minimum width of any single pass for any lift/layer of
bituminous mixture shall be ten feet. There are alternate designs for either
deep-strength asphalt or bituminous concrete on a crushed stone base/subbase.
      (2)   Rigid pavements are specified as either reinforced or unreinforced
portland cement concrete to be constructed either on the earth subgrade or on a
crushed stone subbase or underlayment. Alternate designs are shown for two of
the seven street classifications. The underlayment is to be one-fourth inch
thick fabric, such as “bidim” or “petromat,” or equal.
         (a)   Contraction joints are to be provided at the spacings shown in
division (B)(2)(b) below for each of the various alternates. These transverse
joints are to be sawed joints that are one-eighth inch to one-fourth inch wide
with a depth equal to one-fourth of the pavement thickness. Sawed construction
joints are to be sawed within 24 hours of placement on the concrete. All
contraction joints are to be dowelled with the exception of the alleys and land
access residential streets. Dowel sizes and spacing shall comply with the
following requirements:
 
Pavement Thickness  Minimum Dowel Minimum Dowel Length Minimum Dowel Spacing
(inches)            Diameter      (inches)             (inches)
                    (inches)
6                   5/8           12                   12
7                   3/4           15                   15
8                   1             15                   12
 
      (b)   The dowel units are to be smooth, plain, round bars placed at mid-
height of the pavement with an expansion cap on one end. The bars, or
assemblies, shall be placed so that the bars are parallel to the centerline and
to the pavement surface and shall be treated to prevent bonding of the
concrete.
      (c)   Longitudinal joints shall be constructed no closer than eight feet
and no farther apart than 15 feet. The longitudinal joints may be either
construction joints or sawed joints. In either case, there shall be transverse
No. 4 reformed tie bars, 30 inches long, spaced at 30-inch centers along all
longitudinal joints. This includes the joint between the pavement and curb/
gutter if the curb/gutter is not constructed integral with the pavement. As an
option to tie bars, either a half-round or trapezoidal preformed keyway meeting
the following dimensions may be used on longitudinal joints excluding the
gutter joint:
Minimum Requirements for Structural Composition of Pavements
Street Classification Flexible Pavements          Rigid Pavements
                      Alternative 1 Alternative 2 Alternative 1 Alternative 2
Minimum Requirements for Structural Composition of Pavements
Street           Flexible Pavements            Rigid Pavements
Classification   Alternative 1 Alternative 2   Alternative 1   Alternative 2
Collector                                                    
                 4-inch B.A.M. 8-inch cr. st.  7-inch
                 2-inch I-11   4-inch B.A.M.   S.R.P.C.C.
 Commercial and binder        1-1/2-inch I-11 (40-inch dowel  -----
  industrial     1-1/2-inch I- binder          its)
                 11 surface    1-1/2-inch I-11 4-inch Cr. st./
                               surface         U.L.
                 4-inch B.A.M. 8-inch cr. st.  6-inch          6-inch P.C.C.
                 2-1/2-inch I- 3-inch B.A.M.   S.R.P.C.C.      4-inch Cr. st./
 Residential    11 binder     1-1/2-inch I-11 (40-inch dowel  U.L. (15-foot
                 2-inch I-11   surface         jts.)           dowel jts.)
                 surface
Local                                                        
                 4-inch B.A.M. 8-inch cr. st.  6-inch          6-inch P.C.C.
  Commercial and 2-inch I-11   3-inch B.A.M.   S.R.P.C.C.      4-inch Cr. st./
 industrial     binder        2-inch I-11     (40-inch dowel  U.L. (15-foot
                 1-1/2-inch I- surface         jts.)           dowel jts.)
                 11 surface
                               8-inch cr. st.
                 5-inch B.A.M. 2-inch I-11     6-inch P.C.C.
 Residential    2-inch I-11   binder          (15-foot plain  -----
                 surface       1-1/2-inch I-11 jts.)
                               surface
Marginal land                                                
access
                               8-inch cr. st.
                 4-inch B.A.M. 1-1/2-inch      6-inch P.C.C.
 Residential    2-inch I-11   binder          (15-foot plain  -----
                 surface       1-1/2-inch I-11 jts.)
                               surface
Notes:
(1)   Abbreviations:
Cr. st. = Crushed stone
B.A.M. = Bituminous aggregate mixture
U.L. = Underlayment
P.C.C. = Unreinforced portland cement concrete
S.R.P.C.C. = Standard reinforced portland cement concrete
 
(2)   Maximum lift thickness:
B.A.M. = 6 inches
Crushed stone = 8 inches
I-11 binder = 1-1/2 inches
I-11 surface = 2 inches
 
 
            1.   Equivalent pavements in addition to those shown above shall be
determined by the Village Engineer. Should the total pavement thickness exceed
8 inches the granular base/subbase shall extend under the curb/gutter.
            2.   Notwithstanding the language in (B)(2)(c)1. above, alternative
pavements, and compositions to those shown in this table can be approved by the
Board of Trustees, with the advice of the Village Engineer, through the Planned
Development (PD) provisions of the Zoning Code.
 
Pavement Thickness Half-Round Edge Height Trapezoidal Depth Inside Height
(inches)           Diameter   (inches)    (inches)          (inches)
                   (inches)
6                  2          2           1                 1
7                  2          2-1/4       1                 1
8                  2-1/2      2-1/2       1                 1-1/2
 
            3.   Sawed longitudinal joints shall be sawed within ten days of
concrete placement and prior to any traffic or vehicles traveling on the
surface.
         (d)   Transverse construction joints shall be constructed at the end
of each day’s run or at locations where a cold joint will occur due to a delay
or interruption in placement operations. All transverse construction joints
shall be “tied” with No. 4 reformed bars, 36 inches long, spaced at 12-inch
centers. Construction joints must be at least five feet from a contraction
joint.
         (e)   Pavement reinforcement shall be used in all rigid pavements
designated as S.R.P.C.C. in the table in division (B)(2)(b) above.
Reinforcement shall be welded wire fabric (six inches by 12 inches) with W4
wire transversely and W5.5 wire longitudinally weighing approximately 54 pounds
per 100-square foot. The fabric shall be lapped 12 inches on transverse laps
and six inches on longitudinal laps. Reinforcement shall be placed on the
subgrade and supported by proper chairs and spacers, prior to paving, at the
heights specified below:
 
Pavement Thickness Depth Below Pavement Surface
6 inches           2-inch minimum, 3-inch maximum
7 inches           2 1/1-inch minimum, 3 1/2-inch maximum
8 inches           3-inch minimum, 4-inch maximum
 
   (F)   Should the Village Engineer or the developer’s engineer determine that
the minimal standards are not adequate for a given condition (e.g., traffic
volume, size of loads, subgrade support, drainage, and the like), the required
pavement design shall be determined by the subdivider’s engineer on the basis
of current pavement design procedures subject to the approval of the Village
Engineer.
(Prior Code, § 34-5-21)
(Ord. 06-07, passed 6-19-2006)
§ 153.143 CURB AND GUTTER.
   All streets, except alleys and collector commercial, local commercial,
arterial, or as otherwise approved by the Board of Trustees through the Planned
Development (PD) provisions of the Zoning Code, shall be constructed with
portland cement concrete vertical curb and gutter and/or V-type gutter in
accordance with the dimensions and specifications shown therefor in the
Appendices. Only vertical curb and gutter shall be constructed in industrial
streets. The materials and construction methods for curb and/or gutter shall
conform with IDOT’s Roads and Bridges Standard Specifications. Curb and/or
gutter may be constructed either integrally or separately in conjunction with
Portland cement concrete pavement. If constructed separately, the gutter flag
shall be tied to P.C.C. pavement with 30-inch long No. 4 reinforcing bars
spaced at 30-inch centers.
(Prior Code, § 34-5-22) (Ord. 06-07, passed 6-19-2006)
§ 153.144 BLOCKS.
   (A)   Width. Blocks shall be sufficiently wide to accommodate two tiers of
lots having the minimum depth required by the zoning district regulations;
provided, this requirement may be waived in blocks adjacent to local collector
or collector streets, railroads, or watercourses.
(Prior Code, § 34-5-25)
   (B)   Length. No block shall be longer 1,400 feet nor shorter than 500 feet;
provided that the Board of Trustees may authorize block lengths (or lengths of
cul-de-sac streets) that differ from these standards under the planned
development (PD) provisions of the Zoning Code. Wherever practicable, blocks
along collector streets shall not be less than 1,000 feet in length.
(Prior Code, § 34-5-26)
   (C)   Crosswalks. Crosswalks, not less than ten feet wide, may be required
through the center of blocks more than 1,000 feet long where necessary to
provide circulation or access to schools, playgrounds, shopping centers,
transportation, or other community facilities.
(Prior Code, § 34-5-27)
(Ord. 06-07, passed 6-19-2006)
§ 153.145 SIDEWALKS.
   (A)   (1)   Sidewalks shall be required:
         (a)   On the recommendation of the Plan Commission that sidewalks are
needed to ensure public safety; and
         (b)   Along collector streets, near schools, and in shopping areas and
similar public places.
      (2)   The requirements of this section may be waived by the Board of
Trustees in part or in whole for a proposed subdivision under the planned
development procedures of the Zoning Code; provided that a satisfactory
alternative is provided for safe pedestrian circulation.
      (3)   These requirements of this section shall not be waived unless the
Plan Commission advises the Board of Trustees that, in the area in question,
sidewalks are not needed to ensure public safety, and/or that topographical
conditions make the installation of sidewalks impractical.
      (4)   All sidewalks constructed within the village shall meet IDOT’s
Roads and Bridges Standard Specifications.
(Prior Code, § 34-5-29)
   (B)   (1)   The street-side edge of every sidewalk shall either abut the
curb or be located at least six feet from the curb to allow sufficient space
for tree planting.
      (2)   Residential sidewalks shall be at least four feet wide. Non-
residential sidewalks shall be at least five feet wide.
      (3)   All sidewalks shall be constructed of concrete at least four inches
thick, except that across driveways the thickness shall be increased to six
inches and/or No. 6 reinforcing mesh shall be used.
      (4)   No sidewalk shall be constructed at a grade steeper than 6%.
      (5)   When sidewalks are required curbs shall be cut and sidewalks shall
be ramped at all intersections so as to enhance the mobility of handicapped
individuals.
(Prior Code, § 34-5-30)
(Ord. 06-07, passed 6-19-2006)
§ 153.146 STREETLIGHTS.
   (A)   (1)   Streetlights shall be provided at each intersection of streets
(or alleys) within a subdivision and at each cul-de-sac, but in no event shall
there be less than one streetlight per 400 feet (or portion thereof) of street
frontage between intersections, or between a street intersection and the
terminus of a dead-end street.
      (2)   These spacing standards may be modified only as approved under the
planned development (PD) procedures of the Zoning Code (see §§ 154.045 through
154.052). Additionally, in multi-family dwelling subdivisions, lighting shall
be provided within parking areas at a minimum rate of one light per 25 parking
spaces, or any fraction thereof.
(Prior Code, § 34-5-32)
   (B)   (1)   The design and installation of the streetlight system in every
subdivision shall be reviewed by the Village Engineer and the appropriate
electric utility company.
      (2)   The lighting intensity of each streetlight shall be equivalent, at
a minimum, to a 175-watt lamp or 6,800-mercury luminaire lamp. Each streetlight
standard (post) shall be at least 16 feet high. These lighting standards may be
modified only as approved under the planned development (PD) procedures of the
Zoning Code.
(Prior Code, § 34-5-33)
(Ord. 06-07, passed 6-19-2006)
§ 153.147 STREET NAME SIGNS.
   (A)   Street name signs of the size, height, and type approved by
Administrator shall be supplied and placed by the developer at all
intersections within or abutting any subdivision. Street names shall be
sufficiently different in sound and spelling from other street names in the
village so as to avoid confusion.
   (B)   The Village Clerk shall maintain a list of existing street names for
reference. A street which is planned as a continuation of an existing street
shall bear the same name.
(Prior Code, § 34-5-35) (Ord. 06-07, passed 6-19-2006)
§ 153.148 UTILITIES.
   (A)   At locations within the subdivision where utilities and drainage
facilities are not to be constructed within public rights-of-way, the
subdivider shall make provision for easements for such installations.
Preliminary plats shall be submitted to the electric, gas, and telephone
companies for their input regarding utility easements.
(Prior Code, § 34-5-37)
   (B)   (1)   Utility easements, not less than 20 feet wide for sanitary
sewers and water mains, and not less than 15 feet wide for gas, electric,
telephone, and cable TV, shall be provided where necessary. Normally, in the
case of abutting lots, an equal amount should be taken from each lot. Property
owners may (at their own risk) plant shrubbery or hedges or install fences on
the easement areas.
      (2)   Utilities (private and public), however, in order to have access
for repair shall have the election to destroy said improvements and restore the
area only by grading and seeding, or to have alternate access through the
owner’s property.
(Prior Code, § 34-5-38)
   (C)   Adequate easements for storm water drainage shall be established along
any natural drainage channel and in such other locations as may be necessary to
provide satisfactory disposal of storm water from streets, alleys, and all
other portions of the subdivision. The location and minimum widths of such
easements shall be approved by the Village Engineer.
(Prior Code, § 34-5-39)
§ 153.149 WATER FACILITIES.
   (A)   Water supply.
      (1)   An adequate supply of potable water shall be provided to every
platted lot in accordance with State Department of Public Health regulations.
If the public water system is reasonably accessible, each lot shall be properly
connected thereto at the property line.
      (2)   All water distribution lines shall be at least six inches in
diameter. A fire low analysis of the system will be required to verify the size
of the water lines in the development.
(Prior Code, § 34-5-42)
   (B)   Fire hydrants. Fire hydrants of the type approved by the Water and
Sewer Superintendent shall be installed in every subdivision as part of the
water distribution system. The distance from any lot to a hydrant, measured
along the centerline of the public right-of-way, shall not be greater than 400
feet.
(Prior Code, § 34-5-43)
(Ord. 06-07, passed 6-19-2006)
§ 153.150 SANITARY SEWERS.
   (A)   All proposed sanitary sewer facilities shall comply with the
regulations of the State Department of Public Health and the State
Environmental Protection Agency, and must be approved by the Board of Trustees.
All water and sewer lines must be constructed as per Standard Specifications
for Water and Sewers Mains, State of Illinois, fourth edition, or as amended.
(Prior Code, § 34-5-45)
   (B)   In areas where the public sanitary sewerage system is not reasonably
accessible but where plans for the installation of said system have been
approved by the State Environmental Protection Agency, sanitary sewers shall be
provided in accordance with such plans and temporarily capped. To serve the
subdivision until the time when connection to the public system becomes
practicable, an approved private central sewage disposal system shall be
installed, or individual sewage disposal systems may be used.
(Prior Code, § 34-5-46)
   (C)   In the event it is not possible, or feasible, for the subdivider to
extend the public sewer system into the proposed subdivision, for whatever
reason, the subdivider has the right to petition the village to install an
alternative method of sewage disposal. Any such petition shall be considered on
an individual basis with each case standing on its own merit. No subdivision
shall be approved without the village’s approval of the method of sewage
disposal.
      (1)   Private central sewage systems. Upon specific approval of the Board
of Trustees, the subdivider may install a private central sewage system. The
village shall reserve the right to review and approve/reject the detailed plans
for such a system. Approval of the plans by the village shall in no way be
construed as acceptance of the design or operation or maintenance
responsibility for said installation. Such installation shall be designed and
constructed in accordance with the rules and regulations of the State
Environmental Protection Agency, and the State Department of Public Health. The
subdivider shall assume perpetual operational and maintenance responsibilities
for such installation unless arrangements to the contrary are provided for in a
formal written agreement between homeowners and the subdivider.
      (2)   Individual disposal systems. Upon written approval of the Board of
Trustees, the subdivider may install individual sewage disposal systems
providing the lot size is in excess of 20,000 square feet. If such
installations are permitted, they shall be designed and installed in accordance
with the applicable provisions of the requirements and regulations of the
Private Sewage Disposal Licensing Act, being 225 ILCS 225/1, and Code of the
State Department of Public Health, being 77 Ill. Admin. Code.
(Prior Code, § 34-5-47)
§ 153.151 DRAINAGE AND STORM SEWERS.
   (A)   (1)   Purpose. It is the policy of the village to protect and promote
the public health, safety and general welfare. The criteria for storm water
detention will reduce the possibility of damage to public and private property,
will reduce the erosion on land and creek channels, will assist in the
attainment and maintenance of water quality standards, and will preserve and
enhance the environmental quality of the watercourses in the village. This
criteria provides uniform procedures for designing and checking the design of
storm drainage detention systems.
      (2)   Intent.
         (a)   The Plan Commission shall not recommend the approval of any plat
unless, after consultation with the Village Engineer, it determines that the
proposed provisions for storm water drainage are adequate.
         (b)   Drainage improvements in the subdivision shall be coordinated
with existing and planned drainage improvements elsewhere so as to form an
integrated municipal system. The storm water drainage system shall be separate
and independent of the sanitary sewer system.
(Prior Code, § 34-5-49)
   (B)   (1)   Development. Any activity, including subdivisions, that alters
the surface of the land to create additional impervious surfaces, including,
but not limited to, pavement, buildings, and structures, except:
         (a)   Additions to, improvements, and repair of existing single-family
and duplex dwellings;
         (b)   Construction of any buildings, structures, and/or appurtenant
service roads, drives, and walks on a site having previously provided storm
water control as part of a larger unit of development with the original
development plan;
         (c)   Remodeling, repair, replacement, and improvements to any
existing structure or facility and appurtenances that does not increase the
impervious area on the site in excess of 10% or add one care of impervious
area; and
         (d)   Construction of any one new single-family or duplex unit,
irrespective of the site area on which the same may be situated.
      (2)   Emergency spillway. A device or devices used to discharge water
under conditions of inflow that exceed the design inflow. The emergency
spillway functions primarily to prevent damage to the detention facility that
would permit the sudden release of impounded water. It shall be designed to
handle the runoff from a 100-year storm.
      (3)   Freeboard. The difference in elevation between the top of a
structure such as a dam or open channel and the maximum design water surface
elevation or high water mark and is an allowance against overtopping by waves
or other transient disturbances.
      (4)   Principal spillway. A device such as an inlet, pipe, weir, and the
like, to discharge water during operation of the facility under the conditions
of a 25-year or less return frequency of the existing conditions, before the
proposed development.
      (5)   Private detention facility. Any detention facility located on and
controlling discharge from a site wholly owned and controlled by one owner and
not platted for future subdivision of ownership. Also, all facilities
incorporating detention storage of storm water in or on any of the following:
         (a)   Roofs of buildings or structures also used for other purposes;
         (b)   Paved or surfaced areas also used for other purposes; or
         (c)   Enclosed underground pipes or structures on private property
when the surface is used for other purposes.
      (6)   Public detention facility. Any detention facility controlling
discharge from a tributary area owned by more than one owner and/or platted for
future subdivision of ownership, except as defined as a private detention
facility herein.
      (7)   Rational method. An empirical formula for calculating peak rates of
runoff resulting from rainfall.
      (8)   State Procedures and Standards for Urban Soil Erosion and
Sedimentation Control Manual. This manual published in March of 1982
(IPSUSESCM).
      (9)   Tributary area. All land draining to the point of consideration,
regardless of ownership.
(Prior Code, § 34-5-50)
(Ord. 06-07, passed 6-19-2006)
GUIDELINES
§ 153.165 APPLICABILITY.
   This chapter shall apply to all development within the limits of the
village. Residential developments having a total area of less than five acres,
and commercial or industrial developments having a total area of less than two
acres, may be given a waiver by the village in accordance with §
153.023, subject to the following conditions.
   (A)   The village retains the right to require detention storage in all
cases in which the proposed development will generate excess runoff that
adversely affects the carrying capacity of the receiving watercourse.
   (B)   Developments less than two acres with less than 30% of the area paved
and developments generating less than one cubic foot per second (CFS) per acre
increased runoff shall not be required to provide detention storage, unless
conditions of division (A) above are applicable.
   (C)   This chapter shall apply for all newly platted areas and new
developments proposed after the date of passage of this chapter. All
developments that have an approved preliminary plan by the Plan and Zoning
Commission at the time of the approval of this chapter will not have to conform
to this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 34-5-52)
§ 153.166 AFFIDAVIT OF DISCLOSURE OF PROPERTY INTEREST.
   The effective acreage for a site is not limited to a fractional part of the
total. If a project is developed in phases or small plats, the total acreage of
the project site must be considered. At the time the owner of any development
submits a preliminary plat or preliminary plan, he or she shall also identify
to the village all contiguous property or property in the watershed that he or
she has interest in.
(Prior Code, § 34-5-53)
§ 153.167 METHOD OF EVALUATION.
   (A)   For detention basin facilities, the storage capacity and discharge
rate shall be based upon the calculated volume and peak flow of the storm water
runoff, respectively. The calculations for sites having an area of 100 acres or
less shall be made using either the State Manual for Soil Erosion and
Sedimentation Control method or the rational method. If the site is larger than
100 acres, then the Village Engineer shall use the State Manual for Soil
Erosion and Sedimentation Control method, or, if another method is desired to
be used, the Village Engineer shall submit a proposed method of evaluation for
the calculations for review and approval.
   (B)   The permitted discharge rate of storm water runoff shall be determined
by calculating the rate of runoff for the site’s pre- and post-development
conditions. The Village Engineer shall determine the most critical storm
looking at three different time periods:
      (1)   The time of concentration;
      (2)   A one-hour storm; and
      (3)   A 24-hour storm.
(Prior Code, § 34-5-54) (Ord. 06-07, passed 6-19-2006)
§ 153.168 DETENTION OF DIFFERENTIAL RUNOFF.
   All new developments shall provide a storm water system that ensures that
the rate of flow of storm water runoff discharged from the site after
development does not exceed the rate of flow of storm water runoff discharged
from the site before development of a 25-year storm, unless given a waiver by
the village in accordance with §
153.023. Data shall be submitted for the 15-year, 25-year, and 100-year
frequency storm.
(Prior Code, § 34-5-55)
§ 153.169 FLOWS FROM UPSTREAM AREAS.
   (A)   Flows from upstream areas outside the site should be based upon the
assumption that those areas are fully developed under forecast land use
patterns.
   (B)   The required storage volume will be based upon the site only, with
flows from upstream areas being bypassed or discharged via overflow spillways
or other devices for the 100-year storm.
(Prior Code, § 34-5-56)
§ 153.170 FACILITIES IN FLOODPLAINS.
   (A)   If detention storage is provided within a floodplain, only the net
increase in storage volume above that which naturally existed on the floodplain
shall be credited to the development.
   (B)   No credit will be granted for volumes below the elevation of the base
flood at that location unless compensatory storage is also provided. Where
encroachments in the existing floodplain fill the valley storage areas, an
equal amount of detention volume shall be provided.
(Prior Code, § 34-5-57)
§ 153.171 LAND CREDIT FOR DETENTION AREAS.
   The number of units/lots shall be based on the total area of the tract to be
developed. All areas to be used as detention facilities shall be included in
this total area.
(Prior Code, § 34-5-58)
DESIGN CRITERIA
§ 153.185 GENERAL REQUIREMENTS; REFERENCES.
   (A)   (1)   The design shall be accomplished under the direction of a
registered professional engineer.
      (2)   The design shall also be based on land use in the tributary area as
zoned, actually developed, or indicated by an adopted future land use plan,
whichever basis produces the greatest runoff.
(Prior Code, § 34-5-60)
   (B)   Other agencies have criteria and regulations pertaining to drainage
systems which may complement this criteria. When conflicts are encountered the
most rigorous criteria shall govern.
      (1)   Federal Insurance Agency; floodplain regulations and implementing
ordinances adopted by municipalities. Drainage systems designed within the
limits of the designated 100-year floodplain on the principal stream shall be
designed to convey the flood as defined by applicable published floodplain
information studies. For areas located in FIA Zone A outside the detailed study
area, the developer shall prepare studies and calculations establishing the
floodplain, elevation, and width. These calculations shall be submitted to the
reviewing agency for approval.
      (2)   State Department of Water Resources. Rules and regulations of dams
and reservoirs shall apply to those structures classified as dams thereunder.
(Prior Code, § 34-5-61)
§ 153.186 STORM WATER RUNOFF.
   The design criteria used in determining the amount of runoff shall be the
same as set out in §
153.151.
(Prior Code, § 34-5-62)
§ 153.187 HYDRAULIC CONSIDERATIONS FOR DETENTION STORAGE.
   Hydraulic considerations for detention storage shall be designed to meet the
following requirements.
   (A)   Principal spillways shall be designed to meet the following.
      (1)   The principal spillway shall be designed to function without
requiring attendance or operation of any kind or requiring use of equipment or
tools.
      (2)   All discharge from the detention facility when inflow is equal to
or less than the 100-year inflow shall be via the principal spillways.
      (3)   The design shall allow for discharge of at least 80% of the dry
detention storage volume within 24 hours after the peak or center of mass of
the inflow has entered the detention basin. On basins less than 100 acres, this
shall not apply.
      (4)   The design discharge rate via the spillway shall continuously
increase with increasing head and shall have hydraulic characteristics similar
to weirs, orifices, or pipes.
   (B)   The emergency spillway shall be provided to pass a 100-year storm
without damaging any property and, where applicable, designed to the State
Department of Water Resources’s dam safety requirements.
   (C)   Outlet works shall have an outlet works consisting of valves, gates,
pipes, and other devices as necessary to completely drain the facility in 72
hours or less when required for maintenance or inspection on normally wet
basins.
   (D)   Sediment storage shall be designed to provide for five years of
sediment accumulation calculated by using Chapter 154, Appendix B. All other
detention facilities shall provide storage for two years of sediment
accumulation by using Chapter 154, Appendix B, except for those using roofs of
buildings, paved parking areas or other facilities designed to preclude the
deposition or accumulation of sediment. Sediment storage volume shall be in
addition to the volume required for temporary storage of storm water to
properly size the detention facility on normally wet basins.
   (E)   For erosion control, principal spillways and outlet works shall be
designed to prevent erosion and if necessary equipped with energy dissipating
devices to slow the water to normal velocity as called out in the IPSUSESC
Manual. Special measures shall be taken by the developer to not permit sediment
from filling the proposed detention basin during all construction of the
proposed development.
   (F)   For the public detention facilities, the owner shall dedicate the
detention facility and easements as set forth upon completion of the one-year
warranty period and approval by the Village Engineer, except:
      (1)   When multi-purpose wet facilities are planned or are suitable for
use for private aquatic recreation or for aesthetic enhancement of the owner’s
property; or
      (2)   When multi-purpose dry facilities incorporate surface recreational
improvements.
   (G)   Private detention facilities shall be designed requiring the same
criteria as the public detention facilities.
      (1)   An adequate easement shall be dedicated to the trustees of the
subdivision, homeowner’s association or owner of the property for the purpose
of access and maintenance of the storm water detention facility. The same shall
apply for access and maintenance of all dam and outfall structures.
      (2)   A plan for perpetual maintenance and designating responsibility for
the maintenance shall be provided for its continuing performance to the
standards established by this division (G).
(Prior Code, § 34-5-63) (Ord. 06-07, passed 6-19-2006)
§ 153.188 PLAN REQUIREMENTS.
   The plan requirements shall be:
   (A)   Elevation-area-capacity curves for the storage facility including
notation of the storage volumes allocated to runoff, and permanent residual
water storage for other uses (wet basins only);
   (B)   Inflow hydrographs (detention volumes for rational method) for the 15-
year, 25-year, and 100-year recurrence interval design storms;
   (C)   Stage-discharge rating curves for each spillway and for combined
spillway discharges; and
   (D)   Routing curves for the 15-year and all greater criteria recurrence
interval design storms with time plotted as the abscissa and the following
plotted as ordinates (this item is not required for the rational method):
      (1)   Cumulative inflow volume;
      (2)   Cumulative discharge; and
      (3)   Stage elevation.
(Prior Code, § 34-5-65)
§ 153.189 CONSTRUCTION ALTERNATIVES.
   A developer shall build, as part of his or her development, a detention
basin as required by this chapter, unless the following divisions apply.
   (A)   Developers of adjacent tracts may combine to build one detention site
large enough to meet the requirements of all the tracts of land with approval
of the village. The basin shall be located in the same drainage basin.
   (B)   On-site detention will be required whenever increased runoff from the
proposed development creates a hazard downstream as determined by the Village
Engineer.
   (C)   Where existing strip mine ponds, either in their existing state or as
modified in shape and size, will satisfy the design intent of this chapter and
only as approved by the Board of Trustees upon recommendation of the Village
Engineer.
   (D)   The outlet structure requirements in §
153.187 will still have to be met.
(Prior Code, § 34-5-66) (Ord. 06-07, passed 6-19-2006)
§ 153.190 INSPECTION, MAINTENANCE, AND ACCEPTANCE.
   (A)   Inspection. The developer shall inspect or cause to be inspected all
storm water detention systems constructed within the village. Through such
inspection reports the Village Engineer shall ensure that the facilities under
construction are being constructed in accordance with the approved plans for
such development.
   (B)   Maintenance.
      (1)   Each owner of the property being developed has the responsibility
and duty to properly operate and maintain any storm water management system
which has not been accepted for maintenance by the village. The responsibility
of maintenance of the system and subdivision projects shall remain with the
developer until such time as the storm water management system escrow for such
development has been released at the end of the one year warranty period.
      (2)   Upon release of escrow, the maintenance responsibility shall be
vested in the trustees of the subdivision by virtue of a trust indenture.
Indenture of trusts shall clearly indicate resident responsibility for
maintenance. All such privately owned maintained systems shall be subject to
periodic inspections by the Village Engineer or his or her representative.
      (3)   After an inspection by the Village Engineer, he or she determines
whether or not the conditions of the privately owned storm water detention
system are safe and correct. Any cost incurred by the village, as a result of
the Village Engineer’s actions, shall be attest against the owner(s) of the
system.
   (C)   Acceptance. Upon acceptance by the Board of Trustees, the storm water
detention system may be dedicated to the village for perpetual maintenance. Any
such system shall include adequate perpetual access and sufficient area for
maintenance by the village personnel and vehicles.
(Prior Code, § 34-5-67)
§ 153.999 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person who violates this chapter shall be, upon conviction,
subject to a fine up to $750 for each offense.
(Prior Code, § 34-5-71)
   (B)   (1)   Any person who is convicted of a violation of this chapter shall
be guilty of a Class B misdemeanor and shall be fined not less than $50, nor
more than $750, plus costs. Each day that a violation continues shall be
considered a separate offense.
      (2)   Nothing contained in this section shall prevent the village from
taking any other lawful action that may be necessary to secure compliance with
this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 34-4-8)
   (C)   Failure of the subdivider to discharge his or her operational/
maintenance responsibilities, as described in §
153.150(C)(1), may result in a fine of $500 per day for each day a deficiency
exists and shall apply to the subdivider or his or her heirs, successors, or
assigns.
(Prior Code, § 34-5-47)
(Ord. 96-5, passed 1-15-1996)
APPENDIX A: STREET DIAGRAMS
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/55b2dcabe38ed28988c7fe1d84ccd8df76d568b7/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3425.jpg]
(Prior Code, Ch. 34 diagram)
CHAPTER 154: ZONING
Section
General Provisions
   
154.001   Title
   
154.002   Purpose
   
154.003   Jurisdiction
   
154.004   Interpretation, conflict with other ordinances
   
154.005   Disclaimer of liability
   
154.006   Review
   
154.007   Construction of terms; definitions
General District Regulations
   
154.020   Establishment of districts
   
154.021   Zoning Map and district boundaries; publication
   
154.022   Determining territory of districts with precision
   
154.023   Annexed territory
   
154.024   Prohibitions; unlisted uses
   
154.025   Meeting minimum requirements
   
154.026   Access required
   
154.027   Front setbacks
   
154.028   Intrusions into yards
   
154.029   Heigh limit; exceptions
   
154.030   Sewers and septic tanks
   
154.031   Accessory uses; restrictions
   
154.032   Area-bulk regulations
   
154.033   Temporary uses
Planned Developments
   
154.045   Purpose and intent
   
154.046   Size and density controls
   
154.047   Application and preliminary development plan
   
154.048   Review of application and plan
   
154.049   Final development and section plans
   
154.050   Development design requirements
   
154.051   Criteria for reviewing applications and plans
   
154.052   Performance and maintenance guarantees
A-1 Agricultural District
   
154.065   District defined
   
154.066   One dwelling per lot
   
154.067   Lot and building requirements
   
154.068   Permitted uses
   
154.069   Special uses
SR-1 Single-Family District (Large Lot)
   
154.080   District defined
   
154.081   Special restrictions
   
154.082   Lot and building requirements
   
154.083   Permitted uses
   
154.084   Special uses
SR-2 Single-Family District (Small Lot)
   
154.095   District defined
   
154.096   Lot and building requirements
   
154.097   Permitted uses
   
154.098   Special uses
MR-1 Multiple-Family District
   
154.110   District defined
   
154.111   Lot and building requirements
   
154.112   Permitted uses
   
154.113   Special uses
MH-1 Manufactured Housing District
   
154.125   District defined
   
154.126   Lot ownership
   
154.127   Lot and building requirements, generally
   
154.128   Permitted uses
   
154.129   Special uses
   
154.130   Manufactured home parks
B-1 Community Business District
   
154.145   District defined
   
154.146   Use restrictions
   
154.147   Lot and building requirements
   
154.148   Permitted uses
   
154.149   Special uses
B-2 Highway Business District
   
154.160   District defined
   
154.161   Use restrictions
   
154.162   Lot and building requirements
   
154.163   Permitted uses
   
154.164   Special uses
I-1 Industrial District
   
154.175   District defined
   
154.176   Use restrictions
   
154.177   Lot and building requirements
   
154.178   Permitted uses
   
154.179   Special uses
Supplementary Regulations
   
154.190   Applicability of article
   
154.191   Agricultural activities
   
154.192   Buffer strips, fences, walls, and hedges
   
154.193   Home occupations
   
154.194   Junk yards
   
154.195   Nursing homes
   
154.196   Recreational vehicles
   
154.197   Service stations
   
154.198   Swimming pools
   
154.200   Public buildings
   
154.201   Churches and houses of formal worship
   
154.202   Storage containers
   
154.203   Outdoor wood-fire burners/furnaces
   
154.204   Utility substations
   
154.205   Adult entertainment businesses
Solar Energy Systems
   
154.220   Purpose
   
154.221   Definitions
   
154.222   Mounts permitted as an accessory use
   
154.223   Building integrated systems
   
154.224   Community solar gardens (SES)
   
154.225   Commercial/large scale solar farm (SES)
   
154.226   Compliance with state and federal laws
   
154.227   Liability insurance
   
154.228   Administration and enforcement
   
154.229   Building permit fees
   
154.230   Annual update requirements
   154.231   Conflicting ordinances
Sign Regulations
   
154.245   General prohibition
   
154.246   Computation of sign area allowance
   
154.247   Signs to be non-hazardous, well-maintained
   
154.248   Illumination
   
154.249   Nonconforming signs
   
154.250   Restrictions
   
154.251   Strictly prohibited signs
   
154.252   Signs permitted in any district
   
154.253   Agricultural and residential districts
   
154.254   Business and industrial districts
   
154.255   Temporary signs
Off-Street Parking and Loading
   
154.270   Applicability
   
154.271   Existing parking/loading facilities
   
154.272   Parking lot design standards
   
154.273   Location of parking
   
154.274   Design and location of off-street loading facilities
   
154.275   Computation of required parking/loading spaces
   
154.276   Numbering of parking and loading spaced required
Nonconformities
   
154.290   Purpose
   
154.291   Nonconforming lots
   
154.292   Nonconforming structures
   
154.293   Nonconforming uses occupying a structure
   
154.294   Nonconforming uses of land
   
154.295   Nonconforming under permit authority
Administration and Enforcement
   
154.310   Zoning Administrator; appointment and duties
   
154.311   Initial certificates of zoning compliance
   
154.312   Zoning application
   
154.313   Duration of certificate
   
154.314   Relationship to building permits
   
154.315   Final certificates of zoning compliance
   
154.316   Corrective action orders
   
154.317   Contents of order
   
154.318   Service of order
   
154.319   Stop orders
   
154.320   Emergency measures
   
154.321   Complaints
   
154.322   Fees
Zoning Board of Appeals
   
154.335   Established
   
154.336   Membership, appointment, and compensation
   
154.337   Term of office; vacancies
   
154.338   Meeting; quorum
   
154.339   Records
   
154.340   Decision to recommend or not
   
154.341   Period of validity
   
154.342   Recommendations
   
154.343   Office of the Recording Secretary
   
154.344   Jurisdiction
Appeals
   
154.355   Nature of an appeal
   
154.356   Filing, record transmittal
   
154.357   Stay of further proceedings
   
154.358   Public hearing; notice
   
154.359   Recommendation by the Zoning Board of Appeals
   
154.360   Decision by the Board of Trustees
Variations
   
154.375   Variances
   
154.376   Application
   
154.377   Public hearing; notice
   
154.378   Standards for variances
   
154.379   Recommendation by the Zoning Board of Appeals
   
154.380   Action by the Board of Trustees
Special Uses
   
154.395   Special use permits
   
154.396   Application
   
154.397   Public hearing; notice
   
154.398   Advisory report; factors considered
   
154.399   Action by the Board of Trustees
   
154.400   Temporary use permit procedure
Amendments
   
154.420   Board of Trustees to amend
   
154.421   Filing
   
154.422   Public hearing; notice
   
154.423   Advisory report; findings of fact
   
154.424   Action by Board of Trustees
   
154.425   When two-thirds majority vote is required
   
154.426   Notice to applicant of written protest
   
154.999   Penalty
   
Appendix A: Area and bulk regulations
   
Appendix B: Corners; restricted area
   
Appendix C: Lot terms
   
Appendix D: Sign area
   
Appendix E: Lots corner types
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 154.001 TITLE.
   This chapter shall be known as and cited as the “Zoning Code of the Village
of Marissa, Illinois.”
(Prior Code, § 40-1-1)
§ 154.002 PURPOSE.
   In accordance with state law, this chapter regulates lots, structures, and
uses in order to preserve, protect, and promote the public health, safety, and
welfare. More specifically, this Zoning Code is intended to assist in achieving
the following objectives:
   (A)   To encourage the development of buildings and uses on appropriate
sites in order to maximize community-wide social and economic benefits while
accommodating the particular needs of all residents, and to discourage
development on inappropriate sites;
   (B)   To assist in implementing the Village Community Plan;
   (C)   To protect and enhance the character and stability of sound existing
residential, commercial, and industrial areas, and to gradually eliminate
nonconforming uses and structures;
   (D)   To conserve and increase the value of taxable property throughout the
village;
   (E)   To ensure the provision of adequate lights, air, and privacy for the
occupants of all buildings;
   (F)   To protect persons and property from damage caused by fire, flooding,
and improper sewage disposal;
   (G)   To provide adequate and well-designed parking and loading space for
all buildings and uses, and to reduce vehicular congestion on the public
streets and highways;
   (H)   To ensure the proper design and improvement of mobile home parks; and
   (I)   To promote the use of signs which are safe, aesthetically pleasing,
compatible with their surroundings, and legible in the circumstances in which
they are seen; and to provide for the efficient administration and fair
enforcement of all the substantive regulations in this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 40-1-2)
Statutory reference:
   Related provisions, see 65ILCS 5/11-13-1
§ 154.003 JURISDICTION.
   The Zoning Code shall be applicable only within the corporate limits of the
village and one and one-half miles outside of the village limits.
(Prior Code, § 40-1-3)
§ 154.004 INTERPRETATION, CONFLICT WITH OTHER ORDINANCES.
   Every provision of this chapter shall be construed liberally in favor of the
village and every requirement imposed herein shall be deemed minimal. Whenever
the requirements of this chapter differ from the requirements of any other
lawfully adopted and effective ordinance, regulation, deed restriction, or
covenant, the more stringent requirement shall prevail.
(Prior Code, § 40-1-4)
§ 154.005 DISCLAIMER OF LIABILITY.
   (A)   Except as may be provided otherwise by statute or ordinance, no
official, board member, agent, or employee of the village shall render himself
or herself personally liable for any damage that may accrue to persons or
property as a result of any act required or permitted in the discharge of his
or her duties under this chapter.
   (B)   Any suit brought against any official, board member, agent, or
employee of the village as a result of any act required or permitted in the
discharge of his or her duties under this chapter shall be defended by the
Village Attorney until the final determination of the legal proceedings.
(Prior Code, § 40-1-5)
Statutory reference:
   Local Governmental and Governmental Employees Tort Immunity Act, see 745
ILCS 10/1-101
§ 154.006 REVIEW.
   This chapter shall be reviewed every five years after its effective date by
the Zoning Board of Appeals. After the review, they shall file their reports
and recommendations with the Mayor and the Board of Trustees.
(Prior Code, § 40-1-7)
§ 154.007 CONSTRUCTION OF TERMS; DEFINITIONS.
   (A)   In construing the intended meaning of terminology used in this
chapter, the following rules shall be observed:
      (1)   Words and phrases shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to
them in division (B) below unless the context clearly indicates otherwise;
terms not defined in division (B) below shall have their standard English
dictionary meanings;
      (2)   Words denoting the masculine gender shall be deemed to include the
feminine and neuter genders;
      (3)   Words used in the present tense shall include the future tense;
      (4)   Words used in the singular number shall include the plural number,
and the plural shall include the singular;
      (5)   The term “shall” is mandatory; the term “may” is discretionary;
      (6)   All distances shall be measured to the nearest integral foot; six
inches or more shall be deemed one foot;
      (7)   References to sections shall be deemed to include all sections
within that section; but a reference to a particular section designates only
that section; and
      (8)   A general term that follows or is followed by enumerations of
specific terms shall not be limited to the enumerated class unless expressly
limited;.
(Prior Code, § 40-2-1)
   (B)   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
      ABUTTING. Having a common lot line or district line; synonym for ADJACENT
or ADJOINING.
      ACCESS WAY. A curb cut, ramp, driveway, or other means for providing
vehicular access to an off-street parking or loading area.
      ACCESSORY. As applies to a building, structure, or use, one which is on
the same lot with incidental to and subordinate to the main or principal
structure or use and which is used to purposes customarily incidental to the
main or principle structure, or the main or principal use.
      ADMINISTRATOR. The official appointed by the Mayor, with the advice and
consent of the Board of Trustees, or his or her representative to administer
this chapter; synonymous with ZONING ADMINISTRATOR or ZONING OFFICER.
      AGRICULTURE. Any one or any combination of the following: the growing of
farm or truck garden crops; dairying; pasturage; horticulture; floriculture; or
animal/poultry husbandry. The term AGRICULTURE encompasses the farmhouse and
accessory uses and structures customarily incidental to agricultural
activities.
      AISLE. A vehicular traffic-way within an off-street parking area, used as
a means of access/egress from parking spaces.
      ALLEY. A public right-of-way which affords a secondary means of vehicular
access to abutting premises that front on a nearby street.
      ALTER. To change the size, shape, or use of a structure, or the moving
from one location to another.
      AMENDMENT. A change in the provisions of this chapter (including the
District Map), properly effected in accordance with state law and the
procedures set forth herein.
      ANCHOR. Any approved device to which a mobile home is tied down to keep
it firmly attached to the stand on which it is placed.
      APARTMENT. One or more rooms in an apartment building or combination
apartment and commercial building, arranged, intended, designed, or occupied as
a dwelling unit of a single family, an individual, or a group of individuals.
      APARTMENT HOTEL. A multiple-family dwelling which furnishes for its
tenants services customarily provided by hotels for three days or less, but
which does not furnish such services to the transient public.
      ATTACHED. As applied to buildings, having a common wall and/or a common
roof.
      BASEMENT. A story having more than one-half of its height below the
average level of the adjoining ground.
      BED AND BREAKFAST. An operator-occupied residence providing
accommodations for a charge to the public with no more than five guest rooms
for rent, in operation for more than ten nights in a 12-month period. Breakfast
and light snacks/refreshments may be provided to the guests only. BED AND
BREAKFAST establishments shall not include motels, hotels, boarding houses, or
food service establishments.
      BILLBOARD. Any single-faced or double-faced sign displaying messages or
advertising not associated with the premises on which the sign is located or to
which it is affixed.
      BITUMINOUS CONCRETE. A mixture of petroleum by-products and gravel used
for paving to form a smooth, permanent surface. It does not mean “oil and
chip.”
      BLOCK. An area of land entirely bounded by streets, highways, barriers,
or ways (except alleys, pedestrian ways, or exterior boundaries of a
subdivision, unless the exterior boundary is a street, highway, or way), or
bounded by a combination of streets, public parks, cemeteries, railroad rights-
of-way, waterways, or corporate boundary lines.
      BOARD OF APPEALS. The Zoning Board of Appeals of the village.
      BOARDING HOUSE. A building other than a hotel or restaurant where meals
are provided for compensation to three or more persons, but not more than ten
who are not members of the keeper’s family, but not open on a daily, overnight,
or per meal basis to transient guests.
      BUFFER STRIP. An area of land undeveloped except for landscaping fences
and the like, used to protect a use situated on one lot from the deleterious
effects of the use on the adjacent lot.
      BUILDING. Any covered structure permanently affixed to land and designed
or used to shelter persons or chattels.
      BUILDING INTEGRATED PHOTOVOLTAIC SYSTEMS. A solar energy system that
consists of integrating photovoltaic modules into the building structure as the
roof or facade and which does not alter the relief of the roof.
      BUILDING OR STRUCTURE HEIGHT. The vertical distance measured from the
average grade at the front wall of a building to the highest point of the
coping of a flat roof or to the deck line of a mansard roof, or to the mean
height level between eaves and ridge for gable, hip, or gambrel roofs.
      BUILDING LINE. The line nearest the front of and across a lot,
delineating the minimum open space required between the front of a structure
and the street right-of-way line.
      BULK. Any one or any combination of the following structural or site
design characteristics:
         (a)   Size or height of structure;
         (b)   Location of exterior walls at all levels in relation to lot
lines, streets, or other structures;
         (c)   Lot area; and/or
         (d)   Yards or setbacks.
      CAMPING TRAILER. A trailer, not used commercially, constructed with
partial side walls which fold for towing and unfold to provide temporary living
quarters for recreational camping or travel use and of a size or weight not
requiring an over-dimension permit when towed on a highway.
(625 ILCS 5/1-109.01)
      CAMPING TRAILER PARK. A lot developed with facilities for accommodating
temporarily occupied camping trailers and licensed by the state and inspected
by the County Health Department.
      CENTERLINE. Includes:
         (a)   The centerline of any right-of-way having a uniform width;
         (b)   The original centerline where a right-of-way has been widened
irregularly; and
         (c)   The new centerline, whenever a road has been relocated.
      CERTIFICATE OF ZONING COMPLIANCE, FINAL. A permit issued by the
Administrator indicating that a newly completed structure complies with all
pertinent requirements of this chapter and may, therefore, be occupied or used.
The Building Code compliance certificate is a separate requirement.
      CERTIFICATE OF ZONING COMPLIANCE, INITIAL. A permit issued by the
Administrator indicating a proposed lot, structure, or use is in conformity
with the requirements of this chapter.
      CHURCH or BUILDING FOR RELIGIOUS WORSHIP. A building used by a corporate
religious institution that people regularly attend to participate in religious
services, meetings and other customary, integrally related religious
activities. The term CHURCH shall not carry a secular connotation and shall
include buildings in which the religious services of any denomination are held.
      CLINIC. An establishment where licensed physicians or dentists practice
medicine or dentistry, but where overnight lodging for sick or injured persons
is not provided.
      CLUB or LODGE. A non-profit association of persons who are bona fide
members organized for some purpose(s) and paying regular dues and whose
facilities are restricted to members and their guests; not including a group
organized solely or primarily to render a service customarily carried on as a
commercial enterprise.
      COLLECTIVE SOLAR. Solar installations owned collectively through
subdivision homeowner associations, college student group, or other similar
arrangements.
      COMMERCIAL/LARGE SCALE SOLAR FARM. A utility scale commercial facility
that converts sunlight to electricity, whether by photovoltaics, concentrating
solar thermal devices, or various experimental technologies for onsite or
offsite use with the primary purpose of selling wholesale or retail generated
electricity.
      COMMERCIAL USE/ESTABLISHMENT. Any use or establishment wherein goods are
purchased or sold, whether to the consuming public (retail) or to other
businesses (wholesale).
      COMMUNITY RESIDENCE.
         (a)   A group home or specialized residential care home serving
unrelated persons with handicaps which is licensed, certified, or accredited by
appropriate local, state, or national bodies.
         (b)    COMMUNITY RESIDENCE does not include a residence which serves
persons as an alternative to incarceration for a criminal offense, or persons
whose primary reason for placement is substance or alcohol abuse or for
treatment of communicable disease.
      COMMUNITY SOLAR GARDEN. A community solar-electric (photovoltaic) array,
of no more than five acres size, that provides retail electric power (or
financial proxy for retail power) to multiple households or businesses residing
in or located off-site from the location of the solar energy system.
      CONFORMING. In compliance with the applicable provisions of this chapter.
      CONVENIENCE/GASOLINE SERVICE STATION. A building or premises or portion
thereof used for retail sales of gasoline, oil, and accessories of motor
vehicles, and general convenience service goods to include the retail sale of
alcoholic beverages, not for consumption on the premises where it is sold.
      CORRECTIVE ACTION ORDER. A legally binding order issued by the
Administrator in accordance with the procedures, set forth herein to effect
compliance with this chapter.
      DAYCARE CENTER. An establishment for the part-time care and/or
instruction at any time of day of four or more unrelated children of pre-
elementary or elementary school age.
      DECK. An open porch which has no roof, is generally open on the sides, is
above ground level, and its intended use is for leisure enjoyment.
      DETACHED. As applied to buildings, means surrounded by yards on the same
lot as the building.
      DEVELOP. To erect any structure or to install any improvements on a tract
of land or to undertake any activity (such as grading) in preparation therefor.
      DIMENSIONS. Refers to both lot depth and lot width.
      DISTRICT, ZONING. A portion of the territory of the village wherein
certain uniform requirements or various combinations thereof apply to
structures, lots, and uses under the terms of this chapter.
      DRIVEWAY. A minor way commonly providing vehicular access to a garage or
off-street parking area.
      DRIVE-IN RESTAURANT. An establishment principally used for the sale of
fast order food. “Fast order food” means food that is:
         (a)   Primarily intended for immediate consumption;
         (b)   Available after a short waiting time; and
         (c)   Packaged or presented in such a manner that it can be readily
eaten outside the premises where it is sold.
      DWELLING. A building or portion thereof designed or used primarily as
living quarters for one or more families, but not including hotels, motels, or
other accommodations for the transient public.
         (a)   DWELLING, MULTIPLE-FAMILY. A building or portion thereof
containing three or more dwelling units.
         (b)   DWELLING, SINGLE-FAMILY. A dwelling containing one dwelling unit
and intended for the occupancy of one family.
         (c)   DWELLING, TWO-FAMILY. A dwelling containing two dwelling units.
      DWELLING UNIT. Two or more rooms designed or used as living quarters by
one family. A DWELLING UNIT always includes a bathroom and a kitchen.
      EASEMENT. A right to use another person’s real property for certain
limited purposes.
      EDUCATIONAL INSTITUTION. A public, parochial, charitable, or non-profit
junior college, college, or university, other than trade or business schools,
including instructional and recreational uses, with or without living quarters,
dining rooms, restaurants, heating plants, and other incidental facilities for
students, teachers, and employees.
      ENCLOSED. As applied to a building, means covered by a permanent roof and
separated on all sides from adjacent open space or other buildings by fixed
exterior walls or by common walls, with openings only for windows and doors.
      ENLARGE. To increase the size (floor area, height, and the like) of an
existing principal structure or accessory use, or to devote more land to an
existing use.
      ERECT. To build or construct.
      ESSENTIAL GOVERNMENTAL OR PUBLIC UTILITY SERVICES. The erection,
construction, alteration, or maintenance by public utilities or municipal
departments, or underground or overhead gas, electrical, steam, or water
transmission or distribution systems, collection, communication, supply or
disposal system, including poles, wires, mains, drains, sewers, pipes,
conduits, cables, traffic signals, hydrants, and other similar equipment and
accessories in connection therewith, reasonably necessary for the furnishing of
adequate service by such public utilities or the furnishing of adequate service
by such public utilities or municipal departments or commissions or for the
public health or safety or general welfare, but not including buildings.
      ESTABLISHMENT. Either of the following:
         (a)   An institutional, business, commercial, or industrial activity
that is the sole occupant of one or more buildings; or
         (b)   An institutional, business, commercial, or industrial activity
that occupies a portion of a building such that:
            1.   The activity is a logical and separate entity from the other
activities with the building and not a department of the whole; and
            2.   The activity has either a separate entrance from the exterior
of the building or a separate entrance from a common and clearly defined entry
way that has direct access to the exterior of the building.
      EXISTING. Actually constructed or in operation on the effective date of
this chapter.
      FAMILY. Includes:
         (a)   A single individual doing his or her own cooking and living upon
the premises as a separate dwelling or housekeeping unit;
         (b)   A collective body of persons doing their own cooking and living
together upon the premises as a separate housekeeping unit in a domestic
relationship based upon birth, marriage, adoption, or employment as domestic
servants; or
         (c)   A group of not more than three unrelated persons doing their own
cooking and living together on the premises as a separate housekeeping unit
pursuant to a mutual housekeeping agreement (not including a group occupying a
boarding or rooming house, club, fraternity, or hotel).
      FARMHOUSE. A detached dwelling on a tract of land of not less than ten
acres, and occupied by a family whose income is primarily derived from
agricultural activities conducted on the premises.
      FLOOR AREA, GROSS. The sum of the gross horizontal areas of the several
floors of a building, measured from the exterior faces of the exterior walls or
from the center of the common walls of attached buildings. GROSS FLOOR AREA
includes basement floors; attic floor space, halls, closets, stairwells, space
devoted to mechanical equipment, and enclosed porches.
      FREIGHT TERMINAL. As applied to motor carriers subject to 625 ILCS 18c-
1101 et seq., a station for commercial motor vehicles wherein said motor trucks
are stored, repaired, or parked.
      FRONTAGE. The lineal extent of the front (street side) of a lot or
establishment.
      GARAGE, PRIVATE. A garage for four or less passenger motor vehicles
without provision for repairing or servicing such vehicle(s) for-profit.
      GREENHOUSE. See the definition of NURSERY.
      GROUND-MOUNT SOLAR ENERGY SYSTEM. A solar energy system that is directly
installed into the ground and is not attached or affixed to an existing
structure.
      GROUP HOME. See the definition of COMMUNITY RESIDENCE.
      HEREAFTER. Any time after the effective date of this chapter.
      HOME OCCUPATION. Any business, profession, or occupation conducted for
gain entirely within a dwelling or on residential premises in conformity with
the provisions of this chapter.
      IMMOBILIZE. As applied to a mobile home, to remove the wheels, tongue,
and hitch and place on a permanent foundation as required by state statutes.
      INTERSECTION. The point at which two or more public rights-of-way
(generally, streets) meet.
      JUNK YARD. A tract of land, including any accessory structures thereon,
that is used for buying, selling, exchanging, storing, baling, packing,
disassembling, or handling waste or scrap materials. Such scrap materials
include vehicles, machinery, and equipment not in operable condition (or parts
thereof), and metals, glass, paper, plastic, rags, and rubber tires. A
rebuttable presumption as to the existence of a JUNK YARD shall arise with
regard to any lot upon which three or more inoperable vehicles are located. An
inoperable vehicle, for purposes of this provision, shall be defined by the
Motor Vehicle Code contained in Title VII of this code of ordinances. A JUNK
YARD includes an automobile wrecking yard.
      KENNEL. Any structure or premises or portion thereof on which more than
three dogs, cats, or other household domestic animals, over four months of age,
are kept or on which more than two such animals are maintained, boarded, bred,
or cared for in return for remuneration or are kept for the purpose of sale.
      LANDSCAPE FENCE. A non-obstructive fence, no greater than four feet in
height, of approved design and materials. Picket, split-rail, and wrought iron
fences are acceptable within this definition. Examples of unacceptable FENCE
types include privacy, chain link, and welded wire.
      LOADING SPACED. An off-street space or berth on the same lot with a
building, or contiguous to a group of buildings for the temporary parking of a
commercial vehicle while loading or unloading merchandise or materials, and
which abuts upon a street, alley, or other appropriate means of access.
      LOT. A tract of land intended as a unit for the purpose (whether
immediate or future) of transfer of ownership or development. A LOT may or may
not coincide with a lot of record.
         (a)   LOT, CORNER. A lot having at least two adjacent sides that abut
for their full length upon streets. Both such side lines shall be deemed front
lot lines.
         (b)   LOT, THROUGH. A lot having a pair of approximately parallel lot
lines that abut two approximately parallel streets. Both such lot lines shall
be deemed front lot lines.
      LOT AREA. The area of a horizontal plane bounded by the front, side, and
rear lines of a lot. Application of the minimum lot width and minimum lot depth
shall not be construed to satisfy minimum lot size.
      LOT COVERAGE. The portion of a lot that is occupied by buildings or
structures, including accessory buildings or structures.
      LOT DEPTH. The average horizontal distance between the front lot line and
the rear lot line of a lot.
      LOT LINE, FRONT. The lot line abutting the street right-of-way.
      LOT LINE, REAR. An interior lot line which is most distant from and most
nearly parallel to the front lot line.
      LOT LINE, SIDE. Any lot line other than front or rear lot line. A side
lot line separating a lot from a street is called a side street lot line. (A
SIDE LOT line separating a lot from another lot or lots is called an interior
side lot line.)
      LOT OF RECORD. An area of land designated as a lot on a plat of
subdivision recorded with the County Recorder of Deeds in accordance with state
law.
      LOT SIZE REQUIREMENTS. The lot area, width, and depth requirements of the
applicable district.
      LOT WIDTH. The mean horizontal width of a lot measured at right angles to
the side lot lines (at the building line).
      MAINTENANCE. The routine upkeep of a structure, premises, or equipment
including the replacement or modification of structural components to the
extent necessary to keep said structure in sound condition.
      MARQUEE or CANOPY. A roof-like structure of a permanent nature which
projects from the wall of a building and overhangs the public way.
      MANUFACTURED HOME.
         (a)   MANUFACTURED HOME DWELLING (HUD CODED). A structure designed for
permanent habitation and so constructed as to permit its transport on wheels,
temporarily or permanently attached to its frame, or transported on flatbed or
other trailers and/or the section(s) are built upon detachable running gears,
such as undercarriages, springs, axles, wheels, and/or hitches designed to
permit their removal or remain attached at the location it is to be installed,
and such structure is transportable from its place of construction or
fabrication to the location at which it is intended to be a permanent
habitation and designed to permit the occupancy thereof as a dwelling place for
one or more persons. This definition shall include, but not be limited to, a
fabricated and transported building unit designed to be used by itself or to be
incorporated or joined with similar units at a building site for the purpose of
making a dwelling place. Such units shall bear a red metal label on the
exterior of the home signifying compliance with the federal manufactured home
construction and safety (HUD) standards and have a title as proof of ownership
and shall be known as “manufactured homes-HUD approved.”
         (b)   MANUFACTURED HOME DWELLING. A structure designed to permit its
transport
on its own wheels, containing complete kitchen and sanitary facilities, and
used as a long-term dwelling by one family. A manufactured home is built on a
permanent chassis that consists of the wheel assembly, undercarriage and towing
hitch assembly. A manufactured home should not be confused with a camping
trailer or a recreational vehicle. This structure does not meet state or
federal manufactured home construction and safety (HUD) standards is not
permitted in the village.
      MANUFACTURED HOME, DEPENDENT. A manufactured home which does not have a
toilet and bath or shower facilities.
(210 ILCS 115/2.3)
      MANUFACTURED HOME, DOUBLE WIDE (HUD APPROVED/CODED). Consists of two
manufactured homes units joined at the site into a single home, but kept on
their separate chassis for repeated transportation to a site.
      MANUFACTURED HOME, IMMOBILIZED. Any manufactured home served by
individual utilities, resting on a permanent perimeter foundation which extends
below the established frost depth with the wheels, tongue, and hitch removed
and the home secured in compliance with the Mobile Home Tie-Down Act, 210 ILCS
120/1 et seq., and is HUD approved.
         (a)   The foundation shall extend into the ground below the frost line
so as to attach and become a part of the real estate. Materials such as
concrete, mortared concrete block, or mortared brick extending into the ground
below the frost line shall satisfy the requirement for a permanent foundation.
As an alternative, piers may be used, extending into the ground below the frost
line and sufficient in number to properly support the manufactured home.
         (b)   To complete the immobilization, wheels, tongue, and hitch must
be removed. Axles may be removed.
      MANUFACTURED HOME, INDEPENDENT. A manufactured home which has self-
contained toilet and bath or shower facilities.
(210 ILCS 115/2.4)
      MANUFACTURED HOME LOT. A parcel of land for the placement of a
manufactured home and the exclusive use of its occupants.
      MANUFACTURED HOME MODULE. A factory-fabricated building unit transported
to a building site, mounted on a permanent foundation supporting the outside
perimeter walls, and is designed for residential use.
      MANUFACTURED HOME PAD. The part of an individual manufactured home space
or lot beneath the manufactured home, including the concrete portion of the
pad.
      MANUFACTURED HOME PARK. A tract of land of not less than two acres or two
or more contiguous tracts of land upon which contain sites with the necessary
utilities for two or more independent manufactured homes for permanent
habitation either free of charge or for revenue purposes, and shall include any
building, structure, vehicle, or enclosure used or intended for use as a part
of the equipment of such MANUFACTURED HOME PARK. Separate ownership of
contiguous tracts of land shall not preclude the tracts of land from common
licensure as a manufactured home park if they are maintained and operated
jointly. Neither an immobilized manufactured home nor a motorized recreational
vehicle shall be construed as being a part of a MANUFACTURED HOME PARK.
(210 ILCS 115/2.5)
      MANUFACTURED HOME SALES AREA. A parcel of land used for the display,
sale, and repair of new or used manufactured homes.
      MANUFACTURED HOME SITE. The lot on which the manufactured home is located
for permanent habitation.
(See 210 ILCS 115/2.7)
      MANUFACTURED HOME SPACE. A portion of a manufactured home park designed
and improved for the placement of one manufactured home and the private use of
the occupants thereof.
      MANUFACTURED HOME STAND. The part of a manufactured home space beneath
the manufactured home that includes the concrete slab on which the home is
placed and to which it is anchored.
      MOBILE OR PORTABLE MARQUEE. Any sign designed to be moved from place to
place, including, but not limited to, signs attached to wood or metal frames
designed to be self-supporting and movable, or paper, cardboard, or canvas
signs wrapped around supporting poles.
      MODULAR HOME. A factory-fabricated, single-family home built in one or
more sections. The average width and/or length of the living area (excluding
garages, carports, porches, or attachments) of a MODULAR HOME shall not exceed
a ratio of three to one (3:1). All MODULAR HOMES shall be placed in a full
perimeter permanent foundation, extending below the frost depth. All wheels and
towing devices shall be removed. As with all residences, a MODULAR HOME must
have a minimum 3/12-pitch roof with residential style siding and roofing, six-
inch minimum eave overhang, and shall have a minimum living area of not less
than 900 square feet. MODULAR HOMES shall meet either the National Manufactured
Home Construction and Safety Standards (HUD Code, being 24 C.F.R. pt. 3280) or
the International Building Code. All structures shall be placed on a permanent
foundation in compliance with state law.
      MOTEL OR MOTOR HOTEL. A series of attached, semi-attached, or detached
sleeping or living units for the accommodation of transient guests and not
customarily including individual cooking or kitchen facilities; said units
having convenient access to off-street parking spaces for the exclusive use of
the guests or occupants.
      NET METERING. A billing arrangement that allows solar customers to get
credit for excess electricity that they generate and deliver back to the grid,
so that they only pay for their net electricity usage at the end of the month.
      NOISOME AND INJURIOUS SUBSTANCES, CONDITIONS AND OPERATIONS. Include:
         (a)   Creation of unreasonable physical hazard, by fire, explosion,
radiation, or other
cause, to persons or property;
         (b)   Discharge of any liquid or solid waste into any stream or body
of water or into any public or private disposal system or into the ground, so
as to contaminate any water supply, including underground water supply;
         (c)   Maintenance or storage of any material either indoors or
outdoors so as to cause or to facilitate the breeding of vermin;
         (d)   Emission of smoke, measured at the point of emission, which
constitutes an unreasonable hazard to the health, safety, or welfare of any
person(s);
         (e)   Fly ash or dust which can cause damage to the health of persons,
animals, or plant life or to other forms of property, or excessive soil,
measured at or beyond the property line of the premises on which the aforesaid
fly ash or dust is created or caused;
         (f)   Creation or causation of an unreasonably offensive odors
discernible at or beyond any property line of the premises on which the
aforesaid odor is created or caused; and
         (g)   Creation or maintenance of any unreasonable reflection or direct
glare, by any process, lighting or reflective material at or beyond any
property line of the premises on which the reflective or direct glare is
created or caused.
      NONCONFORMING. As applied to a lot, structure, or use:
         (a)   Lawfully existing on the effective date of this chapter; but
         (b)   Not in compliance with the applicable provisions thereof.
      NUISANCE. Any thing, condition, or conduct that endangers health or
unreasonably offends the senses or obstructs the free use of property or
essentially interferes with the comfortable enjoyment of life or property. (See
Chapter 91.)
      NURSERY. A tract of land on which trees, shrubs, and other plants are
raised for transplanting and/or sale, and including any structure in which said
activities are conducted.
      NURSERY SCHOOL or DAY CARE CENTER. An establishment for the part-time
care and/or instruction at any time of day of four or more unrelated children
of pre-elementary or elementary school age.
      NURSING HOME. A building used as a medical care facility for persons who
need nursing care and medical service, but do not require intensive hospital
care.
      OFFICE. Any building or portion thereof in which the business (usually
clerical and administrative affairs) of a commercial/service enterprise or
professional person is transacted.
      OFFICIAL MAP. The portion of the master plan which designates land
necessary for public facilities or uses. It shall include streets, alleys,
public ways, parks, playgrounds, school sites, and other public grounds and
ways for public service facilities within the whole area included within the
Official Comprehensive Plan. It can be one or more separate geographical or
functional parts or include all or any part of the contiguous, unincorporated
area under the planning jurisdiction of the village.
      OVERLAY DISTRICT. A zoning district superimposed over one or more
standard (primary) zoning districts or portions thereof for the purpose of
controlling developmental problems caused by such factors as steep slopes, wet
soils, flooding, and the like.
      PARKING AREA/LOT, OFF-STREET. Land that is improved in accordance with
this chapter and used primarily for the storage of passenger motor vehicles,
free of charge or for compensation. An OFF-STREET PARKING LOT, depending on the
circumstances of its use, may be either a principal use or an accessory use.
      PARKING LOT, COMMERCIAL. Land that is improved in accordance with this
chapter and shall be limited to automobiles and trucks one ton and under.
      PARKING SPACE, OFF-STREET. An area at least 20 feet long and ten feet
wide within an off-street parking area or garage, used for the storage of one
passenger motor vehicle.
      PERMANENT FOUNDATION. A foundation which extends into the ground below
the frost line so as to attach and become a part of the real estate. Materials
such as concrete, mortared concrete block, poured wall or mortared brick
extending into the ground below the frost line shall satisfy the requirements
for a permanent foundation. In addition, piers may be used, extending into the
ground below the frost line, and sufficient in number to properly support the
structure, provided the support beams are affixed to the permanent perimeter
foundation.
      PERMANENT HABITATION. A period of two or more months.
(210 ILCS115/2.2)
      PERMITTED USE. Any use which is or may be lawfully established in a
particular districts, provided it conforms with all the requirements applicable
to such districts.
      PERSON. Any individual, firm, association, organization, or corporate
body.
      PHOTOVOLTAIC SYSTEM. A solar energy system that produces electricity by
the use of semiconductor devices called photovoltaic cells that generate
electricity whenever light strikes them.
      PLANNED DEVELOPMENT. A development of land that is under unified control
and is planned and developed as a whole in a single development operation of
programmed series of development phases. PLANNED DEVELOPMENTS are subject to
evaluation and approval by the Board of Trustees pursuant to the requirements
of this chapter.
      PREFABRICATED HOUSING. A partially constructed factory fabricated
building unit which will be substantially assembled onsite, utilizing
premanufactured component parts. This term shall not be construed to include
manufactured homes, immobilized manufactured homes, or modular homes.
      PREMISES. A lot and all the structures and uses thereon.
      PRINCIPAL BUILDING/STRUCTURE/USE. The main structure erected on or the
main use occupying a lot, as distinguished from an accessory (subordinate)
structure or use.
      PRIVATE STREET. Any street providing access to abutting property that is
not maintained by and dedicated to a unit of government.
      PROFESSIONAL OFFICE. An office (other than a service office and other
than an office for care and/or treatment of or medical attention to, animals as
distinguished from persons) for the practice of professions, such as the
offices of physicians, dentists, attorneys-at-law, architects, or engineers
qualified to perform services of a professional nature, or the offices of a
governmental agency; and where there is no storage, sale, or display of
merchandise on the premises.
      PROPERTY LINE. See the definition of LOT LINE.
      PUBLIC BUILDINGS. Any building owned, operated, constructed, or
maintained at the expense of the public or a building which provides a service
or function necessary for the general health, welfare, and convenience of the
public.
      PUBLIC OPEN SPACE. Any publicly-owned open area, including, but not
limited to, the following: parks; playgrounds; forest preserves; beaches;
waterways; parkways; and streets.
      PUBLIC UTILITIES. Utilities which are either government-owned or owned by
an established firm serving a wide geographical area and/or a substantial
number of persons.
      QUALIFIED SOLAR INSTALLER. A trained and qualified electrical
professional who has the skills and knowledge related to the construction and
operation of solar electrical equipment and installations and has received
safety training on the hazards involved.
      QUICK SHOP. Any small retail commercial or service establishment offering
goods/services primarily to the residents of a particular multi-family complex,
mobile home park, or similar development. No liquor or gasoline shall be sold
in this SHOP.
      RECONSTRUCT. As applied to nonconforming structures, to rebuild after
damage or destruction.
      RECREATIONAL VEHICLE. A term encompassing any type of vehicle used
primarily for pleasure, such as travel trailers, motor homes, boats,
snowmobiles, and the like.
(625 ILCS 5/1-169)
      REFUSE. Garbage (food wastes) and trash, but not sewage or industrial
wastes.
      RELOCATE. To move to another portion of a lot or to a different lot.
      REPAIR. To restore to sound condition, but not to reconstruct.
      RESIDENCE. A site-constructed building designed for use as a residence.
The average width and/or length of the living area (excluding garages,
carports, porches, or attachments) of a RESIDENCE shall not exceed a ratio of
three to one (3:1). All residences shall be placed on a full perimeter
foundation extending below the frost depth unless located in a special flood
hazard area, and shall have a minimum three-twelfths-pitch roof. All residences
shall have a minimum of 900 square feet of living area and shall be built in
conformity with the International Building Code.
      RESTRICTIVE. Tending to keep within prescribed limits.
      RETAIL. The sale of goods or services directly to the consumer rather
than to another business.
      RIGHT-OF-WAY, PUBLIC. A strip of land which the owner/subdivider has
dedicated to the village or to another unit of government for streets and
alleys.
      ROOF LINE. A horizontal line parallel to the average ground level of a
building along the front thereof, which line delineates the highest point of a
flat roof; or where the flat surface area of a gable, hip, mansard, or gambrel
roof is in view from the ground level, the line of demarcation between the flat
surface and the vertically structured facade; or the line along the front of a
building delineating the roof line between eaves and ridge for gable, hip, and
gambrel roofs.
      ROOF-MOUNT. A solar energy system in which solar panels are mounted on
top of a building roof as either a flush-mounted system or as a modules fixed
to frames which can be tilted toward the south at an optical angle.
      SANITARY LANDFILL. A tract of open land used for the permanent disposal
of refuse in accordance with the requirements of the State Environmental
Protection Agency.
      SATELLITE DISH. Any parabolic/dish-type apparatus, external to or
attached to the exterior of a building or structure, capable of receiving, for
the benefit of the principal use, television, or radio signals. SATELLITE
DISHES are considered an accessory use.
      SCREENING. Trees, shrubs, walls, solid fences, and the like used as a
means of view and noise control.
      SEMI-FINISHED MATERIALS. Materials which have been sufficiently processed
at heavy industrial facilities so that they are no longer in their raw state,
but are readily usable by light industry for assembly or manufacture into
consumer goods.
      SERVICE BUILDING. A structure within a mobile home park or travel trailer
park that contains toilet facilities, clothes washers, and dryers, and, in some
instances, a convenience store.
      SERVICE STATION. A building and premises or portion thereof designed and
used for the retail sale of gasoline or other automotive fuel, oil, and
automotive parts, supplies, and accessories. A SERVICE STATION may include
facilities for washing vehicles and for making minor automotive repairs.
      SERVICE USE/ESTABLISHMENT. Any use or establishment where services are
provided for remuneration either to individuals or to other firms.
      SETBACK. The horizontal distance from the lot line in question to the
side of the structure facing that lot line or to the edge of the area of
operation of the principal use (in the case of a use which does not involve a
structure).
      SEWAGE TREATMENT PLANT, PRIVATE. Any properly constructed disposal system
intended for the treatment of wastewaters from more than one residence and/or
building unit.
      SIGN. Any object, device, display, or structure or part thereof used to
advertise, identify, display, or attract attention to a person, establishment,
product, service, or event by any means including words, letters, figures,
designs, symbols, fixtures, colors, illuminations, and the like. The term SIGN
includes, but is not limited to, every projecting sign, freestanding sign,
awning, canopy, marquee sign, changeable copy sign, illuminated sign, moving
sign, temporary sign, portable sign, or other display, whether affixed to a
building or erected elsewhere on the premises. The term SIGN excludes features
of a building which are an integral part of the building’s design (e.g., the
“castle-look” of a White Castle restaurant).
         (a)   SIGN, CANOPY/MARQUEE. Any sign affixed to, painted on, or
suspended from an awning, canopy, marquee, or similar overhang.
         (b)   SIGN, FLUSH-MOUNTED. Any sign attached to or erected against a
wall of a structure with the exposed face of the sign in a plane approximately
parallel to the plane of the wall and not projecting more than 18 inches. A
FLUSH-MOUNTED SIGN displays only messages associated with the building to which
said sign is attached.
         (c)   SIGN, FREESTANDING. Any sign supported by one or more uprights,
poles, or braces placed in or upon the ground; or any sign supported by any
structure erected primarily for the display and support of the sign; provided
that a FREESTANDING SIGN displays only messages associated with the structure
to which it is attached.
         (d)   SIGN, PROJECTING. Any sign which is suspended from or supported
by a wall, awning, canopy, marquee, and the like, and which is approximately
perpendicular thereto. A PROJECTING SIGN displays only messages associated with
the structure to which it is attached.
      SIGN AREA. The entire area within a single, continuous perimeter
enclosing the extreme limits of the message and the background thereof,
calculated in accordance with the provisions of this chapter.
      SIGN AREA ALLOWANCE. The maximum total sign area of all signs that an
establishment is permitted to display.
      SKIRTING. The covering affixed to the bottom of the exterior walls of a
manufactured home to conceal the underside thereof.
      SOLAR ACCESS. Unobstructed access to direct sunlight on a lot or building
through the entire year, including access across adjacent parcel air rights,
for the purpose of capturing direct sunlight to operate solar energy system.
      SOLAR COLLECTOR. A device, structure, or part of a device or structure
for which the primary purpose is to transform solar radiant energy into
thermal, mechanical, chemical, or electrical energy.
      SOLAR ENERGY. Radiant energy received from the sun that can be collected
in the form of heat or light by solar collector.
      SOLAR ENERGY SYSTEM (SES). The components and subsystems required to
convert solar energy into electrical or thermal energy suitable for use. The
area of the SYSTEM includes all the land inside the perimeter of the SYSTEM,
which extend to any fencing. The term applies, but is not limited to, solar
photovoltaic systems, solar thermal systems, and solar hot water systems.
      SOLAR STORAGE BATTERY/UNIT. A component of a solar energy device that is
used to store solar generated electricity or heat for later use.
      SOLAR THERMAL SETTINGS. Systems that directly heat water or other liquid
using sunlight. The heated liquid is used for such purposes as space heating
and cooling, domestic hot water, and heating pool water.
      SPECIAL USE.
         (a)   A use that has unusual operational, physical, or other
characteristics which distinguish it from the permitted uses of a district, but
which can be made compatible with the intended overall development within a
district.
         (b)   SPECIAL USES commonly must meet special standards not
necessarily applicable to permitted uses in the district, and are allowed only
by permit. A SPECIAL USE permit may not be transferable.
      SPECIAL USE PERMIT. A permit issued in accordance with the provisions of
this chapter to regulate development of a special use.
      STOP ORDER. A type of corrective action order used by the Administrator
to halt work in progress that is in violation of this chapter.
      STREET. A public or private way for motor vehicle travel. The term STREET
includes a highway, thoroughfare, parkway, throughway, road, pike, avenue,
boulevard, lane, place, drive, court, and similar designations, but excludes an
alley or a way for pedestrian use only.
      STREET, PRIVATE. Any street providing access to abutting property that is
not maintained by and dedicated to the municipality or other public entity.
      STRINGENT. Binding and/or exacting.
      STRUCTURE. Anything constructed or erected on the ground, or attached to
something having a fixed location on the ground. All buildings are STRUCTURES,
but not all STRUCTURES are buildings.
      STRUCTURE, TEMPORARY. Any structure that is not attached to a permanent
foundation.
      TELECOMMUTING. Working in the home by using a computer terminal or other
terminal connected by a telephone line or by other means to a central office or
central computer.
      TEMPORARY USE PERMIT. A permit issued in accordance with the provisions
of this chapter and valid for not more than one year, which allows the
erection/occupation of a temporary structure or the operation of a temporary
enterprise.
      TOPOGRAPHY. The relief features or surface configuration of an area.
      USE. The purpose or activity for which the land or a structure thereon is
designed, arranged, intended, occupied, or maintained.
      USE VARIANCE. A type of amendment (not a variance) that allows a use in a
district where said use would not be allowed under existing provisions of this
chapter.
      UTILITY SUBSTATION. A secondary utility facility such as an electrical
substation, gas regulator station, telephone exchange facility, sewage
treatment plant, and the like.
      VACANT. As applied to a lot, no structure is situated thereon.
      VARIANCE. A relaxation of the strict application of the lot size,
setbacks, or other bulk requirements applicable to a particular lot or
structure.
      WHOLESALE. Refers to the sale of goods or services by one business to
another business.
      WINDOW SIGN. Any sign visible from the exterior of a building or
structure which is painted directly on the surface of a window or affixed to or
suspended immediately behind the window for the purpose of informing passersby
of the identity of the proprietor or business, or of the product or service
which can be obtained on the premises.
      YARD. Open space that is unobstructed, except as specifically permitted
in this chapter and that is located on the same lot as the principal building.
         (a)   YARD, FRONT. A yard which is bounded by the side lot lines,
front lot line, and the building line.
         (b)   YARD, REAR. A yard which is bounded by side lot lines, rear lot
line, and rear yard line.
         (c)   YARD, SIDE. A yard which is bounded by the rear yard line, front
yard line, side yard line, and side lot line.
      YARD LINE. A line in a lot that is generally parallel to the lot line
along which the yard in question extends and which is not nearer to such lot
line at any point than the required depth or width of said yard.
      ZONING ADMINISTRATOR, ZONING OFFICIAL, or ZONING OFFICER. The Zoning
Administrator of the village or his or her authorized representative.
      ZONING MAP. The map(s) and any amendments thereto designating zoning
districts, and incorporated into this chapter by reference.
(Prior Code, § 40-2-2) (Ord. 06-08, passed 6-19-2006)
GENERAL DISTRICT REGULATIONS
§ 154.020 ESTABLISHMENT OF DISTRICTS.
   In order to implement the regulatory scheme of this Zoning Code so as to
achieve the objectives enumerated in §
154.002, the entire village is hereby divided into the following zoning
districts:
District Designation  Minimum Area1
District                        Designation  Minimum Area1
Agricultural                    A-1         3 acres
Community Business              B-1         1 acre
Highway Business                B-2         2 acres
Industrial                      I-1         5 acres
Manufactured Housing            MH-1        5 acres
Multiple-Family Housing         MH-1        3 acres
Planned Development2            PD          5 acres
Single-Family Residence (Large) SR-1        5 acres
Single-Family Residence (Small) SR-2        3 acres
Notes:
1: The minimum area requirement (which is intended to prevent spot zoning)
refers to the smallest total area of contiguous parcels that can properly be
given the particular district classification. The minimum area requirement is
not satisfied merely because the acreage of numerous noncontiguous parcels,
when aggregated, happens to equal or exceed the minimum area indicated above
 
2: As established by separate ordinances
 
(Prior Code, § 40-3-1) (Ord. 06-08, passed 6-19-2006)
§ 154.021 ZONING MAP AND DISTRICT BOUNDARIES; PUBLICATION.
   (A)   (1)   The boundaries of the listed zoning districts are hereby
established as shown on the Official Zoning Map of the village.
      (2)   This map, including all notations, and other information thereof is
hereby made a part of this code by reference. The Official Zoning Map shall be
kept on file in the Zoning Administrator’s office.
(Prior Code, § 40-3-2)
   (B)   In accordance with state law, if any changes are made in the zoning
districts or regulations during a calendar year, the Zoning Administrator shall
publish the revised official zoning map of the village not later than March 31
of the following year. The map shall be published if there are any annexations.
(Prior Code, § 40-3-3)
Statutory reference:
    Related provisions, see 65 ILCS 5/11-13-19
§ 154.022 DETERMINING TERRITORY OF DISTRICTS WITH PRECISION.
   In determining with precision what territory is actually included within any
zoning district, the Zoning Administrator shall apply the following rules:
   (A)   Where a district boundary as indicated on the zoning map approximately
follows any of the features listed below on the left, the corresponding feature
on the right shall be deemed the district boundary:
 
Centerline of any street, alley, or highway such centerline
Lot line                                    such lot line
Railroad tracks                             right-of-way line of such tracks
Stream                                      center of such stream
Section, fraction, or survey lines          such lines
 
   (B)   Whenever any street, alley, or other public way is legally vacated,
the zoning districts adjoining each side of such vacated public way shall
automatically extend to the center of such way, and all territory included in
the vacated way shall thereafter be subject to all regulations of the extended
districts.
(Prior Code, § 40-3-4)
§ 154.023 ANNEXED TERRITORY.
   Any territory hereafter annexed to the village shall automatically be in the
SR-1 Single Family Residence District until duly changed by an amendment to
this chapter; except that the Board of Trustees, with the advice of the Zoning
Board, may annex any territory as any other zoning district or districts herein
established if all legal requirements for zoning the property at the time of
the annexation and the requirements for amending this code by the extension of
the zoning district provisions are met. (See § 154.420 for amendments.)
(Prior Code, § 40-3-5)
§ 154.024 PROHIBITIONS; UNLISTED USES.
   (A)    Hereafter, it shall be unlawful to do the following within the
village:
      (1)   Erect, use, occupy, enlarge, alter, relocate, or reconstruct any
structure or part thereof (except in conformity with the provisions of this
chapter);
      (2)   To create any lot (except in conformity with the provisions of this
chapter); or
      (3)   To use, occupy, or develop any lot or part thereof (except in
conformity with the provisions of this chapter).
(Prior Code, § 40-3-6)
   (B)   Whenever any use is not specifically listed as “permitted” or
“special” within a particular zoning district, such use shall be deemed
prohibited in that district. However, if the Board of Trustees, following
consultation with the Zoning Administrator and the Zoning Board of Appeals
finds that the unlisted use is similar to and compatible with the listed uses,
they may allow such use. The decision of the Village Board shall become a
permanent public record, and any unlisted use that they approve shall
thereafter have the same status as listed uses.
(Prior Code, § 40-3-7)
§ 154.025 MEETING MINIMUM REQUIREMENTS.
   Except as specifically provided otherwise elsewhere in this chapter, every
lot must meet the minimum area, minimum dimensions, and minimum setback
requirements of the district in which it is located independently; that is,
without counting any portion of any abutting lot.
(Prior Code, § 40-3-8)
§ 154.026 ACCESS REQUIRED.
   No building shall be erected on any lot unless such lot abuts, or has
permanent easement of access to a public street or private street.
(Prior Code, § 40-3-9)
§ 154.027 FRONT SETBACKS.
   (A)   Every lot with multiple frontages (such as corner or through lots)
shall meet the front setback requirements of the district in which it is
located on every side having frontage. (See Appendix E.)
(Prior Code, § 40-3-10)
   (B)   Except as specifically provided otherwise in the B-1 Community
Business District and in all residential zoning districts where lots having 50%
or more of the frontage on one side of a street between intersections (that is,
in one block) are developed with buildings, and the front setbacks of those
lots do not differ by more than ten feet, the minimum required front setback on
that block shall be the average of the existing front setbacks, but no less
than five feet; provided, however, that in any built-up area, no front setback
greater than 50 feet shall be required.
(Prior Code, § 40-3-11)
§ 154.028 INTRUSIONS INTO YARDS.
    To the extent indicated below, the following features of principal
buildings may intrude into required yards without thereby violating the minimum
setback requirements:
 
Features                                               Maximum Intrusion
Balconies and decks                                    4 feet
Canopies, roof overhangs                               4 feet
Cornices, chimneys, planters, or similar architectural 2 feet
features
Fire escapes                                           4 feet
Patios uncovered at ground level                       No limit
Porches, if unenclosed and at ground level             6 feet
 
(Prior Code, § 40-3-12)
§ 154.029 HEIGH LIMIT; EXCEPTIONS.
   (A)   Necessary appurtenances. Chimneys, church spires, parapet walls,
cooling towers, elevator bulkheads, fire towers, antennas, or other necessary
appurtenances commonly constructed above the roof line shall be permitted to
exceed the maximum height limitations of the district in which they are located
if they comply with all other pertinent ordinances of the village.
   (B)   Intersections. On corner lots, in the triangular portion of land
bounded by intersecting street lines and a line joining these street lines at
points 30 feet from the point of intersection, no obstruction, whether natural
or human-made, shall intrude into the air space that is between two feet and 10
feet above the level of the adjacent street. (See Appendix A.)
(Prior Code, § 40-3-13)
§ 154.030 SEWERS AND SEPTIC TANKS.
   In all districts, property owners of all buildings and places where people
live, work, or assemble shall provide for the sanitary disposal of all sewage
in accordance with the following requirements.
   (A)   Whenever the public sanitary sewerage system is reasonably accessible
(that is, when the distance from the property in question to the nearest public
sewer with available capacity does not exceed 100 feet), all sewage shall be
discharged into such system whether or not a private sewerage system already
exists or is more convenient.
   (B)   Whenever the public sanitary sewerage system is not reasonably
accessible, a private sewerage system shall be installed and used. All private
sewerage systems shall be designed, constructed, operated, and maintained in
conformity with the following requirements:
      (1)   The State Private Sewage Disposal Licensing Act, 225 ILCS 225/
1 through 225/23, as amended from time to time;
      (2)   The State Private Sewage Disposal Code No. 4.002, being 77 Ill.
Adm. Code pt. 905, promulgated by the Director of the State Department of
Public Health, as amended from time to time;
      (3)   Pertinent, current regulations issued by the State Environmental
Protection Agency; and
      (4)   Applicable codes and regulations of the village, particularly the
Subdivision Code.
   (C)   The Zoning Administrator shall not issue any certificate of zoning
compliance unless, following consultation with the Village Engineer, he or she
is satisfied that these requirements will be met. (See Title V of this code of
ordinances.)
(Prior Code, § 40-3-14)
§ 154.031 ACCESSORY USES; RESTRICTIONS.
   (A)   (1)   Any accessory use shall be deemed permitted in a particular
zoning district if such use:
         (a)   Meets the definition of “accessory use” found in §
154.007(B);
         (b)   Is accessory to a principal structure or use that is allowed in
a particular zoning district as a permitted or special use; and
         (c)   Is in compliance with restrictions set forth in division (B).
      (2)   If an accessory structure is attached to a principal structure, it
shall be considered part of such structure. (See the definition of “attached”
in §
154.007(B).)
      (3)   Roof overhangs on accessory structures not attached to the
principal structure shall not encroach more than two feet into the required
setback distance.
(Prior Code, § 40-3-15)
   (B)   (1)   No accessory use shall be higher than 25 feet in any zoning
district; provided, there shall be no height limit on accessory structures
related to agriculture.
      (2)   No accessory use in any zoning district shall be located in any
part of any yard (front, side, or rear) that is required because of the setback
regulations of such district; provided that in the agricultural district or in
any residential district, an accessory use may be located as close as five feet
to any side or eight feet to any rear lot line.
      (3)   Accessory uses shall not cover more than 30% of a required rear
yard.
      (4)   Use of any accessory structure as a dwelling is strictly prohibited
throughout the village.
(Prior Code, § 40-3-16)
§ 154.032 AREA-BULK REGULATIONS.
   To facilitate public understanding of this chapter, the area-bulk regulation
schedule is hereby adopted and declared to be an integral part of this chapter
and it may be amended in the same manner as any other part of this chapter. The
schedule is found in Appendix A at the conclusion of this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 40-3-17)
§ 154.033 TEMPORARY USES.
   (A)   Except as specifically provided otherwise in this chapter, no
temporary structure shall be used or occupied for any purpose, and no land
shall be used for temporary enterprise, whether for profit or not-for-profit,
unless a temporary use permit has been obtained.
   (B)   No temporary use permit shall be valid for more than one year unless
it is properly renewed. (See §
154.400.)
(Prior Code, § 40-3-18)
PLANNED DEVELOPMENTS
§ 154.045 PURPOSE AND INTENT.
   (A)   The planned development provisions contained herein, or PD, is
intended to provide for developments incorporating a single type or a variety
of related uses which are planned and development as a unit.
   (B)   A planned development may consist of conventionally subdivided lots or
provide for nontraditional techniques of development which are consistent with
the intent of the Official Zoning Map and meet the spirit and intent of the
Zoning Code. The further purpose of the Planned development provisions is to
permit the following:
      (1)   A maximum choice in the type of environment available to the public
by allowing a development that would not be possible under the strict
application of the provisions of this chapter;
      (2)   Permanent preservation of common open space and recreation areas
and facilities;
      (3)   A pattern of development to preserve natural vegetation,
topographic, and geologic features;
      (4)   A creative approach to the use of land and related physical
facilities that results in better development and design, including effective
reuse of unreclaimed strip mines;
      (5)   An efficient use of the land resulting in more economic network of
utilities, streets, schools, public grounds and buildings, and other
facilities;
      (6)   A land use which promotes the public health, safety, comfort,
morals, and welfare; and
      (7)   Innovations in residential, commercial, and recreational
development so that growing demands of population may be met by greater variety
in type, design, and layout of buildings and lots and by the conservation and
more efficient use of open space ancillary to said buildings.
(Prior Code, § 40-3-20)
§ 154.046 SIZE AND DENSITY CONTROLS.
   (A)   The minimum size of any planned development shall be five acres.
   (B)   The maximum residential density of any planned development and the
maximum lot coverage shall be controlled by the underlying zoning district(s).
(Prior Code, § 40-3-21)
§ 154.047 APPLICATION AND PRELIMINARY DEVELOPMENT PLAN.
   (A)   (1)   The amendment of a preliminary development plan or the
designation of a portion of the village as a planned development must be
initiated by an application with the proposed preliminary plan, accompanied by
the required fee and filed with the Village Clerk.
      (2)   The application must be verified by the owner or owners of record
or the contract purchasers. The application must be filed at least 20 days
prior to the Plan Commission meeting at which it is to be first considered.
   (B)   The application must include the following information. The village
may require that this information be included on or filed with designated
forms:
      (1)   The name of the proposed PD development;
      (2)   Names, addresses, and phone numbers of the owner(s) of record, and
engineer, surveyor, or designer responsible for the planning, engineering,
survey, and design;
      (3)   Acreage in the entire planned development;
      (4)   Legal description of the entire planned development;
      (5)   Signature(s) of applicant(s) and owner(s) certifying the accuracy
of the requested information;
      (6)   (a)   Payment of the required application fee (see §§
154.310 through
154.322).
         (b)   For portions of the planned development devoted to detached
single-family or attached single-family subdivisions, the fees under see §§
154.310 through
154.322 shall be waived and, instead, the fees specified in §§
153.020 through
153.025 shall apply;
      (7)   A recent certificate of title to the property showing ownership or
other form of evidence of ownership or control (e.g., property tax bill,
executed contract for purchase or option);
      (8)   A list containing the names and addresses of all owners of property
located within 250 feet of the property to be designated a planned development;
and
      (9)   Any additional information deemed necessary by the Plan Commission.
   (C)   The application must be accompanied by six copies of the proposed
preliminary development plan. The scale for preliminary development plan shall
be of such a size so as to clearly show the following information, but in no
case shall be less than one inch equals 200 feet:
      (1)   The name of the planned development;
      (2)   Scale, north arrow, and the date drawn;
      (3)   Proposed use and development of the planned development;
      (4)   Boundaries, dimensions, and area of the planned development;
      (5)   Location of the planned development in relation to the surrounding
uses, buildings, and zoning;
      (6)   Location of the planned development in relation to major
thoroughfares, and any roadways or drives connecting the planned development to
those major thoroughfares;
      (7)   Names of adjacent subdivisions, layout of streets (with names and
rights-of-way widths), connections with adjoining platted streets, location and
widths and of adjoining alleys, easements and public sidewalks, and location
and dimensions of all existing sanitary sewer, storm sewer, and supply
facilities within 250 feet of the planned development;
      (8)   Existing conditions in the planned development area showing all
easements, streets, drives, or alleys, bridges, and existing structures;
      (9)   Existing topography (at least five foot contour intervals). All
topographic data shall directly relate to USGS data;
      (10)   The preliminary development plan submittal shall include the
information required in §
153.007, as applicable. In addition, the following shall be included as
applicable:
         (a)   Gross and net acreage (exclusive of streets) of tract;
         (b)   Building outlines (footprints) of all structures, except
detached single-family and attached single-family dwellings proposed on
subdivided lots;
         (c)   Internal traffic circulation drives and parking areas, except
driveways associated with single-family and two-family dwellings proposed on
subdivided lots;
         (d)   Maximum number of residential dwelling units allowed per the
original zoning district or districts;
         (e)   Number of residential dwelling units proposed;
         (f)   Number of off-street parking spaces required and proposed;
         (g)   Delineation of and gross floor area of all non-residential
buildings. Non-residential uses shall be identified by use type;
         (h)   The proposed location and use of open spaces, including common
ground, recreational areas, plazas, and buffer areas;
         (i)   Preliminary landscaping plan including general information on
the areas of landscaping treatment (e.g., natural areas to be preserved, green
areas, general tree placements and massing, and the like); and
         (j)   Other narrative and graphic information as necessary to describe
design intent and proposed deviations from zoning or other development design
standards.
      (11)   Any additional information deemed necessary by the Plan Commission
to adequately illustrate the planned development.
   (D)   The preliminary development plan and final development plan required
in this section shall replace (for a planned development only) any other site
plan required by the village.
(Prior Code, § 40-3-22)
§ 154.048 REVIEW OF APPLICATION AND PLAN.
   (A)   The proposed preliminary development plan shall be referred to the
Plan Commission for study, a public hearing thereon and recommendation and
report to the Board of Trustees. Preliminary plats associated with a planned
development shall be subject to the provisions of Subdivision Code in
Chapter 153. To the extent practicable, review, and approval of the preliminary
subdivision plat and preliminary development plan may take place
simultaneously.
   (B)   The Plan Commission shall not act on any proposed plan before holding
a public hearing thereon. Notice shall be given of the time and place of the
hearing not more than 30, nor less than 15 days before the hearing, by
publishing a notice thereof in a newspaper published in village, or, if no
newspaper is published therein, then in a newspaper of general circulation
within the village.
   (C)   (1)   After holding a public hearing on any proposed plan, the Plan
Commission shall submit its report of its action to the President and Board of
Trustees for consideration and action. Said report shall include all documents
comprising the proposed plan referred to the Plan Commission, the
recommendation of the Plan Commission with respect to such proposed plan, and
the reasons for approval or disapproval of such proposed plan.
      (2)   The Plan Commission’s recommendation regarding the preliminary
development plan shall be based upon whether the plan is consistent with good
general planning practice, consistent with good site planning, can be
constructed and operated in a manner that is not detrimental to the permitted
uses in the district, would be visually compatible with the uses in the
surrounding area and is deemed desirable to promote the general welfare of the
village. The Plan Commission must also consider architectural, landscape and
other relationships which may exist between the proposed PD development and the
character of the surrounding neighborhood and must prescribe or require such
physical treatment or other limitations as will, in its option, enhance the
neighborhood character.
   (D)   If no report is transmitted by the Plan Commission within 60 days from
the date that the application is first reviewed by the Plan Commission at a
regular meeting, the President and Board of Trustees may take action on such
proposed plan even though the Plan Commission has not submitted its report. If
the Plan Commission fails to hold the public hearing required by Section 40-3-
23(b), the President and Board of Trustees may assume that responsibility and
hold such a hearing after providing the requisite notice.
   (E)   (1)   Upon receipt of the Plan Commission’s report, the President and
Board of Trustees shall either approve the application by adopting an ordinance
amending the Official Zoning Map and authorizing the PD zoning designation in
accordance with the preliminary development plan, or deny the application.
      (2)   If the application is approved, the matter shall be returned to the
Plan Commission for consideration of a final development plan.
   (F)   (1)   Minor, technical, and mechanical changes to the preliminary
development plan may be approved by the Zoning Administrator without review by
the Plan Commission or the Board of Trustees so long as the changes do not
materially affect the PD designation as approved by the Board of Trustees.
      (2)   Within seven days of such approval, the Zoning Administrator will
advise the Chair of the Plan Commission of any such change.
(Prior Code, § 40-3-23)
§ 154.049 FINAL DEVELOPMENT AND SECTION PLANS.
   (A)   Final development plan submission. The final development plan, which
may be submitted for review and approval in phases, shall be in substantial
compliance with the approved preliminary development plan and shall comply with
the conditions of the ordinance establishing the specific PD district and
approving the preliminary development plan. In addition to these requirements,
the preliminary development plan information shall be submitted in its final
form and include:
      (1)   Delineation of off-street parking spaces and count, except for
detached single-family or attached single-family developments;
      (2)   Any site plan revisions that were required as a result of the
conditions placed on the preliminary development plan;
      (3)   The final landscape plan identifying the general location of all
plant material, specifying size and species; provided such final plans are not
required for detached single-family or attached single-family developments;
      (4)   The proposed deed restrictions, protective covenants, and the
Homeowners’ Association articles of incorporation and by-laws, showing the
means of maintaining common ground and common area improvements, if applicable;
and
      (5)   If applicable, written evidence that designs for streets, curb
cuts, and/or signalization have been approved by the State Department of
Transportation and/or the County Highway Department if the proposed development
is to have access to or crosses roadways of one or both of these entities.
   (B)   Copies and alternative. Six copies of each document shall be provided
with the application for final development plan approval. The scale of the
final development plan shall be of such a size so as to clearly show the
required information, but in no case shall be less than one inch equals 200
feet. The scale of section plans shall be no less than one inch equals 100
feet. Final plat drawings may substitute for section plans for the detached
single-family and attached single-family residential component of the planned
development.
   (C)   Final development plan approval. The Plan Commission must determine if
the final development plan complies with the conditions of the ordinance
authorizing the PD development.
      (1)   If the development is to be completed in phases, a section plan for
each phase must be submitted to the Plan Commission for review and approval.
The section plan must contain such information as is required by the ordinance
establishing the planned development, in addition to such other information
required on a final plat by the subdivision regulations contained in Chapter
153.
      (2)   The Plan Commission shall submit its recommendation of each final
development plan or section plan to the Board of Trustees. If the Plan
Commission does not approve or disapprove a final development plan or a section
plan within 35 days from the date that the plan is first reviewed by the Plan
Commission at a regular meeting, the Board of Trustees may approve or
disapprove such plan even though the Plan Commission has taken no action.
      (3)   All plans shall be retained on file by the Village Clerk. An
approved final development plan that involves the subdivision of land shall
have the final plat associated with said final development plan executed and
recorded in accordance with the Subdivision Code in
Chapter 153. No building permits or authorization for improvement or
development for any use authorized under provisions of the ordinance governing
the tract shall be issued prior to approval and recording of such plans.
   (D)   Changes to final development plan.
      (1)   Minor changes in the location, siting, and height of buildings and
structures may be authorized by the Administrator without additional public
hearings if required by engineering or other circumstances not foreseen at the
time the final plan was approved. No change authorized by this section may
cause any of the following:
         (a)   A change in the use or character of the development;
         (b)   An increase in overall coverage of structures;
         (c)   An increase in the intensity of use;
         (d)   An increase in the problems of traffic circulation and public
utilities;
         (e)   A reduction in approved open space;
         (f)   A reduction of off-street parking and loading space; or
         (g)   A reduction in approved pavement widths.
      (2)   (a)   All other changes in use, or significant rearrangement of
lots, blocks and building tracts, or any changes in the provision of common
open spaces and changes other than listed above, must be approved by the
President and Board of Trustees after report of the Plan Commission.
         (b)   Such amendments may be made only if they are shown to be
required by changes in conditions that have occurred since the final plan was
approved or by changes in community policy.
         (c)   Adjustments in the alignment of streets or minor reconfiguration
of lots shall not constitute an amendment requiring approval by the President
and Board of Trustees, provided that such adjustments shall be incorporated on
the final plat, if such a plat is required under the Subdivision Code.
(Prior Code, § 40-3-24)
§ 154.050 DEVELOPMENT DESIGN REQUIREMENTS.
    In addition to development standards required by other village codes,
including the Subdivision Code in Chapter 153, the following design
requirements apply.
   (A)   All lighting shall be served with underground cable. All parking areas
and sidewalks, but excluding nature, walking and bicycle trails, shall be
illuminated so as to produce a uniform illumination of two foot candles with
said areas. All exterior lighting shall be shielded and/or otherwise designed
to direct light downward and within the confines of the site area so as to
prevent or minimize glare or spillover to other areas.
   (B)   (1)   All developed parcels, except those developed for single-family,
shall be provided with streets or circulation drives with a minimum width of
pavement of 24 feet. Driveway openings along arterial streets shall be limited
to not more than 36 feet in width and shall be limited to one drive per 100
feet of lot width.
      (2)   Except as otherwise authorized by §§
153.142 and
153.143, all roads and drives shall be paved with concrete or asphaltic
concrete material as specified by the Zoning Administrator.
      (3)   Concrete curbs shall be provided along all drives that do not abut
parking spaces. All parking areas shall be edged with concrete curbs. Surface
or underground storm drainage facilities shall be provided for all roads,
drives and parking areas as approved by the Zoning Administrator. All storm
drainage will be directed into established surface or underground storm
drainage facilities.
   (C)   (1)   Telephone, electric power, cable television, and all other
utilities, except surface storm water facilities, shall be located underground.
      (2)   However, the following shall be excluded from this requirement:
         (a)   Poles used exclusively for street lighting;
         (b)   Antennas, associated equipment, and supporting structures used
by a utility for furnishing communication services;
         (c)   Equipment appurtenant to underground facilities, such as
surface-mounted transformers, pedestal-mounted terminal boxes, and meter
cabinets and concealed ducts;
         (d)   Temporary poles, overhead wires, and associated overhead
structures used for a period not to exceed six months which are necessary to
provide utility service until the permanent service is completed;
         (e)   Poles, wires, and controller cabinets necessary for the
operation of traffic signals; and
         (f)   Poles, overhead wires, and associated overhead structures used
for the transmission of electric energy at nominal voltages in excess of 34,500
volts.
   (D)   Building setback requirements within a planned development may deviate
from the minimums required in the underlying zoning district.
   (E)   Lot configurations for detached single-family and attached single-
family dwellings developed upon unreclaimed strip mine properties may be
configured in unconventional ways (such as flat lots) and may deviated from the
site lot line design guidelines, as specified in §
153.131(B); provided that all such lots be so configured as to permit access of
emergency vehicles to the structures built upon such lots. Exceptions to this
access requirement (e.g., building on islands) may be granted pursuant to the
procedures and standards specified in §§
154.375 through
154.380.
   (F)   Floor area ratios shall be observed as maximum density controls for
the following uses:
 
Type of Dwelling                 Maximum Density
Duplexes                         0.4
Multi-family buildings           0.6
Single-family attached dwellings 0.4
 
(Prior Code, § 40-3-25)
§ 154.051 CRITERIA FOR REVIEWING APPLICATIONS AND PLANS.
   In considering whether or not such application for a planned development
should be granted, it shall be the duty of the Plan Commission and the Board of
Trustees to give consideration to the effect of the requested use on the
health, safety, morals, and general welfare of the residents of the area in the
vicinity of the property in question and the residents of the village
generally. In considering the planned use or uses, the Plan Commission and the
Board of Trustees should consider the following:
   (A)   The appropriateness of the proposed use or uses for the site in terms,
of land patterns in the entire village;
   (B)   The compatibility with surrounding uses and the surrounding
neighborhood;
   (C)   The comparative size, floor area, mass, and general appearance of the
proposed structures in relationship to adjacent structures and buildings in the
surrounding properties and neighborhood; and
   (D)   The amount of traffic generated by the proposed use or uses and the
relationship to the amount of traffic on abutting streets and on minor streets
in the surrounding neighborhood in terms of the street’s capacity to absorb the
additional traffic and any significant increase in hourly or daily traffic
levels.
(Prior Code, § 40-3-26)
§ 154.052 PERFORMANCE AND MAINTENANCE GUARANTEES.
   (A)   (1)   All public facilities and improvements made necessary as a
result of the planned development shall be either constructed in advance of the
approval of the final plan or, at the discretion of the village, escrow
deposits, irrevocable letters of credit or other form of guarantee approved by
the Village Attorney, or performance bonds shall be delivered to guarantee
construction of the required improvements.
      (2)   The amount of such form of guarantee shall be as provided for in §
153.077.
   (B)   In addition to the above requirement, a deposit shall be made to the
village in cash, irrevocable letters of credit in a form approved by the
Village Attorney, or maintenance bonds to guarantee satisfactory performance of
the facilities constructed within the planned development pursuant to §
153.116 of the Subdivision Code in
Chapter 153.
(Prior Code, § 40-3-27) (Ord. 06-08, passed 6-19-2006)
A-1 AGRICULTURAL DISTRICT
§ 154.065 DISTRICT DEFINED.
   The A Agricultural District encompasses areas that are presently undeveloped
or sparsely developed and that, for various reasons, should remain so for the
foreseeable future. Some tracts of land in the A District are fertile and
relatively level and best suited for agricultural pursuits. Other tracts in the
A District have such poor soils, steep slopes, inadequate natural drainage,
and/or other problems, or are simply so distant from existing developed areas
that the provision and maintenance of roads, utilities, and storm water
drainage systems would be impractical or burdensomely expensive to the tax-
paying public.
(Prior Code, § 40-4-1)
§ 154.066 ONE DWELLING PER LOT.
   In the A District, only one dwelling shall be situated on any one lot.
(Prior Code, § 40-4-2)
§ 154.067 LOT AND BUILDING REQUIREMENTS.
   Every principal building erected in the A District shall conform to the
following requirements:
Use Space Required
Use                                     Space Required
Maximum building height                 35 feet (does not apply to accessory
                                        agricultural structures)
Maximum percent coverage per-lot        N/A
Minimum lot area                        3 acres
Minimum lot depth                       200 feet
Minimum lot width at the established    150 feet
building line
Minimum off-street parking per dwelling 2 spaces
unit
Minimum setbacks
 From either side lot line             10 feet
 From front lot line                   40 feet
 From rear lot line                    25 feet
 From side yard abutting street        40 feet
 Total for both side yard lines        25 feet
 
(Prior Code, § 40-4-3)
§ 154.068 PERMITTED USES.
   The following uses shall be permitted in the A Agricultural District:
   (A)   Agriculture, including all uses commonly classified as such; provided
the requirements of §
154.191 are met;
   (B)   Cemeteries;
   (C)   Government uses;
   (D)   Nurseries, greenhouses, and temporary produce stands;
   (E)   Parks and playgrounds;
   (F)   Single-family dwellings, conventionally constructed;
   (G)   Solar ground- and roof-mount; and
   (H)   Accessory uses in accordance with §
154.031(A).
(Prior Code, § 40-4-4) (Ord. 2018-10, passed 8-6-2018)
§ 154.069 SPECIAL USES.
   The following uses may be allowed by special use permit in accordance with
§§
154.395 et seq. of this chapter in the A Agricultural District:
   (A)   Agricultural implement sales;
   (B)   Amusement facilities, such as go-cart tracks, miniature golf courses,
and the like;
   (C)   Animal hospitals;
   (D)   Churches and other places of formal worship;
   (E)   Clubs or lodges, private; but not those which have as their chief
activity a service customarily carried on as a business;
   (F)   Community solar gardens;
   (G)   Golf courses, regulation size;
   (H)   Home occupations (see §
154.193);
   (I)   Kennels, commercial;
   (J)   Manufactured homes;
   (K)   Modular homes;
   (L)   Nursing homes, sanitariums;
   (M)   Truck trailers; and
   (N)   Utility substations.
(Prior Code, § 40-4-5)
SR-1 SINGLE-FAMILY DISTRICT (LARGE LOT)
§ 154.080 DISTRICT DEFINED.
   (A)   In the SR-1 Single-Family Residence District, land is principally used
for or is best suited for detached, single-family dwellings and related
educational, religious, and recreational facilities.
   (B)   The regulations for the SR-1 District are intended to stabilize and
preserve sound existing single-family neighborhoods, and to promote the
development of subdivisions offering a range of new conventionally constructed
single-family housing.
(Prior Code, § 40-4-7)
§ 154.081 SPECIAL RESTRICTIONS.
   In the SR-1 District, only one principal building shall be situated on any
one lot. No manufactured home, immobilized manufactured home or manufactured
home shall be brought into or placed anywhere in the SR-1 District unless it is
a replacement unit and a special use permit has been granted by the Board of
Trustees.
(Prior Code, § 40-4-8)
§ 154.082 LOT AND BUILDING REQUIREMENTS.
   Every principal building erected in the SR-1 District shall conform to the
following requirements:
Use Space Required
Use                                                Space Required
Maximum building height                            35 feet
Maximum percent coverage per-lot                   25%
Minimum lot area                                   10,000 square feet
Minimum lot depth                                  100 feet
Minimum lot width at the established building line 75 feet
Minimum off-street parking per dwelling unit       2 spaces
Minimum setbacks
 From either side lot line                        10 feet
 From front lot line                              25 feet
 From rear lot line                               25 feet
 From side yard abutting street                   25 feet
 Total for both side yard lines                   25 feet
 
(Prior Code, § 40-4-9)
§ 154.083 PERMITTED USES.
   The following uses shall be permitted in the SR-1 Single-Family Residential
District:
   (A)   Agriculture, as defined in §
154.007(B), excluding the raising of dairy livestock, poultry, and/or animal
husbandry (see §
154.007(B) also);
   (B)   Government uses;
   (C)   Single-family dwellings, conventionally constructed;
   (D)   Solar ground- and roof-mount; and
   (E)   Accessory uses in accordance with §
154.031.
(Prior Code, § 40-4-10) (Ord. 2018-10, passed 8-6-2018)
§ 154.084 SPECIAL USES.
   The following special uses may be allowed by special use permit in
accordance with §
154.395 in the SR-1 District:
   (A)   Churches and related religious facilities;
   (B)   Community solar gardens;
   (C)   Home occupations, but only in conformity with the requirements of §
154.193;
   (D)   Manufactured homes on permanent foundation;
   (E)   Prefabricated dwellings (see § 154.007(B));
   (F)   Schools; and
   (G)   Utility substations.
(Prior Code, § 40-4-11)
SR-2 SINGLE-FAMILY DISTRICT (SMALL LOT)
§ 154.095 DISTRICT DEFINED.
   The SR-2 Single-Family Residence District encompasses areas suitable for
single-family dwellings as well as related educational, religious, and
recreational facilities. The regulations for the SR-2 District are intended to
stabilize and preserve sound existing single-family neighborhoods, and to
promote the development of subdivisions offering a range of new conventionally
constructed single-family housing. Other types of residences are permitted by
special use permit.
(Prior Code, § 40-4-12)
§ 154.096 LOT AND BUILDING REQUIREMENTS.
   Every principal building erected in the SR-2 District shall conform to the
following requirements:
Use Space Required
Use                                                Space Required
Maximum building height                            35 feet
Maximum percent coverage per-lot                   25%
Minimum lot area                                   7,000 square feet
Minimum lot depth                                  100 feet
Minimum lot width at the established building line 50 feet
Minimum off-street parking per dwelling unit       2 spaces
Minimum setbacks
 From either side lot line                        5 feet
 From front lot line                              25 feet
 From rear lot line                               25 feet
 From side yard abutting street                   25 feet
 Total for both side yard lines                   15 feet
 
(Prior Code, § 40-4-13)
§ 154.097 PERMITTED USES.
   The following uses shall be permitted in the SR-2 Single-Family Residential
District:
   (A)   Solar ground- and roof-mount; and
   (B)   Any use permitted in the SR-1 District (see §
154.083).
(Prior Code, § 40-4-14) (Ord. 2018-10, passed 8-6-2018)
§ 154.098 SPECIAL USES.
   The following uses may be allowed in the SR-2 District by special use permit
in accordance with §
154.395, to-wit:
   (A)   Churches and related religious facilities;
   (B)   Community solar gardens;
   (C)   Home occupations, but only in conformity with the requirements of §
154.193;
   (D)   Manufactured homes (see §
154.007(B));
   (E)   Modular homes (see §
154.007(B));
   (F)   Prefabricated homes;
   (G)   Schools; and
   (H)   Utility substations.
(Prior Code, § 40-4-15)
MR-1 MULTIPLE-FAMILY DISTRICT
§ 154.110 DISTRICT DEFINED.
   The MR-1 Multiple-Family Residence District is established to stabilize and
conserve existing neighborhoods that predominantly consist of multiple-family
dwellings and to promote the development of comparable new areas in order to
accommodate all persons desiring this type of residential environment.
(Prior Code, § 40-4-31)
§ 154.111 LOT AND BUILDING REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   Every principal building in the MR-1 District shall conform to the
requirements indicated below:
Use Space Required
Use                                     Space Required
Maximum building height                 35 feet
Maximum percent coverage per-lot        30%
Minimum lot area                        10,000 square feet, or 2,500 square
                                        feet per unit, whichever is greater
Minimum lot depth                       100 feet
Minimum lot width at the established    80 feet
building line
Minimum off-street parking per dwelling 2 spaces
unit
Minimum setbacks
 From either side lot line             7.5 feet
 From front lot line                   25 feet
 From rear lot line                    25 feet
 From side yard abutting street        25 feet
 Total for both side yard lines        15 feet
 
   (B)   Detached single-family and two-family dwellings erected in the MR-
1 District shall comply with all applicable regulations of the MR-1 District.
(Prior Code, § 40-4-32)
§ 154.112 PERMITTED USES.
   The following uses shall be permitted in the MR-1 Multiple-Family
Residential District:
   (A)   Daycare center;
   (B)   Duplexes;
   (C)   Multiple-family dwellings;
   (D)   Solar ground- and roof-mount; and
   (E)   Any use permitted in the SR-2 District (see §
154.098).
(Prior Code, § 40-4-33) (Ord. 2018-10, passed 8-6-2018)
§ 154.113 SPECIAL USES.
   The following uses may be allowed in the MR-1 District by special use permit
in accordance with §
154.083:
   (A)   Churches and related religious facilities;
   (B)   Community solar gardens;
   (C)   Home occupations, but only in conformity with the requirements of §
154.193;
   (D)   Nursing homes;
   (E)   Quick shop;
   (F)   Schools; and
   (G)   Utility substations.
(Prior Code, § 40-4-34)
MH-1 MANUFACTURED HOUSING DISTRICT
§ 154.125 DISTRICT DEFINED.
   The MH-1 Manufactured Housing District encompasses areas suitable for both
single-family dwellings and multi-family dwellings as well as related
educational, religious, and recreational facilities.
(Prior Code, § 40-4-41)
§ 154.126 LOT OWNERSHIP.
   (A)   All manufactured housing units located outside an approved
manufactured home park shall be located on property owned by the owner of the
manufactured housing unit. All units shall meet the Housing and Urban
Development Federal Code, known as the “National Manufactured Home Construction
and Safety Standards, being 24 C.F.R. pt. 3280.”
   (B)   All units outside of a manufactured home park shall be no more than
five years old when placed on said lot (see
Chapter 151).
(Prior Code, § 40-4-42)
§ 154.127 LOT AND BUILDING REQUIREMENTS, GENERALLY.
   Special lot and building requirements are applicable to manufactured home
parks:
Use Space Required
Use                                                Space Required
Maximum building height                            35 feet
Maximum percent coverage per-lot                   25%
Minimum lot area                                   6,000 square feet
Minimum lot depth                                  100 feet
Minimum lot width at the established building line 50 feet
Minimum off-street parking per dwelling unit       3 spaces
Minimum setbacks
 From either side lot line                        5 feet
 From front lot line                              25 feet
 From rear lot line                               20 feet
 From side yard abutting street                   25 feet
 Total for both side yard lines                   15 feet
 
(Prior Code, § 40-4-43)
§ 154.128 PERMITTED USES.
   The following uses shall be permitted in the MH-1 Manufactured Housing
District:
   (A)   Any use permitted in the SR-1 District (Section 40-4-24);
   (B)   Prefabricated homes; and
   (C)   Solar ground- and roof-mount.
(Prior Code, § 40-4-44) (Ord. 2018-10, passed 8-6-2018)
§ 154.129 SPECIAL USES.
   The following uses may be allowed in the MH-I District by special use permit
in accordance with §
154.083:
   (A)   Community solar gardens;
   (B)   Home occupations, but only in conformity with the requirements of §
154.193;
   (C)   Immobilized manufactured homes on individual lots and modular homes,
provided said units conform to all applicable requirements of this code of
ordinances (see
Chapter 151);
   (D)   Manufactured home parks in conformity with this chapter and
Chapter 151;
   (E)   Quick shops; and
   (F)   Utility substations.
(Prior Code, § 40-4-45)
§ 154.130 MANUFACTURED HOME PARKS.
   All manufactured home parks shall be established in conformity with the
requirements of this section.
   (A)   Minimum lot size, setback requirements.
      (1)   No manufactured home park shall be located on a tract less than
five acres in area.
      (2)   No manufactured home park shall be developed on any tract that is
less than 250 feet in both width or depth.
      (3)   No part of any manufactured home or other structure in any
manufactured home park shall be situated closer than 25 feet to any boundary
line of the park.
      (4)   No structure in any manufactured home park shall be more than 35
feet in height.
   (B)   Spacing of manufactured homes.
      (1)   Every manufactured home space shall meet the following
requirements:
         (a)   Minimum area: 7,500 square feet;
         (b)   Minimum width: 50 feet; and
         (c)   Minimum depth: 100 feet.
      (2)   Manufactured homes within any park shall be placed so that no part
of any manufactured home is closer than:
         (a)   Ten feet to any park street;
         (b)   Twenty-five feet to any boundary line of the park; or
         (c)   Twenty feet to any part of any other manufactured home or
structure.
(Prior Code, § 40-4-46)
B-1 COMMUNITY BUSINESS DISTRICT
§ 154.145 DISTRICT DEFINED.
   The B-1 Community Business District primarily encompasses the long-
established commercial areas of the village where a wide range of goods and
services is offered to the general public at retail or wholesale.
(Prior Code, § 40-4-50)
§ 154.146 USE RESTRICTIONS.
   The following use restrictions shall apply:
   (A)   Retail only. Every commercial or service establishment located in this
District shall deal directly with consumers.
   (B)   Processing incidental. Any processing or treatment of goods on any
premises must be clearly incidental to the retail business conducted on such
premises.
   (C)   Unenclosed activities, special use permit. In the B-1 District, a
special use permit is required to conduct any commercial, service, or storage
activities outside a completely enclosed building.
   (D)   No drive-ins. No commercial or service establishment shall offer goods
or services direct to customers waiting in parked motor vehicles, or sell food
or beverages for consumption on the premises in parked motor vehicles. Thus,
service stations, drive-in restaurants, and the like are excluded from the B-
1 District.
   (E)   Refuse containers. All refuse generated by any establishment located
within the B-1 District shall be stored in tightly-covered containers placed in
visually-screened areas.
   (F)   Screening. Along the side and rear lot lines of any lot abutting any
residential district, screening (a wall, solid fence, or closely-planted
shrubbery) at least six feet high and of sufficient density to completely block
the view from the adjacent residential property shall be installed.
   (G)   Signs. See §§
154.245 through
154.255.
(Prior Code, § 40-4-51)
§ 154.147 LOT AND BUILDING REQUIREMENTS.
   Special lot and building requirements are applicable to the B-1 District:
Use Space Required
Use                      Space Required
Maximum building height  35 feet
Maximum percent coverage 50%
per-lot
Minimum depth of from
side yard abutting       25 feet
street
Minimum lot area         5,000 square feet
Minimum lot depth        100 feet
Minimum lot width        50 feet
                         Generally, none required except as necessary to comply
                         with applicable off-street parking and loading
                         requirements. However, any lot that abuts any
Minimum setbacks         residential district shall meet the front setback and
                         side setback (on the side abutting the residential
                         use) requirements of such residential district (see §
                         154.025)
 
(Prior Code, § 40-4-52)
§ 154.148 PERMITTED USES.
   The following uses shall be permitted in the B-1 Community Business District
(see definitions in §
154.007(B)):
   (A)   Churches and related facilities;
   (B)   Clubs and lodges;
   (C)   Commercial establishments, wholesale, and retail, except those listed
under §
154.149;
   (D)   Government uses;
   (E)   Medical/dental clinics;
   (F)   Offices;
   (G)   Service establishments;
   (H)   Solar ground- and roof-mount; and
   (I)   Accessory uses in accordance with §
154.031.
(Prior Code, § 40-4-53) (Ord. 2018-10, passed 8-6-2018)
§ 154.149 SPECIAL USES.
   The following may be permitted as special uses in the B-1 District in
accordance with §
154.083, to-wit:
   (A)   Any use, such as drive-in restaurants, drive-in banks, service
stations, and the like, that offers goods or services directly to customers
waiting in parked vehicles, or that sells food or beverages for consumption on
the premises in parked motor vehicles;
   (B)   Churches and related religious facilities;
   (C)   Community solar gardens;
   (D)   Dwelling units, if located above the first story;
   (E)   Nursing homes;
   (F)   Schools;
   (G)   Utility substations; and
   (H)   Any use permitted in the MR-1 District (see Sec. 40-4-29).
(Prior Code, § 40-4-54)
B-2 HIGHWAY BUSINESS DISTRICT
§ 154.160 DISTRICT DEFINED.
   The B-2 Highway Business District is intended to accommodate and regulate
strip commercial developments and compatible uses. Since such businesses, both
retail and wholesale, draw their patrons primarily from the motoring public,
they typically require direct access to major streets and large lots for off-
street parking and loading. Portable or mobile (manufactured) structures may
not be used for business purposes in the B-2 District.
(Prior Code, § 40-4-56)
§ 154.161 USE RESTRICTIONS.
   The following use restrictions shall apply:
   (A)   Retail only. Every commercial or service establishment located in the
B-2 District shall deal directly with consumers.
   (B)   Processing incidental. Any processing or treatment of goods on any
premises must be clearly incidental to the retail business conducted on such
premises.
   (C)   Unenclosed activities, special use permit. In the B-2 District, a
special use permit is required to conduct any commercial, service, or storage
activities outside a completely enclosed building.
   (D)   No drive-ins. No commercial or service establishment shall offer goods
or services direct to customers waiting in parked motor vehicles, or sell food
or beverages for consumption on the premises in parked motor vehicles. Thus,
service stations, drive-in restaurants, and the like are excluded from this
District.
   (E)   Refuse containers. All refuse generated by any establishment located
within the B-2 District shall be stored in tightly-covered containers placed in
visually-screened areas.
   (F)   Screening. Along the side and rear lot lines of any lot abutting any
residential district, screening (a wall, solid fence, or closely-planted
shrubbery) at least six feet high and of sufficient density to completely block
the view from the adjacent residential property shall be installed.
   (G)   Signs. See §§
154.245 through
154.255.
(Prior Code, § 40-4-57)
§ 154.162 LOT AND BUILDING REQUIREMENTS.
   Every principal building erected in the B-2 Highway Business District shall
conform to the requirements indicated below:
Use Space Required
Use                                                Space Required
Maximum building height                            35 feet
Maximum percent coverage per-lot                   50%
Minimum lot area                                   20,000 square feet
Minimum lot depth                                  120 feet
Minimum lot width at the established building line 125 feet
Minimum off-street parking per dwelling unit       See §
                                                   154.276
Minimum setbacks
 From either side lot line                        25 feet
 From front lot line                              50 feet
 From rear lot line                               25 feet
 From side yard abutting street                   50 feet
 Total for both side yard lines                   50 feet
 
(Prior Code, § 40-4-58)
§ 154.163 PERMITTED USES.
   Provided all the use restrictions of the B-2 District are observed, the
following uses are permitted: (see §
154.129):
   (A)   Any use permitted in the B-1 District (see §
154.126);
   (B)   Churches and related facilities;
   (C)   Clubs and lodges;
   (D)   Commercial establishments, any type, including drive-in facilities;
   (E)   Such uses as the following are especially appropriate in the B-
2 District:
      (1)   Bowling alleys;
      (2)   Furniture and appliance sales;
      (3)   Greenhouses;
      (4)   Lumber and building supplies sales;
      (5)   Manufactured home and recreational vehicle sales; and
      (6)   Motor vehicles sales.
   (F)   Government uses;
   (G)   Offices;
   (H)   Service establishments, any type, including drive-in facilities;
   (I)   Such uses as the following are especially appropriate in the B-
2 District:
      (1)   Animal hospitals;
      (2)   Banks and other financial institutions;
      (3)   Motels;
      (4)   Motor vehicles services;
      (5)   Restaurant; and
      (6)   Service stations.
   (J)   Solar ground- and roof-mount; and
   (K)   Accessory uses in accordance with §
154.031(A).
(Prior Code, § 40-4-59) (Ord. 2018-10, passed 8-6-2018)
§ 154.164 SPECIAL USES.
   Provided all the use restrictions of the B-2 District are observed, the
following uses may be allowed by special use permit (see §
154.129):
   (A)   Community solar gardens;
   (B)   Freight and bus terminals, and related transportation facilities;
   (C)   Governmental uses other than those of the village;
   (D)   Research and development facilities not involving explosives,
flammable gases, or liquids, or live animals;
   (E)   Sports bars;
   (F)   Taverns;
   (G)   Utility substations;
   (H)   Warehousing and wholesaling of any goods except explosives, flammable
gases, or live animals; and
   (I)   Any use permitted in the MR-1 District (See Sec. 40-4-29).
(Prior Code, § 40-4-60)
I-1 INDUSTRIAL DISTRICT
§ 154.175 DISTRICT DEFINED.
   (A)   The I-1 Industrial District is intended to provide for areas where
light industry, research facilities, warehouses, and wholesale businesses may
locate without detriment to the remainder of the community.
   (B)   In these areas, a satisfactory correlation of factors required by such
uses exists or can be readily achieved.
(Prior Code, § 40-4-70)
§ 154.176 USE RESTRICTIONS.
   (A)   Nuisances prohibited. No production, processing, cleaning, servicing,
testing, repair, sale, or storage of goods, materials, or equipment shall
unreasonably interfere with the use, occupancy, or enjoyment of neighboring
properties or the community as a whole. Unreasonable interferences include, but
are not limited to, excessive traffic congestion, loud or shrill noises,
excessive emission of smoke, emission of toxic gases, excessive glare, and
noxious odors.
   (B)   Activities enclosed. All production, processing, cleaning, servicing,
testing, or repair activities shall be conducted within completely enclosed
buildings. Storage areas may be open to the sky, but shall be enclosed by walls
or fences (whether solid or chain-link), including gates, at least six feet
high.
   (C)   Buffer strips. Wherever any industrial use located in the I-1 District
abuts any residential district, a 20-foot wide view and noise control buffer
strip shall be installed. Such buffer strip shall consist of densely planted
shrubbery that is at least five feet high when planted, and that can be
expected to reach a height of ten feet when full grown.
(Prior Code, § 40-4-71)
§ 154.177 LOT AND BUILDING REQUIREMENTS.
   Special lot and building requirements are applicable to the I-1 District:
Use Space Required
Use                                                Space Required
Maximum building height                            60 feet
Maximum percent coverage per-lot                   40%
Minimum lot area                                   20,000 square feet
Minimum lot depth                                  150 feet
Minimum lot width at the established building line 125 feet
Minimum off-street parking per dwelling unit       See §
                                                   154.276
Minimum setbacks
 From either side lot line                        25 feet
 From front lot line                              25 feet
 From rear lot line                               25 feet
 From side yard abutting street                   25 feet
 
(Prior Code, § 40-4-72)
§ 154.178 PERMITTED USES.
   Provided all the use restrictions of the I-1 District are observed, the
following uses are permitted (see §
154.148):
   (A)   Assembly, manufacturing, or processing of any commodity from semi-
finished materials, provided explosives, flammable gases or liquids, or live
animals are not involved;
   (B)   Freight and bus terminals, and related mass transportation facilities;
   (C)   Research and development facilities not involving explosives or
flammable gases or liquids;
   (D)   Service stations;
   (E)   Solar ground- and roof-mount;
   (F)   Towers, structures, and other facilities designed or intended to be
used for the support, enclosure, shelter, or protection of distribution
equipment utilized by entities engaged in the transmission of telephone
messages, including, but not limited to, cellular, personal communications
services, special mobile radio transmitters, and any other personal wireless
service;
   (G)   Warehousing or wholesaling of goods, except explosives, flammable
gases or liquids, or live animals;
   (H)   Utility substations or government uses; and
   (I)   Accessory uses in accordance with §
154.031(A).
(Prior Code, § 40-4-73)
§ 154.179 SPECIAL USES.
   The following uses may be permitted as special uses in the I-1 District by
special use permit in accordance with §
154.083, to-wit:
   (A)   Any permitted use in the B-1 or B-2 Districts (see §
154.126);
   (B)   Assembly, manufacturing, processing, warehousing, or wholesaling
involving explosives, flammable gases, or liquids, or live animals;
   (C)   Community solar gardens;
   (D)   Government uses other than those of the village;
   (E)   Junk yards;
   (F)   Research and development facilities involving explosives or flammable
liquids or gases; and
   (G)   Utility substations.
(Prior Code, § 40-4-74)
SUPPLEMENTARY REGULATIONS
§ 154.190 APPLICABILITY OF ARTICLE.
   (A)   This subchapter establishes lot and structure requirements and design/
operational standards for specific, potentially troublesome structures and
uses.
   (B)   These regulations apply in every zoning district where the specific
structure or use is permitted or allowed by special use permit; but if more
stringent regulations are applicable in any particular district, such
regulations shall prevail.
(Prior Code, § 40-5-1)
§ 154.191 AGRICULTURAL ACTIVITIES.
   (A)   Farm animals. No barn, stable, shed, or other structure intended to
shelter farm animals shall be erected closer than 300 feet to any existing
dwelling, or closer than 200 feet to any lot line of residential property,
whichever distance is greater. Similarly, fences shall be erected or other
means shall be taken to prevent farm animals from approaching closer, than 300
feet to any existing dwelling, or closer than 200 feet to any lot line or
residential property, whichever distance is greater.
   (B)   Farm equipment/commodities. No agricultural equipment or commodities
(including, but not limited to, baled crops, fertilizer, and pesticides/
herbicides) shall be stored outdoors closer than 300 feet to any existing
dwelling, or closer than 200 feet to any lot line of residential property,
whichever distance is greater. If said equipment/commodities are stored within
a completely enclosed structure, said structure shall be located at least 100
feet from any lot line of residential property.
   (C)   Barbed wire/electrical fences. See §
154.272(A).
(Prior Code, § 40-5-2)
§ 154.192 BUFFER STRIPS, FENCES, WALLS, AND HEDGES.
   Buffer strips, fences, walls, or hedges used for any purpose shall, in all
districts, conform to the following.
   (A)   (1)   Whenever a commercial, multi-family, or industrial district
abuts a residential district or is across a street, alley, or similar obstacle
from a residential district, a buffer strip of landscaping and/or other
treatment shall be required. If a buffer strip is live landscaping, a temporary
artificial screening shall be provided until such time as landscape screening
reaches maturity. Width shall be 20 feet, except that between areas zoned “I”
and the designated zones, the width shall be 30 feet.
      (2)   Where an existing SR-1 abuts a district requiring a buffer, the
minimum setback from the buffer in that district requiring a buffer shall be
ten feet, providing that a street does not come between the districts.
   (B)   No new permanent barbed wire or electrically charged fence less than
eight feet in height shall be erected or maintained anywhere except in
connection with agricultural uses; when the agricultural use abuts a property
line or a public right-of-way, the use of such fencing shall require the
issuance of a special use permit.
   (C)   No fence, wall, or other obstruction shall be erected on or within
three feet of any alley or public right-of-way; temporary barricades shall
require the written permission of the Zoning Administrator.
   (D)   No fence, wall, or other obstruction shall be erected in violation of
the State Drainage Code (see 70 ILCS 605/2-1 through 2-13).
   (E)   No fence, wall, or other obstruction shall exceed eight feet in height
in any district except the I-1 Industrial District where the maximum height
shall not exceed ten feet; exemption, planting screen, in addition, in areas
near street intersections, special height restrictions shall be applicable to
fences, walls, or other obstructions (see § 154.030).
   (F)   No fence, wall, or other obstruction shall be erected in any front
yard setback area, with the exception of landscape fences specifically approved
by the Zoning Administrator (see the definition of “landscape fence” in §
154.007(B)).
   (G)   No fence, wall, or other obstruction shall be erected on a property
line without the mutual consent of the abutting property owners; in such
instances, an applicant for an initial certificate of zoning compliance shall
include on the application a statement to the effect that abutting property
owners are aware of the type and proposed location of the fence, wall or other
obstruction to be erected and have given their written consent.
   (H)   No fence, wall, or other obstruction which completely encloses a lot
shall be erected without the provision of a gate or similar type of moveable
barrier for accessibility.
(Prior Code, § 40-5-3)
§ 154.193 HOME OCCUPATIONS.
   (A)   Limitations on use. A home occupation shall be considered a special
use in any residence district; provided the home occupation is subject to the
following limitations.
      (1)   The use shall be conducted entirely within a dwelling or permitted
accessory building and carried on by the inhabitants living there, and no
others.
      (2)   The use shall be clearly incidental and secondary to the use of the
dwelling and dwelling purposes and shall not change the character of use as a
dwelling.
      (3)   The total area used for the home occupation shall not exceed one-
half the floor area of the user’s living unit.
      (4)   There shall be no exterior advertising other than identification of
the home occupation by a sign which shall be attached to the dwelling or the
accessory building and shall not exceed two square feet in area and which shall
not be illuminated.
      (5)   There shall be no exterior storage on the premises of material or
equipment used as a part of the home occupation.
      (6)   There shall be no offensive noise, nor shall there be vibrations,
smoke, dust, odors, heat, or glare noticeable at or beyond the property line.
      (7)   There shall be no storage or use of toxic, explosive, or other
dangerous or hazardous materials upon the premises.
      (8)   A home occupation, including studios or rooms for instruction,
shall provide off-street parking area adequate to accommodate needs created by
the home occupation.
      (9)   The use must be in conformance with all valid covenants and
agreements recorded with the County Recorder of Deeds, covering the land
underlying the dwelling.
      (10)   A home occupation permit may be issued for any use allowed by the
Zoning Code, providing all other criteria for issuance of a home occupation
permit are met. No home occupation permit shall be issued for any other use.
   (B)   Permit required. A home occupation shall not be permitted without a
special use permit being granted by the Zoning Board of Appeals, which shall
determine whether or not the proposed home occupation complies with all
applicable laws and ordinances.
      (1)   The applicant for a home occupation permit shall be responsible for
providing a list of surrounding landowners and tenants (see §
154.397).
      (2)   A hearing upon the application shall be held in accordance with the
rules and regulations of the Zoning Board of Appeals.
   (C)   Activities not covered. No home occupation permit shall be required
for activities, such as telecommuting, involving no outside sign, little or no
increase in traffic, and with only occasional visits by members of the public
to the home. As used in this section, TELECOMMUTING means working in the home
by using a computer terminal connected by the telephone line to a central
office or central computer.
(Prior Code, § 40-5-4)
§ 154.194 JUNK YARDS.
   No part of any junk yard, which includes any lot on which three or more
inoperable vehicles are stored, shall be located closer than 500 feet to the
boundary of any residential district. All vehicles, parts, and equipment shall
be stored within a completely enclosed structure or within an area screened by
a wall, solid fence, or closely-planted shrubbery at least ten feet high and of
sufficient density to block the view from adjacent property (see the definition
of “junk yard” in §
154.007(B)).
(Prior Code, § 40-5-5)
§ 154.195 NURSING HOMES.
   The lot on which any nursing home is situated shall have a minimum width and
depth of 200 feet, and a minimum area of two acres. The principal building of
any nursing home shall be located at least 25 feet from all lot lines.
(Prior Code, § 40-5-6)
§ 154.196 RECREATIONAL VEHICLES.
   The regulations of this section do not apply to travel trailers or other
recreational vehicles parked in a permitted travel trailer park that conforms
to the pertinent requirements of the Mobile Housing Code. The requirements of
paragraphs (A), (C), and (D) below do not apply to travel trailers or other
recreational vehicles parked on a permitted recreational vehicle sales lot.
   (A)   Not more than two travel trailers or recreational vehicles shall be
parked on any lot. They shall not be parked on a street.
   (B)   No travel trailer or other recreational vehicle shall be used as a
dwelling.
   (C)   No travel trailer or other recreational vehicle shall be used as an
office or for any other commercial purpose.
   (D)   Travel trailers or recreational vehicles shall be required to have
setbacks as required for accessory buildings.
   (E)   No travel trailer or other recreational vehicle shall be parked on any
front yard.
   (F)   No unlicensed mobile home may be located in a travel trailer or
recreational vehicle park.
(Prior Code, § 40-5-7) Penalty, see §
154.999
§ 154.197 SERVICE STATIONS.
   (A)   All gasoline pumps and other service facilities shall be located at
least 25 feet from any street right-of-way line, side lot line, or rear lot
line.
   (B)   Every access way shall be located at least 200 feet from the principal
building of any fire station, school, public library, church, park or
playground, and at least 30 feet from any intersection of public streets. Every
device for dispensing or selling milk, ice, soft drinks, snacks, and similar
products shall be located within or adjacent to the principal building.
   (C)   All trash receptacles, except minor receptacles adjacent to the
gasoline pumps, shall be screened from view.
   (D)   Whenever the use of a service station has been discontinued for 12
consecutive months or for 18 months during any three-year period, the
Administrator shall order that all underground storage tanks be removed or
filled with material approved by the Fire Chief. A permanent curb of at least
four inches in height shall be provided between the public sidewalk and the
gasoline pump island, parallel to and extending the complete length of the pump
island.
(Prior Code, § 40-5-8)
§ 154.198 SWIMMING POOLS.
   (A)   No private swimming pool shall be located in any front yard or closer
than eight feet to any side or rear lot line.
   (B)   The provisions of §
154.031 shall be applicable in this section.
   (C)   All lights used to illuminate any swimming pool shall be arranged or
shielded so as to confine direct light rays within the lot lines to the
greatest extent possible (see
Chapter 159).
(Prior Code, § 40-5-9) (Ord. 03-21, passed 11-17-2003)
§ 154.200 PUBLIC BUILDINGS.
   In any district where municipally owned or other publicly owned buildings
are permitted, the following additional requirements shall be met:
   (A)   In any residential or conservation district, all municipal or other
publicly-owned buildings shall be located at least 25 feet from all property
lines.
   (B)   In any residential, conservation, or business district, there shall be
no permanent storage of heavy construction or maintenance equipment (such as
excavating, road building, or hauling equipment), unless in an enclosed
building or enclosed within a solid wall or fence at least six feet in height.
Such storage areas, maintenance yards, or storage warehouses shall be located
at least 25 feet from any front or side property line.
(Prior Code, § 40-5-10)
§ 154.201 CHURCHES AND HOUSES OF FORMAL WORSHIP.
   The following restrictions shall apply to churches no matter if they are
permitted uses or special uses.
   (A)   Lot size. The minimum size of the lot or tract shall be the minimum
lot size of the corresponding zoning classification.
   (B)   Commercial and residential uses. No part of a church or building for
religious worship or accessory building shall be used commercial or residential
purposes, except that one parsonage may be permitted on the same lot or tract
provided the parsonage is located no more than 75 feet from the principal
building for religious worship.
   (C)   Property lines. Each principal building shall be located at least 25
feet from all property lines, and shall meet all other applicable requirements
of the Zoning Code.
   (D)   Accessory buildings. Accessory buildings shall meet all applicable
requirements of the Zone District.
   (E)   Accessory uses. Permitted accessory uses and functions shall be
directly related to and an integral part of the customary religious worship
activities except as otherwise provided by applicable provisions.
(Prior Code, § 40-5-11) (Ord. 14-09, passed 11-3-2014)
Statutory reference:
   Related provisions, see 805 ILCS 110/0.01 et seq.
§ 154.202 STORAGE CONTAINERS.
   It shall be unlawful to locate in the village an accessory use known as a
storage container consisting of either a railroad or train car, a truck body or
shell or a truck trailer, licensed, or unlicensed, on any lot in the village,
unless the lot is in a zoned commercial or industrial district. All containers
shall be closed and be secured when not in use. They shall meet all setbacks
prescribed for accessory uses and located on a permanent foundation. The Zoning
Administrator may submit all applications for a storage unit to the Zoning
Board of Appeals if he or she feels that the unit is not consistent with this
section (see § 154.028 for height limitations).
(Prior Code, § 40-5-12)
§ 154.203 OUTDOOR WOOD-FIRE BURNERS/FURNACES.
   (A)   Definitions. For the purpose of this chapter, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.
      EXISTING OUTDOOR FURNACES/STOVE. An outdoor furnace/stove that was
purchased and installed prior to the effective date of this section.
      OUTDOOR FURNACE/STOVE. Any freestanding accessory device, appliance,
equipment, apparatus, or structure, with a smoke stack, which includes, but is
not limited to, those devices referred to as outdoor furnaces, outdoor boilers,
and outdoor stoves, and:
         (a)   Is designed, intended, and/or used to provide heat, hot water
heat, and/or hot water to any associated structure;
         (b)   Operates by burning clean untreated wood or any other solid
fuel, including, but not limited to, paper pellets and agricultural products;
         (c)   Is not located within the structure to be heated; and
         (d)   Outdoor furnace/stove shall be installed and operated per the
manufacturer’s recommendations.
   (B)   Prohibition. It shall be unlawful for any person to install, erect, or
utilize an outdoor furnace or stove anywhere in the village, unless said person
is grandfathered per the terms of this section.
      (1)   The three residents listed and on file at the Village Hall are
grandfathered from the outdoor furnace/stove prohibition because outdoor
furnaces/stoves are already located on their property.
      (2)   Outdoor furnaces or stoves shall be allowed to remain at the three
properties even if the property is sold or a new furnace or stove is needed to
be installed.
   (C)   Violation, declaration of nuisance. Any of the three existing
grandfathered owners on file under paragraph (B) of this section that operate
an outdoor wood burning stove, outdoor wood burning furnace, outdoor wood
boiler, outdoor wood fired hydronic heater, and/or any other similar wood
burning heating device must not create a public nuisance or a threat to human
health or the environment.
(Prior Code, § 40-5-13) (Ord. 2013-06, passed 9-4-2013)
§ 154.204 UTILITY SUBSTATIONS.
   Every electrical substation, gas regulator station, telephone exchange
facility, private sewage treatment plant, private water storage facility, or
similar facility shall be deemed a special use, and shall conform to the
following regulations.
   (A)   Every lot on which any such facility is situated shall meet the
minimum area and dimensions requirements of the district in which it is
located. Every part of any such facility shall be located at least 25 feet from
all lot lines, or shall meet the district setback requirements, whichever is
greater.
   (B)   In any residential district, every such facility shall be designed,
constructed, and operated so that it is compatible with the residential
character of the area.
   (C)   Screening at least 10 feet in height and of sufficient density to
block the view from adjacent property shall be installed around every such
facility. Furthermore, if the Administrator determines that the facility poses
a safety hazard (for example, if there are transformers exposed), he or she
shall require that a secure fence at least 10 feet in height be installed
behind the planting screen.
(Prior Code, § 40-5-14)
§ 154.205 ADULT ENTERTAINMENT BUSINESSES.
   (A)   Purpose and findings.
      (1)   It is the purpose of this section to regulate sexually oriented
businesses in order to promote the health, safety, morals, and general welfare
of the citizens of the village, and to establish reasonable and uniform
regulations to prevent the deleterious location and concentration of sexually
oriented businesses within the village. The provisions of this section have
neither the purpose, nor effect of imposing a limitation or restriction on the
content of any communicative materials, including sexually oriented materials.
Similarly, it is neither the intent, nor effect of this chapter to restrict or
deny access by adults to sexually oriented materials protected by the First
Amendment, or to deny access by the distributors and exhibitors of sexually
oriented entertainment to their intended market. Neither is it the intent, nor
effect of this section to condone or legitimize the distribution of obscene
material.
      (2)   Based on evidence concerning the adverse secondary effects of adult
uses on the community presented in hearings and in reports made available to
the Village Board of Trustees, and on findings related in the cases of City of
Renton v. Playtime Theatres, Inc., 475 U.S. 41 (1986), Young v. American Mini
Theatres, 426 U.S. 50 (1976), Barnes v. Glen Theatre, Inc., 501 U.S. 560
(1991), City of Erie v. Pap’s A.M., TDBA Kandyland, 529 U.S. 277 (2000), City
of Los Angeles v. Alameda Books, Inc., 535 U.S. 425, 122 S. Ct. 1728 (2002),
Northend Cinema, Inc, v. City of Seattle, 90 Wash.2d 709 (1978), and studies in
“Report to the American Center for Law and Justice on the Secondary Impact of
Sex Oriented Business,” Environmental Research Group, March 31, 1996, “Report
of the Attorney General’s Working Group on the Regulation of Sexually Oriented
Business,” Hubert H. Humphrey, III, Attorney General for the State of
Minnesota, June 6, 1989, and “Appendix D: Summaries of Secondary Effects
Reports,” Preface to the second edition, Community Defense Counsel, the Board
of Trustees finds:
         (a)   Sexually oriented businesses lend themselves to ancillary
unlawful and unhealthy activities that are presently uncontrolled by the
operators of the establishments. Further, there is presently no mechanism to
make the owners of these establishments responsible for the activities that
occur on their premises;
         (b)   Certain employees of sexually oriented businesses defined in
this section as adult theaters and cabarets engage in higher incidence of
certain types of illicit sexual behavior than employees of other
establishments;
         (c)   Sexual acts, including masturbation and oral and anal sex, occur
at sexually oriented businesses, especially those which provide private or
semi-private booths or cubicles for viewing films, videos, or live sex shows;
         (d)   Offering and providing such space encourages such activities,
which creates unhealthy conditions;
         (e)   Persons frequent certain adult theaters, adult arcades, and
other sexually oriented businesses for the purpose of engaging in sex within
the premises of such sexually oriented businesses;
         (f)   At least 50 communicable diseases may be spread by activities
occurring in sexually oriented businesses, including, but not limited to,
syphilis, gonorrhea, human immunodeficiency virus infection (HIV-AIDS), genital
herpes, hepatitis B, Non A, Non B amebiasis, salmonella infections, and
shigella infections;
         (g)   Since 1981 and to the present, there has been an increasing
cumulative number of persons testing positive for the HIV antibody test.
         (h)   The Surgeon General of the United States in his or her report of
October 22, 1986, has advised the American public that AIDS and HIV infection
may be transmitted through sexual contact, intravenous drug abuse, exposure to
infected blood and blood components, and from an infected mother to her
newborn;
         (i)   According to the best scientific evidence, AIDS and HIV
infection, as well as syphilis and gonorrhea, are principally transmitted by
sexual acts;
         (j)   Sanitary conditions in some sexually oriented businesses are
unhealthy, in part, because the activities conducted there are unhealthy, and,
in part, because of the unregulated nature of the activities and the failure of
the owners and the operators of the facilities to self-regulate those
activities and maintain those facilities;
         (k)   Numerous studies and reports have determined that semen is found
in the areas of sexually oriented businesses where persons view adult-oriented
films;
         (l)   Sexually oriented businesses have operational characteristics
which should be reasonably regulated in order to protect those substantial
governmental concerns;
         (m)   Reasonable zoning and licensing procedures are appropriate
mechanisms to place the burden of that reasonable regulation on the owners and
the operators of the sexually oriented businesses. Further, such procedures
will place an incentive on the operators to see that the sexually oriented
business is run in a manner consistent with the health, safety, and welfare of
its patrons and employees, as well as the citizens of the village. It is
appropriate to require reasonable assurances that the licensee is the actual
operator of the sexually oriented business, fully in possession and control of
the premises and activities occurring therein;
         (n)   The general welfare, health, and safety of the citizens of the
village will be promoted by the enactment of this section;
         (o)   The findings noted in divisions (A)(2)(a) through (A)(2)(n)
above raise substantial governmental concerns; and
         (p)   The findings and opinions of the cases and studies as related in
the opening of paragraph (B) of this section are the findings of the Board of
Trustees as if set forth verbatim herein.
   (B)   Applicability. Notwithstanding any other provision in this chapter,
adult entertainment businesses shall be allowed only pursuant to a special use
permit and only in I-1 (Industrial Districts) zoned districts in the village.
   (C)   Definitions. For the purpose of this subchapter, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.
      ADULT ARCADE. Any room or area to which the public may gain admittance
that also contains individual areas or stations or booths, where, for money or
any other form of consideration, one or more still or motion picture
projectors, slide projectors, or similar machines, or other image-producing
machines, video cassettes, slides, or other photographic reproduction of sexual
activities or sexual areas as defined herein may be viewed.
      ADULT BOOKSTORE, ADULT NOVELTY STORE, or ADULT VIDEO STORE. Any
commercial establishment that does not otherwise qualify as an adult theater or
nonprofit free lending library, and:
         (a)   Has 5% or more of its stock on the premises, or has 5% or more
of its stock on display, in stores, periodicals, photographs, drawings,
sculpture, motion pictures, films, video cassettes, video reproductions, DVDs,
slides, or other visual representations which depict nudity, sexual activities,
sexual areas, sadomasochistic abuse, or sexual excitement;
         (b)   Has on the premises one or more mechanical devices intended for
viewing such materials as described in the definition of adult arcade; or
         (c)   Has for sale, rental, or display any instruments, devices or
paraphernalia which are designed for use in connection with sexual activities.
      ADULT ENTERTAINMENT BUSINESS. Any enterprise which features, for money or
any other form of consideration one or more of the following:
         (a)   Adult live entertainment;
         (b)   An adult motion picture theater;
         (c)   An adult arcade;
         (d)   An adult bookstore, adult novelty store, or adult video store;
         (e)   A cabaret; or
         (f)   An adult mote.
      ADULT LIVE ENTERTAINMENT. A person appearing nude in or during a live
entertainment performance.
      ADULT LIVE ENTERTAINMENT PERFORMANCE AREA. An area where adult live
entertainment shall occur.
      ADULT MOTEL. A motel, or similar commercial establishment, which:
         (a)   Offers accommodations to the public for any form of
consideration that provides patrons with closed-circuit television
transmissions, films, motion pictures, video cassettes, slides, or other
photographic reproductions which are characterized by the depiction or
description of nudity of sexual activities or sexual areas and has a sign
visible from the public right of way which advertises the availability of this
adult type of photographic reproductions; or
         (b)   Offers rooms for rent for an hourly, or less than hourly, rate
of time period.
      ADULT MOTION PICTURE THEATER. A building or structure used for presenting
visual media or material distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on
matter depicting or describing nudity, sexual activities, or sexual areas for
observation by patrons therein, and which has been given an “X” rating by the
Motion Picture Association of America.
      APPLICANT. Any person who applies for an adult entertainment business
special use permit.
      CABARET. An establishment that provides entertainment by live
entertainers that are nude or in a state of nudity.
      ENTERTAINER. Any person who provides adult live entertainment in an adult
entertainment business, whether or not a fee is charged or accepted for such
entertainment.
      MANAGER. Any person who manages, directs, supervises, administers, or is
in charge of the affairs and/or the conduct of an adult entertainment business.
      MUNICIPAL CODE. The Revised Code of Ordinances of the Village of Marissa,
Illinois, adopted by the Village Board of Trustees of Marissa, Illinois, on
January 16, 2001, as revised and amended again in 2006.
      NUDE, NUDITY, or STATE OF NUDITY. The appearance or less than complete or
opaque covering of the anus, genitals, pubic region, buttocks, or areola of the
female breast, or any artificial depiction of the same.
      OBSCENE. An activity or material that, taken as a whole, lacks serious
literary, artistic, political, or scientific value, and:
         (a)   Taken as a whole by an average person applying contemporary
community standards, appeals to a prurient interest in sex; and
         (b)   Taken as a whole by an average person applying contemporary
community standards, depicts patently offensive representations of:
            1.   Ultimate sexual acts, normal or perverted, actual or
simulated;
            2.   Masturbation, fellatio, cunnilingus, bestiality, excretory
functions, or lewd exhibition of the genitals or genital area; or
            3.   Violent or destructive sexual acts, including, but not limited
to, human or animal mutilation, dismemberment, rape, or torture.
      OWNER. The sole proprietor, significant stockholder, general partner, or
significant limited partner of any adult entertainment business.
      PERSON. Any natural person, firm, joint venture, including all
participants, partnership, including all partners, association, social club, or
fraternal organization, including all officers and directors, corporation,
including all officers, directors, and significant stockholders, estate, trust,
business trust, receiver, or any other group or combination acting as a unit.
      SEXUAL ACTIVITY. Any one or more of the following:
         (a)   The fondling or other intentional touching of human genitals,
public region, buttocks, anus, female breasts, or artificial depiction of the
same;
         (b)   Sex acts, normal or perverted, actual or simulated, including
intercourse, oral copulation, or sodomy;
         (c)   Masturbation, actual or simulated; and
         (d)   Excretory functions as part of or in connection with any of the
activities set forth in divisions (a) through (c) of this definition.
      SEXUAL AREA. The genitalia, pubic area, buttocks, or anus of any person
and the breasts of any female person.
      SIGNIFICANT LIMITED PARTNER. Any person who owns 20% or greater interest
in an adult entertainment business.
      SIGNIFICANT STOCKHOLDER. Any person who owns 20% or greater stock
interest in an adult entertainment business.
      VILLAGE. The Village of Marissa, Illinois.
      VILLAGE BOARD and BOARD OF TRUSTEES. The corporate body as provided for
in §§
30.045 through
30.054.
   (D)   Conditions of use.
      (1)   Before issuance of any special use permit for any adult
entertainment business, the Board of Trustees shall refer the proposed
application to the Zoning Board of Appeals, which shall be given 60 days in
which to make a report and recommendation as to whether such permit shall issue
after the consideration of the criteria set forth in this division (D) and
division (E) below. The Zoning Board of Appeals’ 60-day time period to make a
report and recommendation shall commence upon the delivery of the completed
application. No action shall be taken by the Board of Trustees upon any
application for a special use permit until and unless the report of the Zoning
Board of Appeals has been filed; provided that, if no report is received from
the Zoning Board of Appeals within 60 days, and unless an extension of time has
been granted by the Board of Trustees, it shall be assumed that approval of the
application has been recommended by the Zoning Board of Appeals.
      (2)   In the case of any adult entertainment business, the following
special conditions shall apply.
         (a)   No adult entertainment business shall be permitted within 3,000
feet of any religious institution, school, public park, or any property zoned
for residential use. Such distance shall be measured in a straight line without
regard to intervening properties from the closest exterior structural wall of
the adult entertainment establishment to the closest point on any property line
of the religious institution, school, or public park, or the property zoned for
residential use.
         (b)   For the purposes of this chapter, measurements shall be made in
a straight line, without regard to intervening structures or objects, from the
property line of the premises upon which the adult entertainment business is
located to the nearest property line of the areas stated.
         (c)   The property on which any adult entertainment business is
located shall have a minimum of 100 feet of frontage on a public right-of-way.
         (d)   The facility on which the use is located and the parking for
such facility shall have a front yard setback of 50 feet, a side yard setback
of 25 feet and a rear yard setback of 25 feet.
         (e)   Off-street parking shall be provided pursuant to §§
154.270 through
154.276 of the Zoning Code.
         (f)   All landscaping and screening requirements otherwise required by
§
154.272 shall be observed.
         (g)   The facility in which the use is located shall be designed in
such a fashion that all openings, entries, and windows prevent view into such
facilities from any pedestrian, sidewalk, walkway, street, or other public
area. No adult entertainment activity whatsoever shall take place outside the
adult entertainment facility.
         (h)   The facility in which such a use is located shall be limited to
one wall-mounted sign no greater than one square foot of sign per one foot of
wall length, not to exceed a total of 25 square feet; said sign shall not
flash, blink, or move by mechanical means and shall not extend above the roof
line of the building. Said sign shall not exceed eight feet in height from
ground level. Further, no merchandise, symbol, or pictures of products or
entertainment on the premises shall be displayed in window areas or on any sign
or any area where such merchandise or pictures can be viewed from the exterior
of the building. No flashing lights and/or lighting which leave the impression
of motion or movement shall be permitted. No temporary signs shall be allowed.
         (i)   No persons, including patrons, shall sell, or offer for sale,
possess, or display for sale, or permit the consumption of, within the
corporate limits of the village, any alcoholic liquor upon the premises,
including the parking lot area.
         (j)   No adult entertainment business shall have any private rooms or
booths.
         (k)   1.   An adult entertainment business shall be permitted to
remain open for business or allow or permit patrons or members to remain upon
the premises between the hours of 10:00 a.m. to 11:30 p.m. on Monday, Tuesday,
Wednesday, Thursday, Friday, and Saturday; and Sunday from 1:00 p.m. until 11:
30 p.m.
            2.   It shall be unlawful to keep open for business, to admit the
public or permit patrons to remain within or upon the premises of an adult
entertainment business other than the hours as set out in division (D)(2)(k)1.
above. If any person, other than the persons excepted under division (D)(2)
(k)3. below, is found to be within or upon the adult entertainment business
more than 15 minutes after the required closing time, the person, along with
the owner, manager, or person in control of the adult entertainment business,
will be subject to a violation of this section.
            3.   This division (D)(2)(k) does not apply to the owner, manager,
or person in control of the adult entertainment business, or an employee who is
performing cleaning or maintenance activities necessary for the operation of
the establishment.
         (l)   1.   It shall be unlawful for any person under the age of 21
years of age to be permitted or allowed to enter, or remain within or upon the
premises in which an adult use is located.
            2.   It shall be unlawful for the owner, associate, member,
representative, agent, or employee of any adult entertainment business to
employ in any capacity within the adult entertainment business any person who
is under the age of 21.
            3.   Only the following types of identification shall be accepted
for the purposes of determining whether a person is old enough to enter an
adult use establishment; vehicle operator’s license, state photo identification
card for non-drivers, visa or passport, and/or military identification card.
         (m)   Lighting of the parking area shall conform to the requirements
of §
154.272.
         (n)   1.   The village staff, Police Department, and Fire Department
shall have the authority to enter upon any premises upon which an adult
entertainment business is located in order to enforce the ordinance of the
village, laws of the state and any state or federal laws pertaining to the
health, safety, or welfare of the public to determine whether any such laws are
being violated, and to examine the operations and facilities used upon the
premises.
            2.   In addition to the provisions of (D)(2)(n)1., no special use
permit may be granted, by the Board of Trustees unless it finds that the
special use:
               a.   Is necessary for the public convenience at that location
or, in case of existing nonconforming uses, that a special use permit will not
make the use less compatible with its surroundings;
               b.   Is so designed, located, and proposed to be operated that
the public health, safety, and welfare will be protected;
               c.   Will not cause substantial injury to the value of other
property in the neighborhood in which it is located; and
               d.   Will not be detrimental to the essential character of the
district in which it is located.
            3.   Every special use permit granted shall be accompanied by a
finding of fact specifying the reason for granting such special use permit.
            4.   The village may revoke a special use permit under this chapter
if the proposal for which a permit has been issued is not carried out pursuant
to the approved site plan.
            5.   The approval or disapproval of any application for a special
use permit by the Board of Trustees may be appealed only as provided in 65 ILCS
5/11-13-25.
   (E)   Site plan.
      (1)   Each application for a special use permit shall require the
submission of an accompanying site plan.
      (2)   Site plans submitted to the village for subsequent review by the
Zoning Board of Appeals and the Board of Trustees shall:
         (a)   Be prepared by registered design professionals licensed in the
state, such as architects, landscape architects, or engineers, with the
appropriate seal affixed;
         (b)   Be drawn to a scale of not more than one inch equals 50 feet,
and be accurate and readable so that the plan can be readily interpreted;
         (c)   Include location map, north arrow, and plan scale;
         (d)   State the subject site’s zoning district, subdivision name, lot
number, county permanent parcel index number (PPIN), dimensions and area, and
zoning of adjacent parcels where different from site;
         (e)   State the name, address, and telephone/fax number of the person
or firm submitting the site plan and the person or firm who desires the review
comments forwarded to them;
         (f)   Identify abutting property owners, names, addresses, zip codes,
and PPINs on site plan;
         (g)   Include existing and proposed lines or elevations based on mean
sea level datum at not more than five foot intervals, unless otherwise waived
by the village;
         (h)   Include previous or concurrent village approvals for variances,
re-zonings, special land use permits, and the like with date and conditions, if
applicable;
         (i)   State the proposed use of the building and its construction type
and setback distance (front, side, and rear yards) from adjacent property
lines;
         (j)   Provide overall dimensions of all buildings and gross floor area
of each building;
         (k)   Provide architectural renderings of all sides of all buildings
and structures;
         (l)   State off-street parking and loading spaces, required and
proposed, including the number, size, and location of those designated for the
handicapped;
         (m)   Delineate and dimension all areas utilized for driveways,
storage, and/or parking equipment, materials, and vehicles;
         (n)   Include the type, location, height, and illumination levels of
parking area lighting standards in accordance with village’s requirements;
         (o)   Delineate any proposed pavement markings, directional signage,
or traffic control measures;
         (p)   Provide dimensions of existing and proposed roadway pavement and
right-of-way width for streets abutting the site;
         (q)   Delineate and dimension all existing and proposed curb cuts and
driveway openings;
         (r)   Delineate all existing and proposed sidewalks and any other
elements of a pedestrian circulation system;
         (s)   Provide for the direction of drainage flow and location of catch
basins for parking areas (if required);
         (t)   Include a traffic study prepared by a registered traffic
engineer;
         (u)   Include a landscape plan, which may be drawn on a site plan or a
separate sheet, The landscape plan shall be drawn to scale of not more than one
inch equals 50 feet. The plan shall, at a minimum, show the following
information:
            1.   The location, approximate size, and common botanical name of
existing and proposed trees and shrubs; and
            2.   The locations and details of other landscape features,
including earthen berms, fences, or walls.
         (v)   Include the location of all existing and proposed water mains,
gas mains, or other public utilities within or adjacent to the development,
including delineation of easements or rights-of-way associated with same;
         (w)   Delineate location of an existing or proposed storm water
detention facility sink holes and springs, ponds, creeks, or other wetland
areas;
         (x)   Show proposed site drainage system designed in accordance with
the requirements of the County Soil and Water Conservation District and showing
any proposed drainage swales, detention or retention areas, storm sewer
systems, culverts, and any other storm drainage improvements, including any
off-site improvements;
         (y)   Include the delineation of FEMA designated floodplain and
floodway boundaries, if any;
         (z)   Include any proposed alteration, adjustment, or change in
elevation of any floodplain or floodway as designated on the FEMA floodplain
and floodway maps;
         (aa)   State the location, dimensions, and identification of existing
and proposed freestanding signs;
         (bb)   State the location, type, and screening of refuse collection;
and
         (cc)   State the measurements from the building or property line, to
any other structures or property lines, establishing compliance, or non-
compliance with this section.
(Prior Code, § 40-5-15)
SOLAR ENERGY SYSTEMS
§ 154.220 PURPOSE.
   (A)   The purpose of this subchapter is to facilitate the construction,
installation, and operation of the solar energy systems (SES) in the village in
a manner that promotes economic development and ensures the protection of
health, safety, and welfare while also avoiding adverse impacts to important
areas such as agricultural lands, endangered species habitats, conservation
lands, and other sensitive lands.
   (B)   It is the intent of this subchapter to encourage the development of
SESs that reduce reliance on foreign and out-of-state energy resources, and
bolster economic development and job creation. This subchapter is not intended
to abridge safety, health, or environmental requirements contained in other
applicable codes, standards, or ordinances.
   (C)   The provision of this subchapter shall not be deemed to nullify any
provision of local, state, or federal law.
(Prior Code, § 40-5-21) (Ord. 2018-10, passed 8-20-2018)
§ 154.221 DEFINITIONS.
   The definitions of § 254.007(B) shall apply to this subchapter.
(Prior Code, § 40-5-22) (Ord. 2018-10, passed 8-20-2018)
§ 154.222 MOUNTS PERMITTED AS AN ACCESSORY USE.
   (A)   Ground-mount and roof-mount (SES) shall be permitted by a building
permit in all zoning districts where there is a principal structure.
   (B)   An application shall be submitted to the Zoning Administrator
demonstrating compliance with the existing Zoning Code in addition to the
following requirements below.
      (1)   Height.
         (a)   Building- or roof-mounted solar energy systems shall not exceed
the maximum allowed height for principal structures in any zoning district.
         (b)   Ground- or pole-mounted solar energy systems shall not exceed 20
feet in height when oriented at maximum tilt.
         (c)   Ground-mounted solar energy system may be placed in the front
yard, but shall not exceed 30 inches above grade.
      (2)   Setbacks.
         (a)   Ground-mounted solar energy systems shall meet the accessory
structure setbacks for the zoning district in which the unit is located.
         (b)   Ground-mounted solar energy systems shall not extend beyond the
side yard or rear yard setback when oriented at minimum design tilt.
         (c)   In addition to building setbacks, the collector surface and
mounting devices for roof- mounted systems shall not extend beyond the exterior
perimeter of the building on which the system is mounted or built, unless the
collector or mounting system has been engineered to safely extend beyond the
edge, and setback requirements are not violated. Exterior piping for solar hot
water systems shall be allowed to extend beyond the perimeter of the building
on a side yard exposure.
      (3)   Reflection angles. Reflection angles for solar collectors shall be
oriented such that they do not project onto adjacent properties.
      (4)   Aviation protection. For solar units located within 500 feet of an
airport or within approach zones of an airport, the applicant shall complete
and provide the results of the Solar Glaze Hazard Analysis Tool (SGHAT) for the
Airport Traffic Control Tower cab and final approach paths, consistent with the
Interim Policy, FAA Review of Solar Energy Projects on Federal Obligated
Airports, or most recent version adopted by the FAA.
      (5)   Visibility. Solar energy systems shall not be located in a manner
to reasonably minimize view blockage for surrounding properties and shading of
property to the north while still providing adequate solar access for
collectors.
      (6)   Safety.
         (a)   Roof- or building-mounted solar energy systems, excluding
building integrated systems, shall allow for adequate roof access for
firefighting purposes to the south facing or flat roof upon which the panels
are mounted.
         (b)   All solar energy system installation shall be performed by a
qualified solar installer.
         (c)   Any connection to the public utility grid shall be inspected by
the appropriate public utility and letter of inspection sent to the Zoning
Administrator within 45 days after inspection.
         (d)   All solar energy systems shall be maintained and kept in good
working order. If it is determined by the Zoning Administrator that the solar
energy system is not being maintained, kept in good working order, or is no
longer being utilized to perform as intended for six consecutive months, the
property owner shall be give 30 days’ notice for removal of the unit and all
equipment.
         (e)   If the solar energy system is not removed within 30 days, the
Zoning Administrator shall issue a notice of violation and notice to appear
before the County Circuit Court as an ordinance violation.
         (f)   All persons, individuals, businesses, and business entities
installing solar energy systems, if burying underground cables, shall become a
member of the State One Call System, known as “JULIE, Inc.,” for the purpose of
marking any buried cables for excavation purposes.
      (7)   Approved solar components. Electric solar energy system components
shall have a UL listing or approved equivalent, and solar hot water systems
shall have an SRCC rating.
      (8)   Restrictions on solar energy systems limited. Consistent with 765
ILCS 165, no homeowner’s agreement, covenant, community interest community of
other contracts between multiple property owners within a subdivision of the
village shall prohibit or restrict homeowners from installing solar energy
systems.
(Prior Code, § 40-5-23) (Ord. 2018-10, passed 8-20-2018)
§ 154.223 BUILDING INTEGRATED SYSTEMS.
   Building integrated systems shall be permitted outright in all zoning
districts.
(Prior Code, § 40-5-24) (Ord. 2018-10, passed 8-20-2018)
§ 154.224 COMMUNITY SOLAR GARDENS (SES).
   Development of community solar gardens is permitted by special use as a
principal use in all zoning districts subject to the following requirements.
   (A)   Rooftop gardens permitted. Rooftop gardens are permitted-in all zoning
districts where buildings are permitted.
   (B)   Ground-mount gardens. Ground-mount community solar energy systems must
be less than five acres in total size, and require special use in all
districts. Ground-mount solar developments covering more than five acres shall
be considered solar farm.
   (C)   Interconnection. An interconnection agreement must be completed with
the electric utility in whose service the territory system is located.
   (D)   Dimensional standards. All solar related structures in newly platted
and existing platted subdivisions shall comply with the principal structure
setback, height, and coverage limitations for the district in which the system
is located.
   (E)   Aviation protection. For solar units within 500 feet of an airport or
within approach zones of an airport, the application shall complete and provide
the results of the solar glaze hazard analysis tool (SGHAT) for the airport
traffic control tower cab and final approach paths, consistent with the interim
policy, FAA review of the solar energy projects on federal obligated airports,
or most recent version adopted by the FAA.
   (F)   Other standards.
      (1)   Ground-mount systems shall comply with all required standards for
structures in the district in which the system is located.
      (2)   All solar gardens shall comply with the then existing special use
permitting process of the Zoning Code.
      (3)   All solar gardens shall comply with all other state and local
requirements.
(Prior Code, § 40-5-25) (Ord. 2018-10, passed 8-20-2018)
§ 154.225 COMMERCIAL/LARGE SCALE SOLAR FARM (SES).
   Ground-mount solar energy systems that are primary use of the lot, designed
for providing energy to off-site uses or export to the wholesale market require
a special use in the agricultural districts of the village.
   (A)   Existing conditions. The applicant shall submit a site plan with
existing conditions showing the following:
      (1)   Existing property lines and property lines extending 100 feet from
the exterior boundaries, including the names of adjacent property owners and
current use of those properties;
      (2)   Existing public and private roads, showing widths of the road and
any associated easements;
      (3)   Location and size of any abandoned wells, sewage treatment systems;
      (4)   Existing buildings and impervious surfaces;
      (5)   A contour map showing topography at two-foot intervals. A contour
map of surrounding properties may also be required;
      (6)   Existing vegetation (including type and percent of coverage, such
as cropland/plowed fields, grassland, wooded areas, and the like);
      (7)   Any delineated wetland boundaries;
      (8)   A copy of the current FEMA FIRM maps that show the subject property
including 100-year flood elevation and any regulated flood protection
elevation, if available;
      (9)   Surface water drainage patterns; and
      (10)   The location of any subsurface drainage tiles.
   (B)   Proposed conditions. The applicant shall submit a site plan of
proposed conditions showing the following:
      (1)   Location and spacing of solar panels;
      (2)   Location of access roads;
      (3)   Location of underground or overhead electrical lines connecting the
solar farm to a building, substation, or other electric load; and
      (4)   New electrical equipment other than at the existing building or
substation that is to be the connection point for the solar farm.
   (C)   Fencing and weed/grass control.
      (1)   The applicant shall submit an acceptable weed/grass control plan
for the property inside and outside the fenced area for the entire property.
The operating company or successor during the operation of the solar farm shall
adhere to the weed/grass control plan.
      (2)   Perimeter fencing having a height of six to eight feet shall be
installed around the boundary of the solar farm. The fence shall contain
appropriate warning signage that is posted such that it is clearly visible on
the site.
      (3)   The applicant shall maintain the fence and adhere to the weed/grass
control plan.
   (D)   Manufacturer’s specifications. The applicant shall include the
manufacturer’s specifications and recommended installation methods for all
major equipment, including solar panels, mounting systems, and foundation for
poles and racks.
   (E)   Connection and interconnection. The applicant shall include:
      (1)   A description of the method of connecting the SOLAR array to a
building or substation; and
      (2)   Utility interconnection details and a copy of a written
notification to the utility company requiring the proposed interconnection.
   (F)   Setbacks. A minimum of 50 feet must be maintained on all property
lines. Solar panels shall be kept at least 500 feet from a residence that is
not part of the special use permit.
   (G)   Aviation protection. For solar unit within 500 feet of an airport or
within approach zones of an airport, the application shall complete and provide
the results of the solar glaze hazard analysis tool (SGHAT) for the airport
traffic control tower can and final approach paths, consistent with the interim
policy, FAA review of the solar energy projects on federal obligated airports,
or most recent version adopted by the FAA.
   (H)   Fire protection. The applicant shall submit a fire protection plan for
the construction and the operation of the facility, and emergency access to the
site.
   (I)   Endangered species and wetlands. Solar farm developers shall be
required to initiate a natural resource review consultation with the State
Department of Natural Resources (IDNR) through the Department’s online EcoCAT
Program. Areas reviewed through this process will be endangered species and
wetlands. The cost of the EcoCAT consultation shall be borne by the developer.
   (J)   Road use agreements. All routes on village, county, or state roads
that will be used for the construction and maintenance purposes shall be
identified on the site plan. All routes for either egress and ingress need to
be shown. The routing shall be approved subject to the approval of the Board of
Trustees, IDOT, and County Highway Engineers, if applicable. The solar farm
developer shall complete and provide a preconstruction baseline survey to
determine existing road conditions for assessing potential future damage due to
development related traffic. The development shall provide a road repair plan
to ameliorate any and all damage, installation, or replacement of roads that
might be required by the developer. The developer shall provide a letter of
credit or surety bond in an amount and form approved by the highway/road
officials, when warranted.
   (K)   Decommissioning of the solar farm.
      (1)   The developer shall provide a decommissioning plan for the
anticipated service life of the facility or in the event the facility is
abandoned or had reached its life expectancy. If the solar farm is out of
service of not producing electrical energy for a period of 12 months, it will
be deemed inoperational and decommissioning and removal of that facility will
commence according to the decommissioning plan as provided and approved. A cost
estimate for the decommissioning of the facility shall be prepared by a
professional engineer or contractor who has expertise in the removal of the
solar farm.
      (2)   The decommissioning cost estimate shall explicitly detail the cost
before considering any projected salvage value of the out of service solar
farm. The decommissioning cost shall be made by a cash, surety bond or
irrevocable letter or credit before construction commences. Further a
restoration plan shall be provided for the site with the application.
      (3)   The decommissioning plan shall have the following; provided:
         (a)   Removal of the following within six months:
            1.   All solar collectors and component, aboveground improvements
and outside storage;
            2.   Foundations, pads, and underground electrical wires and all
electrical equipment shall be removed by the solar company installer and/or the
property owners. The site shall be reclaimed to a depth of four feet below the
surface of the ground; and
            3.   Hazardous material shall be removed from the property and
dispose of in accordance with federal and state law.
         (b)   The decommissioning plan shall recite an agreement between the
applicant and the village that:
            1.   The financial resources for decommissioning shall be in the
form of a Surety Bond, or shall be deposited in an escrow account with an
escrow agent acceptable to the Zoning Administrator;
            2.   A written escrow agreement will be prepared, establishing upon
what conditions the funds will be disbursed;
            3.   The village shall have access to the escrow account funds for
the expressed purpose of completing decommissioning if decommissioning is not
completed by the applicant within six months of the end of the project life or
facility abandonment;
            4.   The village is granted the right of entry onto the site,
pursuant to reasonable notice, to effect or complete decommissioning;
            5.   The village is granted the right to seek injunctive relief to
effect or complete decommissioning, as well as the village’s right to seek
reimbursement from applicant or applicant’s successor for decommissioning costs
in excess of the amount deposited in escrow and to file a lien against any real
estate owned by applicant or applicant’s successor, or in which they have an
interest, for the amount of the excess, and to take all steps allowed by law to
enforce said lien; and
            6.   Financial provisions shall not be onerous as to make solar
power projects unfeasible.
(Prior Code, § 40-5-26) (Ord. 2018-10, passed 8-20-2018)
§ 154.226 COMPLIANCE WITH STATE AND FEDERAL LAWS.
   All solar energy systems shall comply with all federal and state
requirements.
(Prior Code, § 40-5-27) (Ord. 2018-10, passed 8-20-2018)
§ 154.227 LIABILITY INSURANCE.
   The owner or operator of the solar farm shall maintain a current general
liability policy covering bodily injury and property damage and name the
village as an additional insured with limits of at least $2,000,000 per
occurrence and $5,000,000 in the aggregate with a deductible of no more than
$5,000. Proof of insurance must be sent to the Village Clerk on an annual
basis.
(Prior Code, § 40-5-28) (Ord. 2018-10, passed 8-20-2018)
§ 154.228 ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT.
   The Zoning Administrator shall enforce the provisions of this section
through an inspection. The Zoning Administrator is hereby granted the power and
authority to enter upon the premises of the solar farm at any time by
coordinating a reasonable time with the operator/owner of the facility. Any
person, firm, or corporation who violates, disobeys, omits, neglects, refuses
to comply with, or resists enforcement of any of the provisions of this section
may face fines.
(Prior Code, § 40-5-29) (Ord. 2018-10, passed 8-20-2018) Penalty, see §
154.999
§ 154.229 BUILDING PERMIT FEES.
   The fees for processing the application for building permits and mechanical
permits shall be collected by the Village Clerk at City Hall, per the permit
fee schedule for residential, commercial, and industrial districts.
(Prior Code, § 40-5-30) (Ord. 2018-10, passed 8-20-2018)
§ 154.230 ANNUAL UPDATE REQUIREMENTS.
   All contact information including name, phone number, and address of the
current property owner, lessor, lessee, and utility company shall be submitted
annually within 30 days of the anniversary date of the special use permit until
decommissioning has been completed, at which point the special use permit will
be null and void.
(Prior Code, § 40-5-31) (Ord. 2018-10, passed 8-20-2018)
SIGN REGULATIONS
§ 154.245 GENERAL PROHIBITION.
   Any sign not expressly permitted in this subchapter shall be deemed
prohibited.
(Prior Code, § 40-6-1) Penalty, see §
154.999
§ 154.246 COMPUTATION OF SIGN AREA ALLOWANCE.
   (A)   Within the limitations and restrictions as further provided in this
subchapter, the total area of all signs which an establishment is permitted to
display shall be computed according to the following formula: one square foot
of sign area per one foot of street frontage or two square feet of sign for
each lineal foot of the front width of the business; provided, however, that no
establishment in any district shall display more than 300 square feet of sign
on any street front.
(Prior Code, § 40-6-2)
   (B)   As used in this subchapter, the term SIGN AREA means the area of the
one imaginary square or rectangle which would completely enclose all the
letters, parts, or symbols of a sign. (See Appendix D.)
(Prior Code, § 40-6-2.1)
   (C)   (1)   Except as specifically provided otherwise in this subchapter, if
an establishment has frontage on two or more streets, each side having such
frontage shall be considered separately for purposes of determining compliance
with the provisions of this subchapter. However, the area allowance for signs
shall not be aggregated so as to permit such establishment to display on any
one frontage a greater area of signs than would be permitted by application of
the formula set forth above.
      (2)   The side of an establishment adjacent to an off-street parking area
shall not be deemed frontage unless the establishment has no other frontage.
(Prior Code, § 40-6-2.2)
§ 154.247 SIGNS TO BE NON-HAZARDOUS, WELL-MAINTAINED.
   (A)   No sign shall be erected, relocated, or maintained so as to prevent
free access or egress from any door, window, fire escape, or driveway.
   (B)   No sign shall be erected or maintained in such a manner that it
interferes with, obstructs the view of, or is likely to be confused with any
authorized traffic control device.
   (C)   Every sign shall be designed and constructed in conformity with any
applicable provisions of the adopted Building Code, if any. Every sign and
appurtenance shall be maintained in a neat and attractive condition by its
owner. The sign supports shall be kept painted to prevent rust or
deterioration.
(Prior Code, § 40-6-3)
§ 154.248 ILLUMINATION.
   Illumination of signs is permitted, subject to the following requirements.
   (A)   No sign shall employ red, yellow, or green lights in such a manner as
to confuse or interfere with vehicular traffic.
   (B)   No sign other than those providing time and temperature information
shall have blinking, flashing, or fluttering lights or any other illuminating
device which has a changing light intensity, brightness, or color; provided,
however, that this provision shall not apply to any message on any
electronically operated, changeable sign.
   (C)   The light from any illuminated sign shall be shaded, shielded, or
directed so that it creates neither a nuisance to adjacent property nor a
traffic hazard.
(Prior Code, § 40-6-4)
§ 154.249 NONCONFORMING SIGNS.
   A nonconforming sign means any lawfully erected sign or billboard that does
not conform to one or more provisions of this subchapter or any amendment
thereto.
(Prior Code, § 40-6-5)
§ 154.250 RESTRICTIONS.
   Any nonconforming sign as defined in Section 40-6-5 that does not pose an
imminent peril to life or property may lawfully remain subject to all the
restrictions on the enlargement, alteration, or relocation, or reconstruction
of nonconforming structures set forth in §§
154.290 through
154.295; provided as follows:
   (A)   Merely changing the message displayed on a nonconforming sign shall
not be construed as a prohibited alteration; and
   (B)   Whenever any sign is nonconforming solely because it is appurtenant to
a nonconforming commercial/industrial use located in the Agricultural District
or in any residential district, said sign shall be treated in the same manner
as it would be if it were appurtenant to a commercial/industrial use located in
any business district or in the Industrial District.
(Prior Code, § 40-6-6)
§ 154.251 STRICTLY PROHIBITED SIGNS.
   Except as specifically noted otherwise henceforth, the following signs and
street graphics are strictly prohibited throughout the village:
   (A)   Mobile/portable marquees; except that they may be permitted as a
temporary sign;
   (B)   Signs attached to trees, fences, or public utility poles, other than
warning signs posted by government officials or public utilities;
   (C)   Defunct signs, including the posts or other supports therefor that
advertise or identify an activity, business, product, or service no longer
conducted on the premises where such sign is located; and
   (D)   Roof-mounted signs that project or protrude above the highest point of
the roof. (See §
154.255.)
(Prior Code, § 40-6-7)
§ 154.252 SIGNS PERMITTED IN ANY DISTRICT.
   (A)   Any sign or other street graphic enumerated below that complies with
the indicated requirements is permitted in any district of the village:
      (1)   Construction signs identifying the architects, engineers,
contractors, and other individuals or firms involved with the construction,
and/or announcing the character or purpose of the building, but not advertising
any product; such signs shall not exceed 24 square feet in area, shall be
confined to the site of the construction, and shall be removed within 14 days
after the intended use of the project has begun;
      (2)   (a)   Real estate signs, indicating the sale, rental, or lease of
the premises on which they are located; such signs on residential property
shall not exceed six square feet; on other property, such signs shall not
exceed 16 square feet.
         (b)   Not more than one real estate sign per street front shall be
erected on any lot. Such signs shall be removed within seven days of the sale,
rental, or lease;
      (3)   (a)   Political signs announcing candidates seeking public/
political office and/or political issues and other pertinent information
         (b)   In the Agricultural District and in any residential district,
political signs shall not exceed eight square feet; in other districts, such
signs shall not exceed 32 square feet. Political signs shall be removed within
seven days after the election to which they pertain, by the party responsible
for their erection;
      (4)   Garage sale signs advertising a garage or yard sale to be held on
private residential property; such signs shall not exceed four square feet, and
shall not be posted for longer than five days;
      (5)   Public interest signs and street banners publicizing a charitable
or non-profit event of general public interest. In the Agricultural District,
and in any residential district, public interest signs shall not exceed 32
square feet. Public interest signs and street banners shall be permitted only
for 60 days before and seven days after the event;
      (6)   Governmental, public, and directional signs, such as traffic
control signs, railroad crossing signs, legal notices, signs indicating the
location of underground cables, no trespassing signs, no parking signs, signs
indicating the entrances and exits of parking lots, signs indicating the
location of public telephones, restrooms, and so forth;
      (7)   Institutional signs identifying a public, charitable, or religious
institution, such signs shall be located on the premises of such institution,
shall not obstruct the vision of motorists, and shall not exceed 24 square
feet;
      (8)   Integral signs carved into stone or inlaid so as to become part of
the building and containing such information as date of erection, name of
building, and memorial tributes;
      (9)   Home occupation signs identifying only the name and occupation of
the residents shall not be illuminated, and shall not exceed four square feet;
      (10)   Subdivision entrance signs identifying a residential subdivision
or apartment complex shall contain no commercial advertising and shall not
exceed 20 square feet;
      (11)   Permanent house numbers, and/or permanent name of occupant signs
located on the lot to which the sign applies, shall not exceed two square feet
for single-family dwellings, nor six square feet for multiple-family dwellings;
and
      (12)   Signs located in the interior of any building or within an
enclosed lobby or court of any building or group of buildings; provided such
signs are designed and located to be viewed exclusively by the patrons or
residents of such buildings.
   (B)   Such signs or street graphics shall not be debited against the
displaying establishment’s sign area allowance. (See §
154.246.)
(Prior Code, § 40-6-8)
§ 154.253 AGRICULTURAL AND RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS.
   No sign other than those listed in §
154.252 shall be erected in the Agricultural District or in any residential
district.
(Prior Code, § 40-6-9)
§ 154.254 BUSINESS AND INDUSTRIAL DISTRICTS.
   (A)   No establishment located in any business district or in the Industrial
District shall display on any street front a total area of sign in excess of
the allowance derived by application of the formula set forth in §§
154.246 and
154.252.
   (B)   Additionally, signs in any business district or in the Industrial
District shall conform to the requirements indicated below.
      (1)   No flush-mounted (wall) sign shall:
         (a)   Project more than 18 inches from the wall or surface to which it
is attached; or
         (b)   Extend above the roof line of the building to which it is
attached.
      (2)   Signs permanently mounted in display windows shall not be debited
against the sign area allowance of the particular establishment.
      (3)   No establishment shall display more than one projecting sign on any
street front. No projecting sign shall:
         (a)   Project above the roof line of the building to which it is
attached;
         (b)   Extend below a point eight feet above the ground or pavement;
         (c)   Project over a driveway or beyond the curbline of any public
street;
         (d)   Project more than four feet from the building to which it is
attached; or
         (e)   Extend to a point above 12 feet. (See Appendix D.)
      (4)   (a)   Signs mounted flush on any canopy or marquee shall be
considered flush-mounted (wall) signs, and shall meet the requirements of
division (B)(1) above.
         (b)   Signs suspended beneath a canopy or marquee shall be considered
projecting signs, and shall meet the requirements of division (B)(3) above.
      (5)   No establishment shall display more than one freestanding sign on
any street front. Freestanding signs, whether mounted on the ground or post-
mounted, shall comply with the following regulations:
         (a)   No part of any freestanding sign shall intrude into any public
right-of-way.No part of any freestanding sign that extends below a point ten
feet above the ground or pavement shall be located closer than ten feet from
the public right-of-way line.
         (b)   The area of any freestanding sign, calculated in accordance with
§
154.246(B) shall not exceed 100 square feet.
         (c)   When attached to its structural supports, no part of any
freestanding sign shall extend more than 20 feet above the ground or pavement.
         (d)   The length or width of any freestanding sign shall not exceed 12
feet. (See Appendix D.)
      (6)   Billboards and other off-premises advertising signs are strictly
prohibited in every district except the Industrial District. No billboard
shall:
         (a)   Be stacked on top of another billboard;
         (b)   Be located closer than 25 feet to any lot line or any public
right-of-way;
         (c)   Be located closer than 500 feet from any other billboard on the
same side of the roadway;
         (d)   Extend more than 20 feet above the ground or pavement; or
         (e)   Exceed 300 square feet in area.
(Prior Code, § 40-6-10)
§ 154.255 TEMPORARY SIGNS.
   (A)   Temporary signs shall not remain in place for a period of more than 30
days, except when the Zoning Administrator extends the time period for an
additional 30 days.
   (B)   Any further time extension shall thereafter be applied for through
Zoning Board of Appeals, and the Zoning Board of Appeals may grant such time
extension as seems reasonable and necessary in compliance with this subchapter.
   (C)   A permit is required for all temporary signs. (See §§
154.033 and
154.400.)
(Prior Code, § 40-6-11)
OFF-STREET PARKING AND LOADING
§ 154.270 APPLICABILITY.
   Off-street parking and loading shall be provided in accordance with this
subchapter for all structures and uses erected or established after the
effective date of this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 40-7-1)
§ 154.271 EXISTING PARKING/LOADING FACILITIES.
   (A)   Existing off-street parking or loading facilities located on the same
lot as the use served shall not be reduced, or, if already less than, shall not
be further reduced below the requirements and standards for similar new
structures or uses.
   (B)   When an existing structure or use is damaged or destroyed and
subsequently repaired or rebuilt, parking/loading facilities equivalent to any
maintained at the time of such damage or destruction shall be restored, but
additional parking/loading spaces need not be provided.
   (C)   Whenever the use of any structure or premises is intensified through
addition of dwelling units, increased floor area, greater seating capacity, and
the like, additional off-street parking and loading spaces commensurate with
such intensification shall be provided.
   (D)   Whenever the existing use of a structure is changed to a different
use, off-street parking or loading facilities shall be provided as required
herein for such new use.
(Prior Code, § 40-7-2)
§ 154.272 PARKING LOT DESIGN STANDARDS.
   All off-street parking lots shall conform to the standards of this section.
   (A)   Standards applicable to all parking areas.
      (1)   Spaces. Every off-street parking space shall be at least ten feet
wide and 20 feet long, and shall have at least seven feet of vertical
clearance. Every space shall be situated so that no part of any parked vehicle
overhangs the public right-of-way.
      (2)   Access ways. Parking lots shall be designed so that ingress to or
egress from a parking space is from an aisle or driveway, not directly from the
public right-of-way.
         (a)   No access way to any parking lot shall be located within 30 feet
of any corner formed by the intersection of the rights-of-way of two or more
streets. At intersections where traffic control devices are installed, the
Administrator may increase this requirement as necessary to prevent hazards.
         (b)   Parking lot access ways (as well as residential driveways) and
public streets shall be aligned to form, as closely as feasible, right angles.
         (c)   The access way to every parking lot located in any residential
district or in the Agriculture District shall be at least ten feet wide; but if
the parking area is longer than 100 feet, access shall be provided either by
one two-way drive at least 20 feet wide or by two one-way drives, each at least
ten feet wide.
      (3)   Lighting. Any light(s) used to illuminate any parking lot shall be
arranged or shielded so as to confine direct light rays within the lot lines of
the parking lot to the greatest extent possible, and in no case shall the light
(s) shine on or into nearby residences.
   (B)   Standards applicable to all parking areas except those accessory to
single- or two-family dwellings.
      (1)   Spaces. Markings shall be laid and restored as often as necessary
to clearly delineate each parking space.
      (2)   Interior aisles. Aisles within parking lots shall be sufficiently
wide to permit safe and efficient vehicular movement in the aisles, and into
and out of parking spaces. Aisles designed for two-way traffic shall be at
least 22 feet wide. One-way aisles designed for 60-degree parking shall be at
least 18 feet wide.
      (3)   Access ways. The access way to every parking lot located in any
business district or in the
Industrial District shall be at least 24 feet wide, unless two one-way drives,
each 12 feet wide, are provided.
      (4)   Surfacing. Parking lots shall be graded and improved with a
compacted stone base at least seven inches thick, surfaced with at least two
inches of asphaltic concrete, or approved comparable material. Parking lots
used exclusively for employees are hereby exempt from these requirements, but
shall be constructed of an approved dustless surface (“oil and chip” is not
comparable material).
      (5)   Landscaping. In order to reduce heat and glare, to minimize blowing
of dust and trash, and to reduce the oppressive visual effects of large open
parking areas, landscaping shall be provided and maintained within every
parking lot that contains 20 or more parking spaces. Parking lots used
exclusively for employees are hereby exempt from these requirements, but shall
be constructed of an approved, dustless surface.
         (a)   A landscaping plan (either a separate document or an element of
a more inclusive development plan) shall accompany every application for a
certificate of zoning compliance to develop any parking lot that will contain
20 or more parking spaces.
         (b)   The landscaping plan shall include the following information:
            1.   Proposed type, amount, size, and spacing of plantings,
including trees, shrubbery, and ground cover;
            2.   Proposed size, construction materials, and drainage of
landscaped islands; and
            3.   A sketch indicating proposed spatial relationships of
landscaped areas, parking spaces, automobile circulation, and pedestrian
movement.
(Prior Code, § 40-7-3)
§ 154.273 LOCATION OF PARKING.
   All off-street parking shall be located in conformity with the following
requirements.
   (A)   Dwellings.
      (1)   Parking spaces accessory to any dwelling shall be located on the
same lot as the dwelling. Such parking spaces shall not be located in any
required front yard or required side yard adjacent to a street, except in the
driveway, but may be located in the side or rear yards.
      (2)   Each parking space accessory to a multi-family dwelling shall be
unobstructed so that no vehicle need be moved in order to allow another vehicle
to enter/exit the parking area; provided that this requirement shall not be
applicable to two-family dwellings.
   (B)   For business/industrial uses.
      (1)   Every off-street parking space accessory to any business or
industrial use shall be located within 500 feet of the use served; provided
that no portion of any parking lot for non-residential uses shall extend into
any residential district or into the Agriculture District, except by written
permission of the Zoning Administrator.
      (2)   In any business district or in the Industrial District, off-street
parking facilities for different buildings or uses may be provided
collectively, but only if the total number of spaces so located together is not
less than the sum of the separate requirements for each use, and if all other
pertinent regulations are observed.
(Prior Code, § 40-7-4)
§ 154.274 DESIGN AND LOCATION OF OFF-STREET LOADING FACILITIES.
   All off-street loading facilities shall conform to the minimum standards
indicated below.
   (A)   Size of space. Every off-street loading space shall be at least 12
feet wide and 45 feet long exclusive of aisle and maneuver space, and shall
have vertical clearance of at least 14 feet. In no case shall a vehicle being
loaded or unloaded overhang into the public right-of-way.
   (B)   Access way. Every off-street loading space shall have a safe means of
vehicular access to a street or alley. Such access way shall be at least 12
feet wide.
   (C)   Surfacing. Every off-street loading area shall be improved with a
compacted stone base at least seven inches thick, surfaced with at least two
inches of asphaltic concrete or approved comparable material (no “oil and
chip”).
   (D)   Buffer strips. No loading space or area for vehicles over two-ton
cargo capacity shall be developed closer than 50 feet to the lot line of any
lot located in any residential district or in the Agricultural District unless
such space/area is completely enclosed by walls, a solid fence, or closely
planted shrubbery at least ten feet in height and of sufficient density to
block the view from residential property.
   (E)   Location. Every off-street loading space shall be located on the same
parcel of land as the use served, and not closer than 50 feet to the
intersection of the rights-of-way of two or more streets, and not on any
required front yard.
(Prior Code, § 40-7-5)
§ 154.275 COMPUTATION OF REQUIRED PARKING/LOADING SPACES.
   In computing the number of parking spaces required by this chapter, the
Zoning Administrator shall apply the following rules.
   (A)   In computing parking space requirements based on the number of
employees, the maximum number of employees on the premises at any period of the
day shall be used. EMPLOYEE PARKING means one parking space shall be required
per one and one-half employees, unless otherwise stated.
   (B)   In computing parking or loading space requirements on the basis of
building floor area, the gross floor area shall be used.
   (C)   Whenever it is necessary to translate gross parking lot area into
number of parking spaces, 350 square feet of gross area shall be deemed one
parking space.
   (D)   If computation of the number of parking or loading spaces required by
this chapter results in a fractional space, any fraction of one-half or more
shall be counted as one space.
   (E)   No space or portion thereof needed to satisfy the minimum applicable
requirement for number of off-street parking or loading spaces shall be counted
as part of the off-street parking or loading spaces required for another
structure or use.
(Prior Code, § 40-7-6)
§ 154.276 NUMBERING OF PARKING AND LOADING SPACED REQUIRED.
   Off-street parking and loading spaces shall be provided as indicated in
tabular form below. For any use that is not listed in the table, the same
amount of parking and loading space shall be provided as is required for the
most similar listed use. The Zoning Administrator shall make the determination
of similarity.
 
Use Parking Spaces Required Loading Spaces Required
Use                          Parking Spaces Required  Loading Spaces Required
Commercial, office, and
service (all commercial and
service uses, unless                                  
specifically indicated
otherwise
 Beauty and barber shops    2 spaces per chair, plus N/A
                             employee parking
                             4 spaces per bowling
                             lane, plus additional
 Bowling alleys             spaces as required       N/A, except as required
                             herein for affiliated    for affiliated uses
                             uses such as restaurants
                             and taverns
 Car wash                   3 spaces per wash lane   N/A
 Financial institutions     1 space per 300 square   To 10,000 square feet of
                             feet of floor area       floor area
  Drive-in                 5 spaces per teller
                             window                   To 30,000 square feet of
                                                      floor area: none
                             1 space per 300 square   required; 30,001 to
  Walk-in                  feet of floor area, plus 100,000 square feet: 1
                             employee parking         space

                                                      To 25,000 square feet of
                                                      floor area: 2 spaces;
                                                      More than 25,000 square
  Furniture and appliance    1 space per 600 square   feet of floor area: 2
 stores                     feet of floor area       spaces, plus 1 additional
                                                      space per 25,000 square
                                                      feet of floor area is
                                                      excess of 25,000 square
                                                      feet
                             1 space per 150 square
                             feet of floor area
                             devoted to the home
 Home occupations           occupation in addition   N/A
                             to the parking
                             requirements for the
                             dwelling
                             1 space per 5 seats,
                             plus 1 space per funeral 1 space per 10,000 square
 Mortuaries                 vehicle, but not less    feet or more of floor
                             than 20 spaces per       area
                             chapel of state room
                                                      To 30,000 square feet of
  Offices, generally (not    1 space per 300 square   floor area: none
 medical or dental offices) feet of floor area)      required;
                                                      30,001 to 100,000 square
                                                      feet: 1 space
                             1 space per 200 square
 Offices, medical/dental    feet of floor area, or 3 N/A
                             spaces per professional,
                             whichever is greater
 Restaurants and                                     
  refreshment stands
  Drive-in                 1 space per 25 square
                             feet of floor area       1 space per structure
                             1 space per 4 seats, or  having 10,000 square feet
  Sit-down                 1 space per 50 square    or more floor area
                             feet of floor area,
                             whichever is greater
                             2 spaces per service
 Service stations           stall, plus employee     N/A
                             parking
                             1 space per 2 seats, or  1 space per structure
 Taverns                    1 space per 50 square    having 10,000 square feet
                             feet of floor area,      or more of floor area
                             whichever is greater
 Theaters                                            
  Drive-in                 On review by the Zoning
                             Administrator            N/A
  Indoor                   1 space per 4 seats
                             1 space per 600 square
                             feet of enclosed floor
                             area plus:
                             Up to 10,000 square feet To 25,000 square feet of
                             of open lot area devoted floor area and open lot
                             to sale/display of       area: 2 spaces;
  Vehicle sales (auto, boat. vehicles: 1 space per    More than 25,000 square
 trailer, and the like)     2,500 square feet of     feet of floor area: 2
                             open lot area;           spaces, plus 1 additional
                             Above 10,000 square      space per 25,000 square
                             feet: 4 spaces plus 1    feet in excess of 25,000
                             additional space per     square feet
                             5,000 square feet of
                             open lot area in excess
                             of 10,000 square feet
Dwellings and lodgings                                
 Mobile homes and           3 spaces per unit        N/A
  immobilized homes
                             1 space per lodging      1 space if the use has
 Motels, boarding houses    unit, plus employee      20,000 square feet or
                             parking                  more of floor area
 Multi-family dwellings     3 spaces per dwelling    N/A
                             unit
 Single-family and two-     2 spaces per dwelling    N/A
  family dwellings           unit
Educational, institutional,                           
and recreational
 Churches, assembly halls   1 space per 4 seats in   N/A
                             the largest seating area
                             1 space per 5 beds, plus To 50,000 square feet of
 Libraries, museums         1.5 spaces per employee  floor area: 1 space;
                             of the major shift       50,0001 to 100,000 square
                                                      feet: 2 spaces
                             1 space per 5 beds, plus To 50,000 square feet of
 Nursing homes              1.5 spaces per employee  floor area: 1 space;
                             on the major shift       50,001 to 100,000 square
                                                      feet: 2 spaces
 Schools                                             
                             1 space for every 20
    Elementary and junior    students that the
  high schools             building is designed to
                             accommodate, plus
                             employee parking         On review by the Zoning
                             1 space for every 4      Administrator
                             students that the
  Senior high schools      building is designed to
                             accommodate plus
                             employee parking
Industrial                                            
                                                      To 20,000 square feet of
                                                      floor area: 1 space;
                                                      20,001 to 50,000 square
                             Employee parking of 1    feet: 2 spaces;
  Any manufacturing,         space per 1.5 employee,  50,001 to 90,000 square
 warehousing, or other      plus 1 space per company feet: 3 feet;
  industrial use             vehicle, plus 1 visitor  Above 90,000 square feet:
                             space per employees on   3 spaces: 3 spaces, plus
                             the major shift          1 additional space per
                                                      50,000 square feet of
                                                      floor area in excess of
                                                      90,000 square feet
 
(Prior Code, § 40-7-7)
NONCONFORMITIES
§ 154.290 PURPOSE.
   (A)   The requirements imposed by this chapter are designed to guide the use
of land by encouraging the development of structures and uses that are
compatible with the predominant character of each of the various districts.
   (B)   Lots, structures, and uses of land or structures that do not conform
to the requirements of the district in which they are located tend to impede
appropriate development. For example, nonconformities are frequently
responsible for heavy traffic on residential streets, the overtaxing of parking
facilities, the creation of nuisances, and/or the lowering of property values.
   (C)   The regulations of this subchapter are intended to alleviate such
existing/potential problems by encouraging the gradual elimination of
nonconformities.
(Prior Code, § 40-8-1)
§ 154.291 NONCONFORMING LOTS.
   (A)   If the Zoning Board of Appeals grants a variance for any vacant lot
that does not conform to one or more of the lot size (area dimensions)
requirements of the district in which it is located, that lot may, nonetheless,
be developed for any use permitted in that district if such vacant lot:
      (1)   Was recorded in the office of the County Recorder of Deeds prior to
the effective date of this chapter (or pertinent amendment thereto); and
      (2)   Has continuously remained in separate ownership from abutting
tracts of land throughout the entire period during which the creation of such
lot was prohibited by the applicable zoning code or other ordinances; and
      (3)   Is at least 50 feet wide.
(Prior Code, § 40-8-2)
   (B)   If two or more lots or combinations of lots and portions of lots with
continuous frontage were of record and in common ownership on the effective
date of this chapter, and if one or more of those lots does not meet the
minimum lot width, depth, or area requirements of the district in which it is
located, the land involved shall be considered an undivided parcel. No portion
of any such parcel shall be developed except in compliance with this chapter,
nor shall any such parcel be divided so as to create a lot that does not meet
the requirements of this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 40-8-2.1)
§ 154.292 NONCONFORMING STRUCTURES.
   Any otherwise lawful structure which exists on the effective date of this
chapter, but which could not be erected under the terms of this chapter because
of requirements/restrictions concerning lot size, height, setbacks, or other
characteristics of the structure or its location on the lot, may lawfully
remain, subject to the following provisions.
   (A)   Maintenance. A nonconforming structure may be maintained by ordinary
repairs.
   (B)   Enlargement, alterations. A nonconforming structure shall not be
enlarged or altered in any way which increases its nonconformity.
   (C)   Relocation. A nonconforming structure shall not be moved unless, after
relocation, it will conform to all the regulations of the district in which it
will be situated.
   (D)   Reconstruction.
      (1)   No structure which is destroyed or damaged by any means shall be
reconstructed if the Zoning Administrator determines that the cost of such
reconstruction exceeds 50% of the structure’s market value at the time of loss,
unless after reconstruction the structure will conform to all applicable
regulations of the district in which it is located. In the event the Zoning
Administrator determines the estimated cost of reconstruction is less than 50%
of the structure’s market value at the time of the loss, repairs or
reconstruction shall be permitted; provided such work starts within six months
from the date the damage occurred and is diligently prosecuted to completion.
      (2)   The Zoning Administrator may require that the reconstruction cost
estimate be made by a bona fide construction contractor, and that the
structure’s market value at the time of loss be determined by a licensed real
estate appraiser. The owner of the damaged structure shall be responsible for
obtaining these estimates for the Zoning Administrator.
      (3)   As an alternative, the market value may be determined by the Zoning
Administrator by using the “state equalized assessed value” multiplied by the
number three.
      (4)   The provisions of this division (D) shall not apply to single-
family dwellings.
(Prior Code, § 40-8-3)
§ 154.293 NONCONFORMING USES OCCUPYING A STRUCTURE.
   If any lawful use occupying a structure exists on the effective date of this
chapter, but would not be allowed under the terms of this chapter, such use may
lawfully continue, subject to the following provisions.
   (A)   Maintenance. Any structure housing a nonconforming use may be
maintained through ordinary repairs.
   (B)   Enlargement, alteration, reconstruction, and relocation. No structure
housing a nonconforming use shall be enlarged, structurally altered,
reconstructed, or relocated, unless the use of the structure is changed to a
permitted use.
   (C)   Extension of use. No conforming use may be extended to any part(s) of
the structure not intended or designed for such use, nor shall the
nonconforming use be extended to occupy any land outside such structure.
   (D)   Change of use. A nonconforming use occupying a structure may be
changed to a similar use, to a more restrictive use, or to a conforming use.
Such use shall not thereafter be changed to a less restrictive use.
   (E)   Discontinuance of use. When a nonconforming use of a structure or of a
structure and premises in combination is discontinued for 12 consecutive months
or for 18 months during any three-year period, the nonconforming use shall not
thereafter be resumed. Any discontinuance caused by government action and
without any contributing fault by the nonconforming user shall not be counted
in calculating the length of discontinuance.
(Prior Code, § 40-8-4)
§ 154.294 NONCONFORMING USES OF LAND.
   Any lawful use of land existing on the effective date of this chapter that
would not be permitted under the terms of this chapter may lawfully continue,
subject to the following provisions.
   (A)   Intensification or extension of use. A nonconforming use of land shall
not be intensified or extended to occupy a greater area of land than was
occupied by such use on the effective date of this chapter.
   (B)   Relocation. No nonconforming use of land shall be moved, in whole or
in part, unless such use, upon relocation, will conform to all pertinent
regulations of the district in which it is proposed to be located.
   (C)   Change of use. Whenever a nonconforming use of a building has been
changed to a more restrictive use or to a conforming use, such use shall not
thereafter be changed to a less restrictive use. If no structural alterations
are made, a nonconforming use of a building may be changed to another
nonconforming use of the same or more restricted classification.
   (D)   Discontinuance. When a nonconforming use of land is discontinued for a
period of 12 consecutive months or for 18 months during any three-year period,
it shall not thereafter be resumed, and any subsequent use of such land shall
conform to the applicable district regulations. Any discontinuance caused by
government action and without any contributing fault by the owner or operator
shall not be counted in calculating the length of discontinuance.
(Prior Code, § 40-8-5)
§ 154.295 NONCONFORMING UNDER PERMIT AUTHORITY.
   The regulations of this subchapter shall not apply to any change in an
existing structure or to any change in the use of a structure or of land for
which a permit was issued prior to the effective date of this chapter or any
pertinent amendment thereto; provided that the work authorized by such permit
is completed within a reasonable time.
(Prior Code, § 40-8-6)
ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT
§ 154.310 ZONING ADMINISTRATOR; APPOINTMENT AND DUTIES.
   (A)   There is hereby established the office of Zoning Administrator, who
shall be appointed by the Mayor, with the advice and consent of the Board of
Trustees, for a term of two years.
   (B)   The Zoning Administrator is hereby authorized and directed to
administer and enforce the provisions of this chapter. This broad
responsibility encompasses, but is not limited to, the following specific
duties:
      (1)   To review applications pertaining to land, structures and the uses
of land and/or structures;
      (2)   To inspect lots, structures, and uses to determine compliance with
this chapter, and, where there are violations, to initiate appropriate
corrective action;
      (3)   To review and forward to the Zoning Board of Appeals all appeals
and applications for variances, special use permits, and amendments;
      (4)   To maintain up-to-date records of matters related to this chapter,
including, but not limited to, district maps, certificates of zoning
compliance, special use permits, variances, interpretative decisions of the
Zoning Board of Appeals, amendments, and all applications/documents related to
any of these items;
      (5)   To republish the zoning district map not later than March 31 if any
re-zonings or annexations have been approved during the preceding calendar year
(see § 154.022);
      (6)   To provide information to the general public on matters related to
this chapter; and
      (7)   To perform such other duties as the Board of Trustees may prescribe
from time to time.
(Prior Code, § 40-9-1)
§ 154.311 INITIAL CERTIFICATES OF ZONING COMPLIANCE.
   (A)   Upon the effective date of this chapter, no land shall be developed,
no new use or structure shall be established or erected, and no existing use or
structure shall be enlarged, extended, altered, relocated, or reconstructed
until an initial certificate of zoning compliance has been issued.
   (B)   The Zoning Administrator shall not issue an initial certificate of
zoning compliance unless he or she determines that the proposed activity
conforms to the applicable provisions of this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 40-9-2)
§ 154.312 ZONING APPLICATION.
   (A)   Every applicant for a certificate of zoning compliance shall submit to
the Administrator, in graphic and/or narrative form, all the items of
information listed below that are applicable to the particular project. The
Zoning Administrator shall decide which items are applicable. (Note: Filing fee
required in § 154.322.)
   (B)   Items of information include:
      (1)   Name and address of the applicant;
      (2)   Name and address of the owner or operator of the proposed lot,
structure, or use, if different from division (A) above;
      (3)   Nature of the proposed use, including type of activity, manner of
operations, number of occupants or employees, and similar matters;
      (4)   Location of the proposed use or structures, and its relationship to
existing adjacent uses or structures;
      (5)   Area and dimensions of the site for the proposed structure or use;
      (6)   Existing topography of the site (USGS ten-foot contour data is
acceptable), and proposed finished grade;
      (7)   Existing and proposed screening, landscaping, and erosion control
features on the site, including the parking area;
      (8)   Height, setbacks, and lot coverage of the proposed structures;
      (9)   Number and size of proposed dwelling units, if any;
      (10)   Location and number of proposed parking/loading spaces and access
ways;
      (11)   Identification and location of all existing and proposed
utilities, whether public or private; and/or
      (12)   Location and square footage of existing and proposed signs by type
and class.
(Prior Code, § 40-9-3) (Ord. 06-08, passed 6-19-2006)
§ 154.313 DURATION OF CERTIFICATE.
   (A)   Initial certificates of zoning compliance shall be valid for one year,
or until revoked for failure to abide by a corrective action order.
   (B)   The Zoning Administrator may renew initial certificates of zoning
compliance for successive one year periods upon written request, provided the
applicant is making a good faith effort to complete the authorized work. (See §
154.316.)
(Prior Code, § 40-9-4)
§ 154.314 RELATIONSHIP TO BUILDING PERMITS.
   (A)   Upon the effective date of this chapter, no building permit for the
erection, enlargement, extension, alteration, or reconstruction of any
structure shall be issued until the applicant for such permit has properly
obtained an initial certificate of zoning compliance pertaining to such work.
   (B)   The village, in compliance with the State Architecture Practice Act of
1989 and effective January 1, 1992 (225 ILCS 305/1 et seq.), requires that all
new construction and structural renovations of buildings used by the general
public, including multiple housing, but excluding one- and two-family
residences, shall require architectural plans with an architect’s seal from a
licensed architect.
(Prior Code, § 40-9-5)
§ 154.315 FINAL CERTIFICATES OF ZONING COMPLIANCE.
   No lot or part thereof recorded or developed after the effective date of
this chapter, and no structure or use or part thereof that has been erected,
enlarged, altered, relocated, or reconstructed after the effective date of this
chapter, shall be used, occupied, or put into operation until a certificate of
zoning compliance has been issued. The Zoning Administrator shall not issue a
final certificate of zoning compliance until it has been determined, by
inspection, that the work authorized by the initial certificate of zoning
compliance has been completed in accordance with approved plans. Failure to
obtain a final certificate of zoning compliance shall constitute a separate
violation of this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 40-9-6)
§ 154.316 CORRECTIVE ACTION ORDERS.
   Whenever the Zoning Administrator finds, by inspection or otherwise, that
any lot, structure, or use, or work thereon is in violation of this chapter, he
or she shall so notify the responsible party, and shall order appropriate
corrective action.
(Prior Code, § 40-9-7)
§ 154.317 CONTENTS OF ORDER.
   The order to take corrective action shall be in writing and shall include:
   (A)   A description of the premises sufficient for identification;
   (B)   A statement indicating the nature of the violation;
   (C)   A statement of the remedial action necessary to effect compliance;
   (D)   The date by which the violation must be corrected;
   (E)   A statement that the alleged violator is entitled to a conference with
the Zoning Administrator if he or she so desires;
   (F)   The date by which an appeal of the corrective action order must be
filed, and a statement of the procedure for so filing; and
   (G)   A statement that failure to obey a corrective action order shall
result in revocation of the certificate of zoning compliance and may result in
the imposition of fines.
(Prior Code, § 40-9-8)
§ 154.318 SERVICE OF ORDER.
   A corrective action order shall be deemed properly served upon the owner,
occupant, or operator of the offending lot, structure, or use if it is:
   (A)   Served upon him or her personally;
   (B)   Sent by certified mail to his or her last known address; or
   (C)   Posted in a conspicuous place on or about the affected premises.
(Prior Code, § 40-9-9)
§ 154.319 STOP ORDERS.
   Whenever any work is being done in violation of an initial certificate of
zoning compliance, the Zoning Administrator’s corrective action order may state
that the violation be stopped immediately. In such case, the corrective action
order is equivalent to a stop order. (See § 514.317.)
(Prior Code, § 40-9-10)
§ 154.320 EMERGENCY MEASURES.
   Notwithstanding any other provisions of this chapter, whenever the Zoning
Administrator determines that any violation of this chapter poses an imminent
peril to life or property, he or she may institute, without notice or hearing,
any necessary proceedings to alleviate the perilous condition.
(Prior Code, § 40-9-11)
§ 154.321 COMPLAINTS.
   Whenever any violation of this chapter occurs, or is alleged to have
occurred, any person may file a written complaint on forms provided by the
Zoning Administrator. The Zoning Administrator shall record such complaints,
promptly investigate, and, if necessary, institute appropriate corrective
action.
(Prior Code, § 40-9-12)
§ 154.322 FEES.
   (A)   (1)   The Board of Trustees establishes the following schedule of fees
for the various permits and procedures listed in this chapter. The fees are
intended to defray the administrative costs connected with the processing/
conducting of such permits or procedures; the fees do not constitute a tax or
other revenue-raising device. All such fees shall be paid in advance by the
applicant to the Village Clerk as follows:
Service/Structure Zoning Occupancy Fee
Service/Structure                   Zoning Occupancy Fee
Accessory building (larger than 100 $10 per building, $0.04 per square foot,
square feet)                        whichever is greater
Commercial or business structure    $100, or $0.04 per square foot,
                                    whichever is greater
Industrial structure                $150, or $0.04 per square foot,
                                    whichever is greater
Miscellaneous permit (e.g., parking $0.01 per square foot
lot, deck, driveway, and the like)  ($5 minimum, $25 maximum)
Mobile home park permit             $500, or $25 per pad, whichever is
                                    greater, plus engineering costs, if any
Mobile home unit/immobilized        $25, or $0.04 per square foot, whichever
                                    is greater
Multi-family residence              $25 per unit, or $0.04 per square feet,
                                    whichever is greater
Planned development                 $500, or $0.04 per square foot of
                                    building space, whichever is greater1
Sign permit                         $5, or $0.05 per square foot, whichever
                                    is greater
Single-family residence             $25, or $0.04 per square foot, whichever
                                    is greater
Structural additions                $10, or $0.04 per square foot, whichever
                                    is greater
Note:
1: For portions of a planned development devoted to detached single-family
or attached single- family dwellings on subdivided lots, the fees specified
in §§
153.020 through
153.025 shall apply instead of the fee specified herein.
 
      (2)   All fees for the above projects that are started prior to obtaining
the zoning occupancy permit and/or paying the fees shall be doubled.
 
Service                Zoning Board of Appeals Fee
Amendments             $100, plus mailing and publication costs
Interpretation of Code $100, plus mailing and publication costs
Special use permit     $100, plus mailing and publication costs
Variance permit        $100, plus mailing and publication costs
 
(Prior Code, § 40-9-13)
ZONING BOARD OF APPEALS
§ 154.335 ESTABLISHED.
    The Zoning Board of Appeals is hereby established in accordance with state
law.
(Prior Code, § 40-10-1)
Statutory reference:
   Related provisions, see 65 ILCS 5/11-13-3
§ 154.336 MEMBERSHIP, APPOINTMENT, AND COMPENSATION.
   The Zoning Board of Appeals shall consist of seven members, all of whom
shall reside within the village. Each Zoning Board of Appeals member shall be
appointed by the Mayor with the advice and consent of the Board of Trustees.
One of the members so appointed shall be named as Chair at the time of his or
her appointment. The Zoning Board of Appeals shall select one of its members to
be the Vice-Chair, and one the Secretary. Each Zoning Board of Appeals member
shall receive compensation as established by the Board of Trustees.
(Prior Code, § 40-10-2)
§ 154.337 TERM OF OFFICE; VACANCIES.
   (A)   Every member of the Zoning Board of Appeals shall hold office for five
years from the date of his or her appointment and until his or her successor
has been selected and qualified.
   (B)   With the advice and consent of the Board of Trustees, the Mayor may
remove any member of the Zoning Board of Appeals for cause after a public
hearing. Vacancies on the Zoning Board of Appeals shall be filled for the
unexpired term of the member whose place has become vacant in the same manner
as provided for the appointment of new members.
(Prior Code, § 40-10-3) (Ord. 03-21, passed 11-17-2003)
§ 154.338 MEETING; QUORUM.
   (A)   (1)   All meetings of the Zoning Board of Appeals shall be held at the
call of the Chair and at such times as the Zoning Board of Appeals may
determine. All Board meetings shall be open to the public.
      (2)   The Zoning Board of Appeals may adopt its own rules of meeting
procedures consistent with this chapter and the applicable state statutes.
   (B)   The Zoning Board of Appeals may select such officers as it deems
necessary. The Chair, or, in his or her absence, the Acting Chair may
administer oaths and compel the attendance of witnesses. Four members of the
Zoning Board of Appeals shall constitute a quorum, and the affirmative vote of
at least four members shall be necessary to authorize any Zoning Board of
Appeals action. (See § 154.340 for vote on decisions of Zoning Board of
Appeals.)
(Prior Code, § 40-10-4)
§ 154.339 RECORDS.
   The Zoning Board of Appeals shall keep minutes of its proceedings and
examinations. These minutes shall indicate the absence of any member, the vote
or abstention of each member on each question, and any official action taken. A
copy of every rule, variance, order, or decision of the Zoning Board of Appeals
shall be filed immediately with the Village Clerk and shall be made a public
record.
(Prior Code, § 40-10-5)
§ 154.340 DECISION TO RECOMMEND OR NOT.
   (A)   The concurring vote of four members of the Zoning Board of Appeals
shall be necessary to recommend a variance or special use permit or to
recommend an amendment to the Board of Trustees.
   (B)   The recommendation of the Zoning Board of Appeals shall be by written
letter and shall contain its findings of fact. A copy shall be sent to the
Board of Trustees.
(Prior Code, § 40-10-6)
§ 154.341 PERIOD OF VALIDITY.
   (A)   No decision by the Board of Trustees granting a variance or special
use permit shall be valid for a period longer than 12 months from the date of
such decision, unless:
      (1)   An application for a zoning certificate is obtained within such
period and construction, moving, remodeling, or reconstruction is started; or
      (2)   An occupancy certificate is obtained and a use is commenced.
   (B)   However, the Zoning Board of Appeals may grant additional extensions
of time not exceeding 180 days, each upon written application made within the
initial 12-month period without further notice or hearing, but said right to so
extend said time shall not include the right to grant additional relief by
expanding the scope of the variation.
(Prior Code, § 40-10-7)
§ 154.342 RECOMMENDATIONS.
   No applicant shall apply for the same or identical request for a period of
one year unless the facts and/or request have substantially changed.
(Prior Code, § 40-10-8)
§ 154.343 OFFICE OF THE RECORDING SECRETARY.
   (A)   The Recording Secretary of the Board of Appeals shall be appointed by
the Zoning Board of Appeals to serve until his or her successor is appointed.
   (B)   The Recording Secretary shall record the minutes of the Zoning Board
of Appeals’ proceedings and actions, showing the vote of each member upon each
question or if absent or failing to vote, indicating such fact. He or she shall
perform such other duties as may be assigned from time to time by the Zoning
Board of Appeals.
(Prior Code, § 40-10-9)
§ 154.344 JURISDICTION.
   The Zoning Board of Appeals has the power to hear and recommend appeals,
variances and requests for special use permits pursuant to this chapter. It has
the power to hear and recommend requests for amendments to this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 40-10-10)
APPEALS
§ 154.355 NATURE OF AN APPEAL.
   (A)   Any person aggrieved by any decision or order of the Zoning
Administrator in any matter related to the interpretation or enforcement of any
provision of this chapter may appeal to the Zoning Board of Appeals on a
prescribed form
   (B)    Every such appeal shall be made and treated in accordance with state
law (65 ILCS 5/11-13-12) and the provisions of this section.
(Prior Code, § 40-10-12)
Statutory reference:
   Related provisions, see 65 ILCS 5/11-13-3(d)
§ 154.356 FILING, RECORD TRANSMITTAL.
   (A)   Every appeal shall be made within 45 days of the matter complained of
by filing with the Zoning Administrator and the Zoning Board of Appeals a
written notice specifying the grounds for appeal.
   (B)   Every appeal shall also be filed with the Soil and Water Conservation
District as per state law. Not more than five working days after the notice of
appeal has been filed, the Zoning Administrator shall transmit to the Zoning
Board of Appeals all records pertinent to the case.
(Prior Code, § 40-10-13)
Statutory reference:
   Related provisions, see 65 ILCS 5/11-13-12 and 70 ILCS 405/22.02a
§ 154.357 STAY OF FURTHER PROCEEDINGS.
   (A)   An appeal stays all further action on the matter being appealed unless
the Administrator certifies to the Zoning Board of Appeals after the notice of
appeal has been filed with him or her, that for reasons stated in the
certificate, a stay would cause imminent peril to life or property.
   (B)   In such case, further action shall not be stayed unless the Zoning
Board of Appeals or the circuit court grants a restraining order for due cause
and so notifies the Zoning Administrator.
(Prior Code, § 40-10-14)
Statutory reference:
   Related provisions, see 65 ILCS 5/11-13-12
§ 154.358 PUBLIC HEARING; NOTICE.
   (A)   The Zoning Board of Appeals shall hold a public hearing on every
appeal within a reasonable time after the filing of the appeal notice. At the
hearing, any interested party may appear and testify, either in person or by
duly authorized agent or attorney.
   (B)   Notice indicating the time, date, and place of the hearing, and
briefly describing the issue to be decided shall be given not more than 30
days, nor less than 15 days before the hearing:
      (1)   By publication in a newspaper of general circulation within the
village;
      (2)   By certified mail to the applicant; and
      (3)   By first-class mail to all owners of property contiguous to any
property affected by the appeal.
(Prior Code, § 40-10-15)
Statutory reference:
   Related provisions, see 65 ILCS 5/11-13-12
§ 154.359 RECOMMENDATION BY THE ZONING BOARD OF APPEALS.
   The Zoning Board of Appeals shall render a recommendation on the appeal
within 30 days after the hearing therein. The Zoning Board of Appeals may
reverse or affirm, wholly or partly, or may modify or amend the decision or
order appealed from the extent and in the manner that they deem appropriate.
In so doing, the Zoning Board of Appeals has all the power of the Zoning
Administrator. The recommendation shall be forwarded to the Board of Trustees
for a final decision.
(Prior Code, § 40-10-16)
§ 154.360 DECISION BY THE BOARD OF TRUSTEES.
   (A)   The Board of Trustees shall render a decision on the appeal within a
reasonable time after receiving the appropriate records and recommendation of
the Zoning Board of Appeals.
   (B)   The Board of Trustees may uphold the recommendation of the Zoning
Board of Appeals or make such other decision as they deem appropriate. In so
doing, the Board of Trustees has all the powers of the Administrator and Zoning
Board of Appeals. Such decision shall be binding upon the Zoning Administrator
and observed by him or her and he or she shall be required to incorporate the
terms and conditions of the same in the zoning certificate to the applicant or
appellant whenever a certificate of occupancy is authorized by the Zoning Board
of Appeals.
(Prior Code, § 40-10-17)
Editor’s note:
   The Zoning Board of Appeals is delegated the task of hearing appeals from
the decisions of the Zoning Administrator or other official charged with
enforcement of an ordinance passed pursuant to the Zoning Enabling Act, being
65 ILCS 5/Art. 11, Div. 4. This may, for example, entail determining whether
there has been a discontinuance of a nonconforming use. It is important for the
applicant to note the appeal process because of the requirement of exhaustion
of administrative remedies before suit is filed as well as the more obvious
reason of using a less expensive administrative process for correcting a
mistake or error which may have been made by the Zoning Administrator.
Statutory reference:
    Related provisions, see 65 ILCS 5/11-13-3(d)
VARIATIONS
§ 154.375 VARIANCES.
   A variance is a relaxation of the requirements of this chapter that are
applicable to a particular lot, structure, or use. A so-called “use variance”
(which would allow a use that is neither permitted nor special in the district
in question) is not a variance, it is an amendment, and should be granted only
as provided for in §
154.420 .
(Prior Code, § 40-10-18)
   (B)   All actions by the Zoning Board of Appeals requires an ordinance.
Statutory reference:
   Related provisions, see 65 ILCS 5/11-13-1 et seq.
§ 154.376 APPLICATION.
   (A)   (1)   Every application for a variance shall be filed with the
Administrator on a prescribed form. Every variance application shall also be
filed with the Soil and Water Conservation District as per state law.
      (2)   The Zoning Administrator shall promptly transmit said application,
together with any advice he or she might wish to offer, to the Zoning Board of
Appeals. The application shall contain sufficient information to allow the
Zoning Board of Appeals to make an informed decision and shall include, at a
minimum, the following:
      (1)   Name and address of the applicant;
         (a)   Location of the structure/use for which the variance is sought;
         (b)   Brief description of adjacent lots, structures, and/or uses;
         (c)   Brief description of the problems/circum stances engendering the
variance request;
         (d)   Brief, but specific, explanation of the desired variance;
         (e)   Specific section(s) of this code containing the regulations
which, if strictly applied, would cause a serious problem; and
         (f)   Any other pertinent information that the Zoning Administrator
may require.
   (B)   A filing fee is required.
(Prior Code, § 40-10-19) (Ord. 06-08, passed 6-19-2006)
Statutory reference:
   Related provisions, see 70 ILCS 405/22.02a
§ 154.377 PUBLIC HEARING; NOTICE.
   (A)   The Zoning Board of Appeals shall hold a public hearing on each
variance request within 60 days after the variance application is submitted to
it. At the hearing, any interested party may appear and testify either in
person or by duly authorized agent or attorney.
   (B)   Notice indicating the time, date, and place of the hearing, and the
nature of the proposed variance shall be given not more than 30, nor less than
15 days before the hearing:
      (1)   By certified mail to the applicant;
      (2)   By publication in a newspaper of general circulation within the
village; and
      (3)   By first-class mail to all owners of property contiguous to the
property affected by the proposed variance.
(Prior Code, § 40-10-20)
Statutory reference:
   Related provisions, see 65 ILCS 5/11-13-7
§ 154.378 STANDARDS FOR VARIANCES.
   (A)   The Zoning Board of Appeals shall not grant any variance unless they
find that the proposed variance is consistent with the general purposes of this
chapter, and that the strict application of the district requirements would
result in great practical difficulties or hardship to the applicant.
   (B)   More specifically, the Zoning Board of Appeals shall not decide upon a
variance unless they determine, based upon the evidence presented to them,
that:
      (1)   The property in question cannot yield a reasonable return if the
district regulations are strictly applied;
      (2)   The plight of the applicant is due to peculiar circumstances not of
his or her own making;
      (3)   The variance, if granted, will not be detrimental to the public
health, safety, and welfare;
      (4)   The peculiar circumstances engendering the variance request are not
applicable to other property within the district, and therefore, that a
variance would be a more appropriate remedy than an amendment (re-zoning); and
      (5)   The variance, if granted, will not alter the essential character of
the area where the premises in question are located, nor materially frustrate
implementation of the village’s Comprehensive Plan.
(Prior Code, § 40-10-21)
Statutory reference:
   Related provisions, see 65 ILCS 5/11-13-4
§ 154.379 RECOMMENDATION BY THE ZONING BOARD OF APPEALS.
   The Zoning Board of Appeals shall be required to submit an advisory report
on all applications within 30 days after the final hearing thereon. A copy of
the Zoning Board of Appeals’ report shall be transmitted to the applicant or
appellant and to the Zoning Administrator. The Zoning Board of Appeals shall
specify the terms of relief recommended (if any) in one statement and its
findings of fact in another statement. The findings of fact shall clearly
indicate the Zoning Board of Appeals’ reasons for recommending or denying any
requested variance.
(Prior Code, § 40-10-22)
§ 154.380 ACTION BY THE BOARD OF TRUSTEES.
   The Board of Trustees shall act on every proposed variance at its next
regularly scheduled meeting following submission of the advisory report of the
Zoning Board of Appeals. Without further public hearing, the Board of Trustees
may approve or disapprove any proposed variance by simple majority vote of all
the members then holding office. Such decision shall be binding upon the Zoning
Administrator and observed by him or her. He or she shall be required to
incorporate the terms and conditions of the same in. The zoning certificate to
the applicant or appellant whenever a certificate is authorized by the Board of
Zoning Appeals.
(Prior Code, § 40-10-23)
SPECIAL USES
§ 154.395 SPECIAL USE PERMITS.
   This chapter divides the village into various districts, and permits in each
district as a matter of right only those uses which are clearly compatible with
one another. Certain other uses, because of their special operational or
physical characteristics, may or may not have a detrimental impact on nearby
permitted uses, depending upon their precise location, manner of operation and
other factors. Such special uses require careful case-by-case review, and may
be allowed only after review and approval by the Zoning Board of Appeals.
(Prior Code, § 40-10-24)
§ 154.396 APPLICATION.
   (A)   Every applicant for a special use permit shall submit to the Zoning
Administrator in narrative and/or graphic form, the items of information
enumerated below. The Zoning Administrator shall promptly transmit the
completed application, together with any comments or recommendation he or she
might have, to the Zoning Board of Appeals for further consideration.
   (B)   A filing fee shall be required as in §
154.356.
   (C)   The following items of information shall be included:
      (1)   Name and address of the applicant;
      (2)   Name and address of the owner or operator of the proposed structure
or use, if different from division (C)(1) above:
      (3)   Nature of the proposed use, including type of activity, manner of
operation, number of occupants or employees, and similar matters;
      (4)   Location of the proposed use or structure, and its relationship to
existing uses of structures on adjacent lots;
      (5)   Area and dimensions of the site for the proposed structure or use;
      (6)   Existing topography of the site and proposed finished grade;
      (7)   Existing and proposed screening, landscaping, and erosion control
features on the site, including the parking area;
      (8)   Height and setbacks of the proposed structure;
      (9)   Number and size of the proposed dwelling units, if any;
      (10)   Number and location of proposed parking/loading spaces and access
ways;
      (11)   Identification and location of all existing or proposed utilities,
whether public or private; and/or
      (12)   Any other pertinent information that the Zoning Administrator may
require.
(Prior Code, § 40-10-25) (Ord. 06-08, passed 6-19-2006)
§ 154.397 PUBLIC HEARING; NOTICE.
   (A)   The Zoning Board of Appeals shall hold a public hearing on every
special use permit application within 60 days after the application is
submitted to them. At the hearing, any interested party may appear and testify,
either in person or by duly authorized agent or attorney.
   (B)   Notice indicating the time, date, and place of the hearing, and the
nature of the proposed special use shall be given not more than 30 days, nor
less than 15 days, before the hearing:
      (1)   By certified mail to the applicant;
      (2)   By publication in a newspaper of general circulation within the
village; and
      (3)   By first-class mail to all owners of property contiguous to the
property affected by the proposed variance.
(Prior Code, § 40-10-26)
Statutory reference:
   Related provisions, see 65 ILCS 5/11-13-7
§ 154.398 ADVISORY REPORT; FACTORS CONSIDERED.
   Within 30 days after the public hearing, the Zoning Board of Appeals shall
reach a final decision. In deciding, the Zoning Board of Appeals shall consider
the following factors:
   (A)   Whether the proposed design, location, and manner of operation of the
proposed special use will adequately protect the public health, safety, and
welfare, and the physical environment;
   (B)   Whether the proposed special use is consistent with the village’s
Comprehensive Plan, if any;
   (C)   The effect the proposed special use would have on the value of
neighboring property and on the village’s overall tax base;
   (D)   The effect the proposed special use would have on public utilities and
on the traffic circulation on nearby streets; and
   (E)   Whether there are any facilities near the proposed special use (such
as schools or hospitals) that require special protection.
(Prior Code, § 40-10-27)
§ 154.399 ACTION BY THE BOARD OF TRUSTEES.
   (A)   The Board of Trustees shall act on every request for a special use
permit at its next regularly scheduled meeting following submission of the
advisory report by the Zoning Board of Appeals. Without further public hearing,
the Board of Trustees may approve or disapprove a special use permit by an
ordinance passed by simple majority vote of all members then holding office.
   (B)   In a separate statement accompanying any such ordinance, the Board of
Trustees shall state its findings of fact, and indicate its reasons for a
special use permit.
(Prior Code, § 40-10-28)
Statutory reference:
   Related provisions, see 65 ILCS 5/11-31-1
§ 154.400 TEMPORARY USE PERMIT PROCEDURE.
   As set forth at §
154.033, requests for temporary use permits shall be treated in the same manner
as requests for special use permits. The Zoning Board shall issue no temporary
use permit for a period longer than one year but may renew any such permit as
they see fit.
(Prior Code, § 40-10-29)
AMENDMENTS
§ 154.420 BOARD OF TRUSTEES TO AMEND.
   (A)   The Board of Trustees may amend this chapter in accordance with state
law and the provisions of this section, proposed alterations of district
boundaries, or proposed changes in the status of uses (permitted, special, and
prohibited) shall be deemed proposed amendments.
   (B)   Amendments may be proposed by the Board of Trustees, the Zoning Board,
the Plan Commission, the Zoning Administrator, or any party in interest.
(Prior Code, § 40-10-30)
Statutory reference:
    Related provisions, see 65 ILCS 5/11-13-14
§ 154.421 FILING.
   (A)   Every proposal to amend this chapter shall be filed with the Zoning
Administrator on a prescribed form. Every amendment proposal shall also be
filed with the Soil and Water Conservation District as per state law (70 ILCS
405/22.02a). The Administrator shall promptly transmit said proposal, together
with any comments or recommendations he or she might wish to make, to the
Zoning Board of Appeals for a public hearing.
   (B)   A filing fee shall be required as in §
154.356.
(Prior Code, § 40-10-31) (Ord. 06-08, passed 6-19-2006)
§ 154.422 PUBLIC HEARING; NOTICE.
   (A)   The Board of Appeals shall hold a public hearing on every amendment
proposal within 60 days after said proposal has been submitted to it. At the
hearing, any interested party may appear and testify, either in person or by
duly authorized agent or attorney.
   (B)   Notice indicating the time, date, and place of the hearing and the
nature of the proposed amendment shall be given not more than 30 days, nor less
than 15 days, before the hearing, by publishing a notice thereof in a newspaper
published in the village, or, if no newspaper is published therein, then in a
newspaper of general circulation within the village.
(Prior Code, § 40-10-32) (Ord. 06-08, passed 6-19-2006)
§ 154.423 ADVISORY REPORT; FINDINGS OF FACT.
   (A)   Within 30 days after the public hearing, the Zoning Board of Appeals
shall submit its advisory report to the Board of Trustees. The report shall
state the recommendations of the Zoning Board of Appeals regarding adoption of
the proposed amendment and its reasons therefor.
   (B)   If the effect of the proposed amendment would be to alter district
boundaries or to change the status of any use, the Zoning Board of Appeals
shall include in its advisory report findings of fact concerning each of the
following matters:
      (1)   Existing use and zoning of the property in question;
      (2)   Existing uses and zoning of other lots in the vicinity of the
property in question;
      (3)   Suitability of the property in question for uses already permitted
under existing regulations;
      (4)   Suitability of the property in question for the proposed use; and
      (5)   The trend of development in the vicinity of the property in
question, including changes (if any) which may have occurred since the property
was initially zoned or last re-zoned.
(Prior Code, § 40-10-33)
§ 154.424 ACTION BY BOARD OF TRUSTEES.
   (A)   The Board of Trustees shall act on every proposed amendment at its
next regularly scheduled meeting following submission of the advisory report of
the Zoning Board of Appeals.
   (B)   Without further public hearing, the Board of Trustees may approve or
disapprove any proposed amendment or may refer it back to the Zoning Board of
Appeals for further consideration by simple majority vote of all the members
then holding office.
(Prior Code, § 40-10-34)
§ 154.425 WHEN TWO-THIRDS MAJORITY VOTE IS REQUIRED.
   The favorable vote of at least two-thirds of the members of the Board of
Trustees is required to pass an amendment to this chapter in each of the
following instances:
   (A)   When passage would be contrary to the recommendation of the Board of
Appeals; and
   (B)   When the amendment is opposed, in writing, by the owners of 20% of the
frontage proposed to be altered, or by the owners of 20% of the frontage
immediately adjoining or across an alley therefrom, or by the owners of 20% of
the frontage directly opposite the frontage proposed to be altered.
(Prior Code, § 40-10-35)
§ 154.426 NOTICE TO APPLICANT OF WRITTEN PROTEST.
   In cases of written opposition to an amendment of this chapter as prescribed
in §
154.425, a copy of the written protest shall be served by the protestor or
protestors on the applicant for the proposed amendment and a copy upon the
applicant’s attorney, if any, by certified mail at the address of such
applicant and attorney shown in the application for the proposed amendment.
(Prior Code, § 40-10-36)
Statutory reference:
   Related provisions, see 65 ILCS 5/11-13-14
§ 154.999 PENALTY.
   (A)   (1)   Any person who is convicted of a violation of this chapter shall
be fined not less than $150, nor more than $750, plus costs. Each day on which
a violation continues shall be considered a separate offense.
      (2)   Nothing contained in this section shall prevent the village from
taking any other lawful action that may be necessary to secure compliance with
this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 40-9-14)
   (B)   If the operating company does not adhere to the proposed plan, as
described in §
154.225(C)(3), a fine of $500 per week will be assessed until the operating
company or successor complies with the weed/grass control and fencing
requirements.
(Prior Code, § 40-5-26)
   (C)   Any person, firm, or corporation who violates, disobeys, omits,
neglects, refuses to comply with, or resists enforcement of any of the
provisions of §
154.228 may face fines of not less than $25, nor more than $500 for each
offense.
(Prior Code, § 40-5-29)
(Ord. 96-5, passed 1-15-1996; Ord. 2018-10, passed 8-20-2018)
APPENDIX A: AREA AND BULK REGULATIONS
§
154.032 Area and Bulk Regulations Summary Sheet
Accessory Buildings and Uses if Detached Minimum Distance to:
             Maximum                                Front  Side Lot           Rear
             Height of Maximum    Maximum Principal Lot    Adjacent Other     Lot
Zone         Principal Coverage   Height  Building  Line   to       Side Lot  Line
Districts    Building  as a       in      in Linear in     Street   Line, in  in
             in Linear Percentage Linear  Feet      Linear in       Linear    Linear
             Feet      of Lot     Feet              Feet   Linear   Feet      Feet
                                                           Feet
A-                                                  50
1            35 feet   N/A        25 feet N/A       feet   25 feet  5 feet    8 feet
Agricultural
SR-1 Single- 35 feet   25%        25 feet N/A       N/A    25 feet  5 feet    8 feet
Family
SR-2 Single- 35 feet   25%        25 feet N/A       N/A    25 feet  5 feet    8 feet
Family
MR-1 Two-    35 feet   30%        25 feet N/A       N/A    25 feet  3 feet    3 feet
Family
MH-
1            35 feet   25%        25 feet N/A       N/A    25 feet  5 feet    8 feet
Manufactured
Housing
B-                                                  15              See       12
1 Community  35 feet   50%        25 feet 15 feet   feet   25 feet  Principal feet
Business                                                            Building
B-2 Highway  35 feet   50%        25 feet 15 feet   15     25 feet  15 feet   12
Business                                            feet                      feet
I-           60 feet   40%        25 feet 15 feet   15     25 feet  15 feet   12
1 Industrial                                        feet                      feet
§
154.032 Area and Bulk Regulations Summary Sheet
          Minimum Lot Size                Minimum Yard Dimensions
                                                         Depth of Side
                                                         Yard Abutting
                                                         a Lot (in     Minimum
                   Area                   Depth Depth of Linear Feet)  Distance  Depth
          Maximum  (in    Width at Mean   of    Side                   to        of
Zone      Number   Square Building Depth  Front Yard                   Nearest   Rear
Districts of       Feet   Line (in (in    Yard  Abutting               Principal Yard
          Dwelling or     Linear   Linear (in   Street   Total Minimum on        (in
          Units    Acres) Feet)    Feet)  Feet) (in      for   for     Adjacent  Linear
                                                Feet)    Both  Either  Lot (in   Feet)
                                                                       Feet)
§
154.032 Area and Bulk Regulations Summary Sheet
             Minimum Lot Size                  Minimum Yard Dimensions
                                                                Depth of Side
                                                                Yard Abutting
                                                                a Lot (in     Minimum
                                               Depth   Depth of Linear Feet)  Distance  Depth
             Maximum  Area    Width at Mean    of      Side                   to        of
Zone         Number   (in     Building Depth   Front   Yard                   Nearest   Rear
Districts    of       Square  Line (in (in     Yard    Abutting               Principal Yard
             Dwelling Feet or Linear   Linear  (in     Street   Total Minimum on        (in
             Units    Acres)  Feet)    Feet)   Feet)   (in      for   for     Adjacent  Linear
                                                       Feet)    Both  Either  Lot (in   Feet)
                                                                              Feet)


A-                            150 feet 200     40 feet 25 feet  25                      25
1            1        3 acres minimum  feet    minimum minimum  feet  10 feet N/A       feet
Agricultural                           minimum
SR-1 Single-          10,000  75       100     25 feet 25 feet  25                      25
Family       1        square  minimum  feet    minimum minimum  feet  10 feet N/A       feet
                      feet             minimum
SR-2 Single-          7,000   50 feet  100     25 feet 25 feet  15                      25
Family       1        square  minimum  feet    minimum minimum  feet  5 feet  N/A       feet
                      feet             minimum
             1 per    10,000           100
MR-1 Two-    2,500    square  80 feet  feet    25 feet 25 feet  15    7.5     15 feet   25
Family       square   feet    minimum  minimum minimum minimum  feet  feet              feet
             feet     minimum
MH-1 Manu-            6,000   50 feet  100     25 feet 25 feet  15                      20
factured     1        square  minimum  feet    minimum minimum  feet  5 feet  20 feet   feet
Housing               feet             minimum
                                                                None
                                                                required, but
                                                                if provided
B-                    5,000            100                      or when
1 Community  N/A      square  50 feet  feet            25 feet  abutting an   N/A
Business              feet    minimum  minimum         minimum  SR or MR
                                                                District, a
                                                                side yard of
                                                                15 feet is
                                                                required
B-2 Highway           20,000  125 feet 120     50 feet 50 feet  50                      25
Business     N/A      square  minimum  feet    minimum minimum  feet  25 feet N/A       feet
                      feet             minimum
I-                    20,000  125 feet 150     50 feet 50 feet  50                      25
1 Industrial N/A      square  minimum  feet    minimum minimum  feet  25 feet N/A       feet
                      feet             minimum
 
(Prior Code, Ch. 40)
APPENDIX B: CORNERS; RESTRICTED AREA
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/55b2dcabe38ed28988c7fe1d84ccd8df76d568b7/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3437.jpg]
(Prior Code, Ch. 40)
APPENDIX C: LOT TERMS
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/55b2dcabe38ed28988c7fe1d84ccd8df76d568b7/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3431.jpg]
(Prior Code, Ch. 40)
APPENDIX D: SIGN AREA
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/55b2dcabe38ed28988c7fe1d84ccd8df76d568b7/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3439.jpg]
Prior Code, Ch. 40)
APPENDIX E: LOTS CORNER TYPES
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/55b2dcabe38ed28988c7fe1d84ccd8df76d568b7/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3435.jpg]
(Prior Code, Ch. 40)
CHAPTER 155: GENERAL BUILDING REGULATIONS
Section
Moving Buildings
   
155.001   Permit required; application; fee
   
155.002   Terms and conditions of permit
   
155.003   Suspension or revocation of permit
   
155.004   Estimate of cost and deposit
   
155.005   Liability insurance
   
155.006   Owner’s completion bond or savings and loan certificate and share
   
155.007   Clearance of site and safety measures required
   
155.008   Control and supervision
   
155.009   Notice required
   
155.010   Default in performance of conditions
   
155.011   Route; obstructing streets
   
155.012   Light and barricades
   
155.013   Wires and structural supports
   
155.014   Trees, plants, and shrubs
   
155.015   Repairs to public property
   
155.016   Refunding of deposits
MOVING BUILDINGS
§ 155.001 PERMIT REQUIRED; APPLICATION; FEE.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to move or cause to be moved any
building in, into, through, or from the village without first obtaining a
permit therefor from the Village Clerk. Such permit shall be known as a “House
Moving Permit.”
(Prior Code, § 33-9-1)
   (B)   Any person desiring such a permit shall file with the Village Clerk an
application therefor in writing on a form to be furnished by the Street
Superintendent for that purpose. Such application shall specify the following:
      (1)   The character and size of the building to be moved;
      (2)   The reason for such moving;
      (3)   The use, purpose, and occupancy for which said building or
structure is to be used;
      (4)   The location from which and to which said building is to be moved;
      (5)   A plot plan showing the proposed location of the building upon the
property to which said building is to be moved; provided said location is in
the village;
      (6)   The streets on, over, or through which it is desired to move said
building; and
      (7)   Whether the building conforms to the Zoning Code or other
applicable regulations in the location to which it is to be moved.
(Prior Code, § 33-9-2)
   (C)   Upon the filing of the application, the Street Superintendent shall
cause the Zoning Administrator, or other authorized representative of the
village, to investigate the building and report to him or her the results of
such investigation, together with recommended action thereon.
(Prior Code, § 33-9-3)
   (D)   (1)   No permit shall be issued to move any building or structure
which, in the opinion of the Street Superintendent:
         (a)   Is so constructed or in such condition as to be dangerous;
         (b)   Is infested with pests or unsanitary;
         (c)   If it is a dwelling or habitation, is unfit for human
habitation;
         (d)   Is so dilapidated, defective, unsightly, or in such a condition
of deterioration or disrepair that its relocation at the proposed site would
cause appreciable harm to or be materially detrimental to the property or
improvements in the district within a radius of 1,000 feet from the proposed
site;
         (e)   If the proposed use is prohibited by the zoning laws of the
village;
         (f)   If the structure is of a type prohibited at the proposed
location by any ordinance of the village; or
         (g)   If the moving of the building or structure causes unreasonable
damage to the trees, plants, and/or shrubs on and along the public streets.
      (2)   Provided, however, that if the condition of the building or
structure, in the judgment of the Street Superintendent, admits of practicable
and effective repair, the permit may be issued upon the terms and conditions as
set forth herein.
(Prior Code, § 33-9-4)
   (E)   (1)   An inspection fee in the sum of $15 shall be paid to the Village
Clerk upon filing of each application for a house moving permit.
      (2)   A permit fee in the sum of $10 shall be paid to the Village Clerk
upon the issuance of each house moving permit.
(Prior Code, § 33-9-10)
   (F)   The Street Superintendent shall approve the issuance of a house moving
permit when all the necessary requirements and conditions of this subchapter
have been complied with. It shall then be the duty of the Village Clerk to
issue the permit.
(Prior Code, § 33-9-11)
§ 155.002 TERMS AND CONDITIONS OF PERMIT.
   (A)   When a house moving permit is granted, such terms and conditions as
may be deemed reasonable and proper may be imposed, including, but not limited
to, the public streets or other public property in the village on, over, or
through which the building or structure shall be moved, and the requirements of
changes, alterations, additions, or repairs to be made to or upon the building
or structure, to the end that the relocation thereof will not be materially
detrimental or injurious to public safety or to public welfare or to the
property and improvements, or either, in the district to which it is to be
moved.
   (B)   Such terms and conditions shall be written upon the permit or appended
in writing thereto.
(Prior Code, § 33-9-5)
§ 155.003 SUSPENSION OR REVOCATION OF PERMIT.
   The Street Superintendent at any time, and for sufficient cause, may revoke
or suspend any permit granted under this subchapter.
(Prior Code, § 33-9-12)
§ 155.004 ESTIMATE OF COST AND DEPOSIT.
   The applicant shall also deposit with the Village Clerk a cash deposit
sufficient to cover the cost to the village as estimated by the Street
Superintendent of trimming, moving, removing, or replanting of trees or shrubs,
and of moving, removing, and displacing any pole or other structure, supporting
any wires, cables, or other equipment belonging to the village or the cutting,
displacing, or changing the location of any wire, cable, or other equipment
upon said poles or structures belonging to the village.
(Prior Code, § 33-9-6)
§ 155.005 LIABILITY INSURANCE.
   (A)   Every person moving a building in the village shall file with the
Village Clerk a liability insurance policy issued by the solvent corporation
holding a certificate of authority to do insurance business in the state, which
policy shall conform in all respects to the requirements of this section.
   (B)   In lieu of filing the insurance policy herein referred to, a
certificate of insurance issued by an insurance corporation may be filed. The
certificate must show that a policy meeting the requirements of this section
has been issued, and shall set forth the expiration date of said policy.
   (C)   The liability policy required under this section shall insure the
person moving a building against loss from the liability imposed by law for
injury to or death of any person, or damage to any property growing out of the
moving of such building to the amount or limit of $50,000 exclusive of interest
and costs, on account of injury to or death of any one person, of $100,000
exclusive of interest and costs, on account of moving any one building
resulting in injury to or death of more than one person, and of $25,000 for
damage to property of others, resulting from moving any one building.
(Prior Code, § 33-9-7)
§ 155.006 OWNER’S COMPLETION BOND OR SAVINGS AND LOAN CERTIFICATE AND SHARE.
   Prior to the issuance of a permit to move a building, the owner or lessee of
the property upon which the building is to be located shall file with the
Zoning Administrator or other authorized representative of the village, a
corporate surety bond, conditioned as follows.
   (A)   All of the work required to be done to complete the relocation,
alteration, and reconstruction of the building pursuant to the conditions of
the permit shall be fully performed and completed within a reasonable time to
be specified in the permit by the Zoning Administrator, or other authorized
representative of the village. Such bond shall be in principal amount equal to
the estimated cost of the work proposed to be done, plus 10% thereof, and shall
name the village as obligee, and shall be in a form approved by the Village
Attorney.
   (B)   In lieu of furnishing such a corporate surety bond, the owner or
lessee may post a cash deposit in the amount of said bond.
   (C)   An extension of time for the completion may be granted in writing by
the Zoning Administrator or other authorized representative of the village
when, in his or her discretion, circumstances shall so justify, but no such
extension shall release any surety or other security.
(Prior Code, § 33-9-8)
§ 155.007 CLEARANCE OF SITE AND SAFETY MEASURES REQUIRED.
   Prior to the issuance of a permit to move a building, the owner or lessee of
the property from which the building is to be moved shall file with the Village
Clerk a bond or other form of security in favor of the village, conditioned as
follows.
   (A)   Before any work is started on a building or structure, the permittee
or his or her authorized agent shall notify the appropriate utilities in order
that all gas, water, and oil pipelines that are to be disconnected from the
building may be securely capped and sealed.
   (B)   Immediately after the moving of any building or structure, the
permittee or his or her authorized agent shall securely barricade all basement
excavations and other holes or openings.
   (C)   Within ten days after the moving of any building or structure, the
permittee or his or her authorized agent shall complete the following work:
      (1)   Securely close and seal any sanitary piping located on the
property;
      (2)   Fill with dirt or sand any septic tanks or cesspools located on the
property;
      (3)   Fill any openings, excavations, or basements remaining on the land
with dirt or sand to street level or the natural level of adjoining property,
unless otherwise directed by the Street Superintendent;
      (4)   Remove any buried underground tanks formerly used for storage of
flammable liquids; and
      (5)   Remove all refuse, debris, and waste materials from the property.
   (D)   The bond required by this section shall be an amount equal to the cost
of the work proposed to be done, as estimated by the Street Superintendent.
   (E)   The bond may be in the form of a corporate surety bond, cash deposit,
savings, and loan certificate, or an instrument of credit.
   (F)   An extension of time for completion of the work required by this
section may be granted by the Street Superintendent when, in his or her
discretion, circumstances justify such an extension; but no such extension
shall release any bond or other security furnished pursuant to this section.
(Prior Code, § 33-9-9)
§ 155.008 CONTROL AND SUPERVISION.
   (A)   Every building which is moved on, over, or through any public street,
way, or park in the village shall be under the control of the Street
Superintendent and every such building shall be moved in a careful manner, and
the work shall be prosecuted with diligence and to the satisfaction and
approval of the Street Superintendent.
   (B)   This section in no way relieves the person having charge of the moving
of any building of his or her obligation to furnish proper supervision.
(Prior Code, § 33-9-13)
§ 155.009 NOTICE REQUIRED.
   Notice must be given to both the Street Department and the Police Department
of the village by the person or his or her representative to whom the permit is
issued not less than 48 hours, nor more than 72 hours before the actual work of
moving a building or structure is to commence.
(Prior Code, § 33-9-14)
§ 155.010 DEFAULT IN PERFORMANCE OF CONDITIONS.
   (A)   (1)   Whenever a default has occurred in the performance of any term
or condition of any permit, written notice thereof shall be given to the
permittee by the Street Superintendent; said notice to state the work to be
done, the estimated cost thereof, and the period of time deemed to be
reasonably necessary to complete such work.
      (2)   After receipt of such notice, the permittee must, within the time
therein specified, either cause the work to be done, or pay over to the Village
Clerk the estimated cost of doing the work, as set forth in the notice, plus
10% of said estimated cost.
      (3)   Upon receipt of notice from the Village Clerk that the permittee
has deposited such money, the Street Superintendent shall cause the required
work to be performed and completed.
   (B)   If the permittee defaults, the village shall have the option in lieu
of completing the work required to demolish the building or structure and to
clear, clean, and restore the site or sites.
(Prior Code, § 33-9-15)
§ 155.011 ROUTE; OBSTRUCTING STREETS.
   (A)   The streets over which any building or structure is to be moved must
be approved by the Street Superintendent and the Chief of Police.
(Prior Code, § 33-9-16)
   (B)   No person owning or having charge of the moving of any building into,
on, over, through, or from any public streets, ways, or parks in the village
shall permit said building to remain in any one location on any such street,
way, or park for a period longer than 24 hours, except by written permission
obtained from the Chief of Police, or to obstruct traffic on any railroad.
(Prior Code, § 33-9-17)
§ 155.012 LIGHT AND BARRICADES.
   The person having charge of the moving of any structure shall maintain
proper lights and barricades whenever such structure is on any public street,
way, or park during the hours of darkness.
(Prior Code, § 33-9-18)
§ 155.013 WIRES AND STRUCTURAL SUPPORTS.
   (A)   In the event that the moving of any building for which a permit shall
have been granted hereunder makes it necessary to move, remove, or displace any
pole or other structure supporting the wires, cables or other equipment of any
public utility or of the village, or to cut, displace, or change the location
of any wire, cable, or other equipment upon said pole or structure, the person
to whom such permit has been granted, or his or her authorized representative,
shall obtain permission in writing from the owner or owners of such pole,
structure or wires, cables, or other equipment thereon, and shall notify such
owner or owners at least 72 hours prior to the time that the moving of such
building will necessitate the removal of such obstructions.
   (B)   The person to whom the permit is granted shall not, at the expiration
of said time of notice or at any time, cut, move, or in any way disturb such
public utility or village property; and such work shall be done only by the
authorized workpersons of the utility or the village, whichever is the owner.
The person to whom the permit is granted shall pay to the public utility, or to
the village, as the case may be, any and all costs or expense for the removal,
rearrangement, or replacement of any pole or structural support of wires,
cables, or equipment thereon or of any damage to such property.
(Prior Code, § 33-9-19)
§ 155.014 TREES, PLANTS, AND SHRUBS.
   (A)   In the event that the moving of any building for which a permit shall
have been granted hereunder makes it necessary to trim, move, remove, or
replant any tree, plant, or shrub belonging to or under the control of the
village, the person to whom such permit has been granted or his or her
authorized representative shall notify the Street Superintendent at least 72
hours prior to the time that the moving of such building will necessitate the
removal of such obstructions.
   (B)   The person to whom the permit is granted shall not, at the expiration
of the time of notice, or at any time, trim, move, remove, replant, or
otherwise disturb such trees, plants, or shrubs; and such work shall be done
only by the authorized workpersons of the village unless otherwise approved and
so ordered by the Street Superintendent. The person to whom the permit is
granted shall pay to the village, any and all costs or expenses for the
trimming, moving, removing, or replanting of any trees, plants, or shrubs or of
any damage thereto.
(Prior Code, § 33-9-20)
§ 155.015 REPAIRS TO PUBLIC PROPERTY.
   In the event that the moving of any building for which a permit shall have
been granted hereunder causes damage to the public streets or other public
property, in addition to any other remedies the village may have, the Street
Superintendent may cause such damage to be repaired and the cost thereof shall
be deducted from the deposit required herein, or he or she may require the
person to whom such a permit has been granted, or his or her authorized
representative, upon written notification from the Street Superintendent to
make all necessary repairs to such streets or property; provided, however, that
should the person to whom the permit has been granted and to whom the notice
has been given, or his or her authorized representative, fails to make the
necessary repairs within the period of time designated in the written notice,
the Street Superintendent may cause such necessary repairs to be made and the
cost thereof deducted from the deposit required herein.
(Prior Code, § 33-9-21)
§ 155.016 REFUNDING OF DEPOSITS.
   When the moving of any building for which a permit has been granted is
completed, and all damage to public streets or other public property has been
repaired to the satisfaction of the Street Superintendent, and all costs of
repairing damages or performing other work as provided herein have been paid
and the deposit as required by §
155.004, or such portion thereof then remaining unused under the provisions of
this subchapter, shall be refunded upon surrender of the deposit receipt
representing the money so deposited. However, should the cost of repairing
damages and/or performing other work as in this subchapter provided exceed the
total amount of money deposited, the person to whom the permit was granted
shall be held liable for the amount of damage and/or other costs which are in
excess of the amount deposited. It shall be the duty of the Village Clerk, upon
receipt of the request from the Street Superintendent, to collect such part of
the claim which is in excess of the deposit from the person to whom the permit
was granted.
(Prior Code, § 33-9-22)
CHAPTER 156: BUILDING CODE
Section
General Provisions
   
156.001   Adoption
   
156.002   Title
   
156.003   Scope
   
156.004   Intent
   
156.005   Referenced codes
   
156.006   Violations
   
156.007   Amendments
   
156.008   Definitions
Applicability
   
156.020   General
   
156.021   Other laws
   
156.022   Application of references
   
156.023   Referenced codes and standards
   
156.024   Partial invalidity
   
156.025   Existing structures
Administration
   
156.040   Department of Building Safety
   
156.041   Building Official
   
156.042   Applications and permits
   
156.043   Notices and orders
   
156.044   Inspections
   
156.045   Identification
   
156.046   Right of entry
   
156.047   Department records
   
156.048   Liability
   
156.049   Materials, equipment, modifications, and design
Permits
   
156.060   Permit required
   
156.061   Work exempt from permit
   
156.062   Application
   
156.063   Validity
   
156.064   Expiration
   
156.065   Suspension or revocation
   
156.066   Placement of permit
   
156.067   Temporary uses and structures
Construction Documents
   
156.080   Submittal documents
   
156.081   Site plan
   
156.082   Examination of documents
   
156.083   Amended documents
   
156.084   Retention of documents
Fees and Payment
   
156.095   Payment of fees required
   
156.096   Special fees
   
156.097   New construction and alterations
   
156.098   Permit fees
   
156.099   Accounting
   
156.100   Refunds
Inspections
   
156.115   Permitted work subject to inspection
   
156.116   Preliminary inspection
   
156.117   Required inspections
   
156.118   Inspections agencies
   
156.119   Inspection requests
   
156.120   Approval required
Certificate of Occupancy
   
156.135   Use and occupancy
   
156.136   Certificate issued
   
156.137   Temporary occupancy
   
156.138   Revocation
Service Utilities
   
156.150   Connection of service utilities
   
156.151   Temporary connection
   
156.152   Authority to disconnect service utilities
Appeals; Board of Appeals
   
156.165   Application for appeal
   
156.166   Membership of the Board of Appeals
   
156.167   Notice of meeting
   
156.168   Open hearing
   
156.169   Board decision; court review
Stop Work Order
   
156.180   Authority
   
156.181   Issuance
   
156.182   Unlawful continuance
Unsafe Structures and Equipment
   
156.195   Conditions
   
156.196   Record
   
156.197   Notice
   
156.198   Method of service
   
156.199   Restoration
 
   
156.999   Penalty
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 156.001 ADOPTION.
   (A)   A certain document, one copy of which is on file in the office of the
County Zoning Administrator of, being marked and designated as “The
International Building Code, 2003 edition,” as published by the International
Code Council, be and is hereby adopted as the Building Code of the County
Board; for the control of buildings and structures as herein provided; and each
and all of the regulations, provisions, penalties, conditions, and terms of
said International Building Code, 2003 edition, are hereby referred to,
adopted, and made a part hereof as if fully set out in this chapter, with the
additions, insertions, deletions, and changes, if any, prescribed in §
156.007.
(Prior Code, § 6-1-1)
   (B)   Administration and enforcement of the International Building Code,
2003 edition, is hereby amended to read as follows.
(Prior Code, § 6-1-2)
§ 156.002 TITLE.
   These regulations shall be known as the “Building Code of Country of St.
Clair County,” hereinafter referred to as “this Code” or “this chapter.”
(Prior Code, § 6-1-3)
§ 156.003 SCOPE.
   (A)   Application. The provisions of this code shall apply to the
construction, alteration, movement, enlargement, replacement, repair,
equipment, use and occupancy, location, maintenance, removal, and demolition of
every building or structure or any appurtenances connected or attached to such
buildings or structures.
   (B)   Exceptions. Detached one- and two-family dwellings and multiple
single-family dwellings (town houses) not more than three stories above grade
plane in height with a separate means of egress and their accessory structures
shall comply with the International Residential Code. Existing buildings
undergoing repair, alterations, or additions and change of occupancy shall be
permitted to comply with Chapter 150.
   (C)   Appendices. Provisions in the appendices shall not apply unless
specifically adopted.
(Prior Code, § 6-1-4)
§ 156.004 INTENT.
   The purpose of this chapter is to establish the minimum requirements to
safeguard the public health, safety, and general welfare through structural
strength, means of egress facilities, stability, sanitation, adequate light and
ventilation, energy conservation, and safety to life and property from fire and
other hazards attributed to the built environment and to provide safety to fire
fighters and emergency responders during emergency operations.
(Prior Code, § 6-1-5)
§ 156.005 REFERENCED CODES.
   The other codes listed in divisions (A) through (F) below and referenced
elsewhere in this chapter shall be considered part of the requirements of this
chapter to the prescribed extent of each such reference.
   (A)   Electrical. The provisions of the National Electrical Code NFPA 70/
2005 shall apply to the installation of electrical systems, including
alterations, repairs, replacement, equipment, appliances, fixtures, fittings,
and appurtenances thereto.
   (B)   Gas. The provisions of the International Fuel Gas Code shall apply to
the installation of gas piping from the point of delivery, gas appliances, and
related accessories as covered in this chapter. These requirements apply to gas
piping systems extending from the point of delivery to the inlet connections of
appliances and the installation and operation of residential and commercial gas
appliances and related accessories.
   (C)   Mechanical. The provisions of the International Mechanical Code shall
apply to the installation, alterations, repairs, and replacement of mechanical
systems, including equipment, appliances, fixtures, fittings, and/or
appurtenances, including ventilating, heating, cooling, air-conditioning, and
refrigeration systems, incinerators, and other energy-related systems.
   (D)   Plumbing. The provisions of the State Plumbing Code of 2004 shall
apply to the installation, alteration, repair, and replacement of plumbing
systems, including equipment, appliances, fixtures, fittings, and
appurtenances, and where connected to a water or sewage system and all aspects
of a medical gas system. The provisions of the International Private Sewage
Disposal Code shall apply to private sewage disposal systems.
   (E)   Property maintenance. The provisions of Chapter 150 shall apply to
existing structures and premises, equipment and facilities, light, ventilation,
space heating, sanitation, life, and fire safety hazards, responsibilities of
owners, operators and occupants, and occupancy of existing premises and
structures.
   (F)   Energy. The provisions of the International Energy Conservation Code
shall apply to all matters governing the design and construction of buildings
for energy efficiency.
(Prior Code, § 6-1-6)
§ 156.006 VIOLATIONS.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person, firm, or corporation to erect,
construct, alter, extend, repair, remove, demolish, or occupy any building,
structure, or equipment regulated by this chapter, or cause same to be done, in
conflict with or in violation of any of the provisions of this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 6-1-72)
   (B)   The Building Official is authorized to serve a notice of violation or
order on the person responsible for the erection, construction, alteration,
extension, repair, moving, removal, demolition, or occupancy of a building or
structure in violation of the provisions of this chapter, or in violation of a
permit or certificate issued under the provisions of this chapter. Such order
shall direct the discontinuance of the illegal action or condition and the
abatement of the violation.
(Prior Code, § 6-1-73)
   (C)   If the notice of violation is not complied with promptly, the Building
Official is authorized to request the legal counsel of the jurisdiction to
institute the appropriate proceeding at law or in equity to restrain, correct,
or abate such violation, or to require the removal or termination of the
unlawful occupancy of the building or structure in violation of the provisions
of this chapter or of the order or direction made pursuant thereto.
(Prior Code, § 6-1-74)
Penalty, see §
156.999
§ 156.007 AMENDMENTS.
    The following provisions shall further apply and shall supersede any and
all references listed within the adopted edition of the International Building
Code, 2003 edition.
   (A)   Chapter 11, “Accessibility.” Insert the following text: “When there is
a conflict between this Chapter and the Illinois Accessibility Code the
stricter of the two shall apply.”
   (B)   Section 1612.3, “Establishment of flood hazard areas.” This section is
amended to read:
“To establish flood hazard areas, the governing body shall adopt a flood hazard
map and supporting data. The flood hazard map shall include, at a minimum,
areas of special flood hazard as identified by the Federal Emergency Management
Agency in an engineering report entitled ‘The Flood Insurance Study for County
of St. Clair,’ dated March 1, 2007, as amended or revised with the accompanying
Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) and Flood Boundary and Floodway Map (FBFM) and
related supporting data along with any revisions thereto. The adopted flood
hazard map and supporting data are hereby adopted by reference and declared to
be part of this Section.”
   (C)   Section 1805, “Footings and Foundation.” All references to wood
footings and foundation are deleted. The use of wood footings and foundation is
prohibited.
   (D)   ICC Electric Code. Delete all and any reference to the ICC Electrical
Code and insert “the National Electric Code, 2005 edition.”
   (E)   International Plumbing Code. Delete all and any reference to the
International Plumbing Code and add the following:
“The County Building official shall require that the provisions of the current
‘Illinois Plumbing Code Law’ 225 Illinois Compiled Statutes 320/1 et seq., as
presently in force or as the same may be hereafter amended or modified and the
same is hereby incorporated herein by reference and adopted as the standard for
the purposes of this Chapter. Any conflicts concerning the provisions of these
codes shall be determined by the strictest standard contained in the code
provisions.”
   (F)   Section 2902, “Plumbing Systems.” Delete this section in its entirely
and replace with “Article IX.”
   (G)   Section 3410.2, “Applicability.” This section is amended to read:
“Structures existing prior to 1978, in which there is work involving additions,
alterations or changes of occupancy shall be made to conform to the
requirements of this Section or the provisions of Sections 3403 through 3407.
The provisions in Sections 3410.2.1 through 3410.2.5 shall apply to existing
occupancies that will continue to be, or are proposed to be, in Groups A, B, E,
F, M, R, S and U. These provisions shall not apply to buildings with
occupancies in Group H or I.”
   (H)   Appendix F. Adopt Appendix F, “Rodent-proofing.”
   (I)   Appendix L. Adopt Appendix J, “Grading.”
(Prior Code, § 6-1-84)
§ 156.008 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   NON-OWNER OCCUPIED RESIDENTIAL PROPERTY. Any single-unit building or
structure wherein no individual occupying said building holds a proprietary
interest by title, contract, or agreement is said real property or any building
thereon, as well as any multiple-unit building or structure wherein at least
one unit within said building is not occupied by any individual holding a
proprietary interest by title, contract, or agreement in said real property or
any building thereon. Persons deemed to have a proprietary interest for persons
of this definition shall include, but not be limited to, any part owner, joint
owner, tenant in common, joint tenant by entirety, or lessee of the whole or of
a part of said real property or any building thereon.
   OWNER OCCUPIED RESIDENTIAL PROPERTY. Any building or structure designed for
or occupied exclusively as a single housekeeping unit, wherein any individual
occupying said building holds a proprietary interest by title, contract, or
agreement in said real property or any building thereon, as well as, any multi-
unit building or structure, wherein each and all units within said building or
structure are occupied by an individual holding a proprietary interest by
title, contract, or agreement in said real property or any building thereon.
Persons deemed to have a proprietary interest for purposes of this definition
shall include, but not be limited to, any part owner, joint owner, tenant in
common, joint tenant by entirety, or lessee of the whole or of a part of said
real property or any building thereon.
(Prior Code, § 6-1-85) (Ord. 16-05, passed 6-6-2016)
APPLICABILITY
§ 156.020 GENERAL.
   Where, in any specific case, different sections of this chapter specify
different materials, methods of construction, or other requirements, the most
restrictive shall govern. Where there is a conflict between a general
requirement and a specific requirement, the specific requirement shall be
applicable.
(Prior Code, § 6-1-7)
§ 156.021 OTHER LAWS.
   The provisions of this chapter shall not be deemed to nullify any provisions
of local, state, or federal law.
(Prior Code, § 6-1-8)
§ 156.022 APPLICATION OF REFERENCES.
   References to chapter or section numbers, or to provisions not specifically
identified by number, shall be construed to refer to such chapter, section, or
provision of this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 6-1-9)
§ 156.023 REFERENCED CODES AND STANDARDS.
   (A)   The codes and standards referenced in this chapter shall be considered
part of the requirements of this chapter to the prescribed extent of each such
reference.
   (B)   Where differences occur between provisions of this chapter and
referenced codes and standards, the provisions of this chapter shall apply.
(Prior Code, § 6-1-10)
§ 156.024 PARTIAL INVALIDITY.
   In the event that any part or provision of this chapter is held to be
illegal or void, this shall not have the effect of making void or illegal any
of the other parts or provisions.
(Prior Code, § 6-1-11)
§ 156.025 EXISTING STRUCTURES.
   The legal occupancy of any structure existing on the date of adoption of
this chapter shall be permitted to continue without change, except as is
specifically covered in this chapter, Chapter 150, or as is deemed necessary by
the Building Official for the general safety and welfare of the occupants and
the public.
(Prior Code, § 6-1-12)
ADMINISTRATION
§ 156.040 DEPARTMENT OF BUILDING SAFETY.
   (A)   The Department of Building Safety is hereby created and the official
in charge thereof shall be known as the Building Official.
(Prior Code, § 6-1-13)
   (B)   The Building Official shall be appointed by the chief appointing
authority of the jurisdiction.
(Prior Code, § 6-1-14)
   (C)   In accordance with the prescribed procedures of this jurisdiction and
with the concurrence of the appointing authority, the Building Official shall
have the authority to appoint a deputy building official, the related technical
officers, inspectors, plan examiners, and other employees. Such employees shall
have power as delegated by the Building Official. For the maintenance of
existing properties, see
Chapter 150.
(Prior Code, § 6-1-15)
§ 156.041 BUILDING OFFICIAL.
   (A)   The Building Official is hereby authorized and directed to enforce the
provisions of this chapter. The Building Official shall have the authority to
render interpretations of this chapter and to adopt policies and procedures in
order to clarify the application of its provisions.
   (B)   Such interpretations, policies, and procedures shall be in compliance
with the intent and purpose of this chapter. Such policies and procedures shall
not have the effect of waiving requirements specifically provided for in this
chapter.
(Prior Code, § 6-1-16)
§ 156.042 APPLICATIONS AND PERMITS.
   The Building Official shall receive applications, review construction
documents, and issue permits for the erection, and alteration, demolition, and
moving of buildings and structures, inspect the premises for which such permits
have been issued, and enforce compliance with the provisions of this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 6-1-17)
§ 156.043 NOTICES AND ORDERS.
   The Building Official shall issue all necessary notices or orders to ensure
compliance with this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 6-1-18)
§ 156.044 INSPECTIONS.
   The Building Official shall make all of the required inspections, or the
Building Official shall have the authority to accept reports of inspection by
approved agencies or individuals. Reports of such inspections shall be in
writing and be certified by a responsible officer of such approved agency or by
the responsible individual. The Building Official is authorized to engage such
expert opinion as deemed necessary to report upon unusual technical issues that
arise, subject to the approval of the appointing authority.
(Prior Code, § 6-1-19)
§ 156.045 IDENTIFICATION.
   The Building Official shall carry proper identification when inspecting
structures or premises in the performance of duties under this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 6-1-20)
§ 156.046 RIGHT OF ENTRY.
   (A)   Where it is necessary to make an inspection to enforce the provisions
of this chapter, or where the Building Official has reasonable cause to believe
that there exists in a structure or upon a premises a condition which is
contrary to or in violation of this chapter which makes the structure or
premises unsafe, dangerous, or hazardous, the Building Official is authorized
to enter the structure or premises at reasonable times to inspect or to perform
the duties imposed by this chapter; provided that if such structure or premises
be occupied that credentials be presented to the occupant and entry requested.
   (B)   If such structure or premises is unoccupied, the Building Official
shall first make a reasonable effort to locate the owner or other person having
charge or control of the structure or premises and request entry. If entry is
refused, the Building Official shall have recourse to the remedies provided by
law to secure entry.
(Prior Code, § 6-1-21)
§ 156.047 DEPARTMENT RECORDS.
   The Building Official shall keep official records of applications received,
permits, and certificates issued, fees collected, reports of inspections, and
notices and orders issued. Such records shall be retained in the official
records as long as the period required for retention of public records.
(Prior Code, § 6-1-22)
§ 156.048 LIABILITY.
   The Building Official, member of the Board of Appeals or employee charged
with the enforcement of this chapter, while acting for the jurisdiction in good
faith and without malice in the discharge of the duties required by this
chapter or other pertinent law or ordinance, shall not thereby be rendered
liable personally and is hereby relieved from personal liability for any damage
accruing to persons or property as a result of any act or by reason of an act
or omission in the discharge of official duties. Any suit instituted against an
officer or employee because of an act performed by that officer or employee in
the lawful discharge of duties and under the provisions of this chapter shall
be defended by legal representative of the jurisdiction until the final
termination of the proceedings. The Building Official or any subordinate shall
not be liable for cost in any action, suit, or proceeding that is instituted in
pursuance of the provisions of this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 6-1-23)
§ 156.049 MATERIALS, EQUIPMENT, MODIFICATIONS, AND DESIGN.
   (A)   (1)   Materials, equipment, and devices approved by the Building
Official shall be constructed and installed in accordance with such approval.
      (2)   The use of used materials which meet the requirements of this
chapter for new materials is permitted. Used equipment and devices shall not be
reused unless approved by the Building Official.
(Prior Code, § 6-1-24)
   (B)   (1)   Wherever there are practical difficulties involved in carrying
out the provisions of this chapter, the Building Official shall have the
authority to grant modifications for individual cases, upon application of the
owner or owner’s representative; provided the Building Official shall first
find that special individual reason makes the strict letter of this chapter
impractical and the modification is in compliance with the intent and purpose
of this chapter and that such modification does not lessen health,
accessibility, life and fire safety, or structural requirements.
      (2)   The details of action granting modifications shall be recorded and
entered in the files of the Department of Building Safety.
(Prior Code, § 6-1-25)
   (C)   The provisions of this chapter are not intended to prevent the
installation of any material or to prohibit any design or method of
construction not specifically prescribed by this chapter; provided that any
such alternative has been approved. An alternative material, design, or method
of construction shall be approved where the Building Official finds that the
proposed design is satisfactory and complies with the intent of the provisions
of this chapter, and that the material, method, or work offered is, for the
purpose intended, at least the equivalent of that prescribed in this chapter in
quality, strength, effectiveness, fire resistance, durability, and safety.
      (1)   Supporting data, where necessary to assist in the approval of
materials or assemblies not specifically provided for in this chapter, shall
consist of valid research reports from approved sources.
      (2)   Whenever there is insufficient evidence of compliance with the
provisions of this chapter, or evidence that a material or method does not
conform to the requirements of this chapter, or in order to substantiate claims
for alternative materials or methods, the Building Official shall have the
authority to require tests as evidence of compliance to be made at no expense
to the jurisdiction. Test methods shall be as specified in this chapter or by
other recognized test standards. In the absence of recognized and accepted test
methods, the Building Official shall approve the testing procedures. Tests
shall be performed by an approved agency. Reports of such tests shall be
retained by the Building Official for the period required for retention of
public records.
(Prior Code, § 6-1-26)
PERMITS
§ 156.060 PERMIT REQUIRED.
   (A)   Any owner or authorized agent who intends to construct, enlarge,
alter, repair, move, demolish, or change the occupancy of a building or
structure, or to erect, install, enlarge, alter, repair, remove, convert, or
replace any electrical, gas, mechanical, or plumbing system, the installation
of which is regulated by this chapter, or to cause such work to be done, shall
first make application to the Building Official and obtain the required permit.
   (B)   In lieu of an individual permit for each alteration to an already
approved electrical, gas, mechanical, or plumbing installation, the Building
Official is authorized to issue an annual permit upon application therefor to
any person, firm, or corporation regularly employing one or more qualified
trade persons in the building, structure, or on the premises owned or operated
by the applicant for the permit.
   (C)   (1)   The person to whom an annual permit is issued shall keep a
detailed record of alterations made under such annual permit.
      (2)   The Building Official shall have access to such records at all
times or such records shall be filed with the Building Official as designated.
(Prior Code, § 6-1-27)
§ 156.061 WORK EXEMPT FROM PERMIT.
   Exemptions from permit requirements of this chapter shall not be deemed to
grant authorization for any work to be done in any manner in violation of the
provisions of this chapter or any other laws or ordinances of this
jurisdiction.
   (A)   Building. Permits shall not be required for the following:
      (1)   One-story detached accessory structures used as tool and storage
sheds, playhouses and similar uses, provided the floor area does not exceed 120
square feet (11.15 meters2);
      (2)   Fences not over six feet (1,829 millimeters) high;
      (3)   Retaining walls which are not over four feet (1,219 millimeters) in
height measured from the bottom of the footing to the top of the wall, unless
supporting a surcharge or impounding Class I, II, or III-A liquids;
      (4)   Water tanks supported directly on grade if the capacity does not
exceed 5,000 gallons (18,925 liters) and the ratio of height to diameter or
width does not exceed one to two (1:2);
      (5)   Sidewalks and driveways not more than 30 inches (762 millimeters)
above grade and not over any basement or story below and which are not part of
an accessible route;
      (6)   Painting, papering, tiling, carpeting, cabinets, counter tops, and
similar finish work;
      (7)   Temporary motion picture, television, and theater stage sets and
scenery;
      (8)   Prefabricated swimming pools accessory to a Group R-3 occupancy, as
applicable in §
156.003, which are less than 24 inches (610 millimeters) deep, do not exceed
5,000 gallons (18,925 liters), and are installed entirely above ground;
      (9)   Shade cloth structures constructed for nursery or agricultural
purposes and not including service systems;
      (10)   Swings and other playground equipment accessory to detached one-
and two-family dwellings;
      (11)   Window awnings supported by an exterior wall which do not project
more than 54 inches (1,372 millimeters) from the exterior wall and do not
require additional support of Group R-3, as applicable in §
156.003, and Group U occupancies; and
      (12)   Movable cases, counters, and partitions not over five feet, nine
inches (1,753 millimeters) in height.
   (B)   Electrical. Permits shall not be required for the following:
      (1)   Repairs and maintenance. Minor repair work, including the
replacement of lamps or the connection of approved portable electrical
equipment to approved permanently installed receptacles;
      (2)   Radio and television transmitting stations. The provisions of this
chapter shall not apply to electrical equipment used for radio and television
transmissions, but do apply to equipment and wiring for power supply, the
installations of towers and antennas; and
      (3)   Temporary testing systems. A permit shall not be required for the
installation of any temporary system required for the testing or servicing of
electrical equipment or apparatus.
   (C)   Gas. Permits shall not be required for the following:
      (1)   Portable heating, cooking, or clothes drying appliances;
      (2)   Replacement of any minor part that does not alter approval of
equipment or make such equipment unsafe; and
      (3)   Portable fuel cell appliances that are not connected to a fixed
piping system and are not interconnected to a power grid.
   (D)   Mechanical. Permits shall not be required for the following:
      (1)   Portable heating appliance;
      (2)   Portable ventilation equipment;
      (3)   Portable cooling unit;
      (4)   Steam, hot, or chilled water piping within any heating or cooling
equipment regulated by this chapter;
      (5)   Replacement of any part which does not alter its approval or make
it unsafe;
      (6)   Portable evaporative cooler;
      (7)   Self-contained refrigeration system containing ten pounds (4.54
kilograms) or less of refrigerant and actuated by motors of one horsepower (746
watts) or less; and
      (8)   Portable fuel cell appliances that are not connected to a fixed
piping system and are not interconnected to a power grid.
   (E)   Plumbing. Permits shall not be required for the following:
      (1)   The stopping of leaks in drains, water, soil, waste, or vent pipe
provided, however, that if any concealed trap, drain pipe, water, soil, waste,
or vent pipe becomes defective and it becomes necessary to remove and replace
the same with new material, such work shall be considered as new work and a
permit shall be obtained and inspection made as provided in this chapter; and
      (2)   The clearing of stoppages or the repairing of leaks in pipes,
valves, or fixtures, and the removal and reinstallation of water closets;
provided such repairs do not involve or require the replacement or
rearrangement of valves, pipes, or fixtures.
   (F)   Emergency repairs. Where equipment replacements and repairs must be
performed in an emergency situation, the permit application shall be submitted
within the next working business day to the Building Official.
   (G)   Repairs.
      (1)   Application or notice to the Building Official is not required for
ordinary repairs to structures, replacement of lamps, or the connection of
approved portable electrical equipment to approved permanently installed
receptacles
       (2)   Such repairs shall not include the cutting away of any wall,
partition, or portion thereof, the removal or cutting of any structural beam or
load-bearing support, or the removal or change of any required means of egress,
or rearrangement of parts of a structure affecting the egress requirements; nor
shall ordinary repairs include addition to, alteration of, replacement of, or
relocation of any standpipe, water supply, sewer, drainage, drain leader, gas,
soil, waste, vent, or similar piping, electric wiring, mechanical work, or
other work affecting public health or general safety.
   (H)   Public service agencies. A permit shall not be required for the
installation, alteration, or repair of generation, transmission, distribution,
or metering or other related equipment that is under the ownership and control
of public service agencies by established right.
(Prior Code, § 6-1-28)
§ 156.062 APPLICATION.
   (A)   Filing form. To obtain a permit, the applicant shall first file an
application therefor in writing on a form furnished by the Department of
Building Safety for that purpose. Such application shall:
      (1)   Identify and describe the work to be covered by the permit for
which application is made;
      (2)   Describe the land on which the proposed work is to be done by legal
description, street address, or similar description that will readily identify
and definitely locate the proposed building or work;
      (3)   Indicate the use and occupancy for which the proposed work is
intended;
      (4)   Be accompanied by construction documents and other information as
required in §
156.082;
      (5)   State the valuation of the proposed work;
      (6)   Be signed by the applicant, or the applicants authorized agent; and
      (7)   Give such other data and information as required by the Building
Official.
   (B)   Action on application.
      (1)   The Building Official shall examine or cause to be examined
applications for permits and amendments thereto within a reasonable time after
filing.
      (2)   If the application or the construction documents do not conform to
the requirements of pertinent laws, the Building Official shall reject such
application in writing, stating the reasons therefor.
      (3)   If the Building Official is satisfied that the proposed work
conforms to the requirements of this code and laws and ordinances applicable
thereto, the Building Official shall issue a permit therefor as soon as
practicable.
   (C)   Time limitation of application. An application for a permit for any
proposed work shall be deemed to have been abandoned 180 days after the date of
filing, unless such application has been pursued in good faith or a permit has
been issued; except that the Building Official is authorized to grant one or
more extensions of time for additional periods not exceeding 90 days each. The
extension shall be requested in writing and justifiable cause demonstrated.
(Prior Code, § 6-1-29)
§ 156.063 VALIDITY.
   (A)   The issuance or granting of a permit shall not be construed to be a
permit for, or an approval of, any violation of any of the provisions of this
chapter or of any other ordinance of the jurisdiction. Permits presuming to
give authority to violate or cancel the provisions of this chapter or other
ordinances of the jurisdiction shall not be valid.
   (B)   The issuance of a permit based on construction documents and other
data shall not prevent the Building Official from requiring the correction of
errors in the construction documents and other data.
   (C)   The Building Official is also authorized to prevent occupancy or use
of a structure where in violation of this chapter or of any other ordinances of
this jurisdiction.
(Prior Code, § 6-1-30)
§ 156.064 EXPIRATION.
   (A)   Every permit issued shall become invalid unless the work on the site
authorized by such permit is commenced within 180 days after its issuance, or
if the work authorized on the site by such permit is suspended or abandoned for
a period of 180 days after the time the work is commenced.
   (B)   The Building Official is authorized to grant, in writing, one or more
extensions of time, for periods not more than 180 days each. The extension
shall be requested in writing and justifiable cause demonstrated.
(Prior Code, § 6-1-31)
§ 156.065 SUSPENSION OR REVOCATION.
   The Building Official is authorized to suspend or revoke a permit issued
under the provisions of this chapter wherever the permit is issued in error or
on the basis of incorrect, inaccurate, or incomplete information, or in
violation of any ordinance or regulation or any of the provisions of this
chapter.
(Prior Code, § 6-1-32)
§ 156.066 PLACEMENT OF PERMIT.
   The building permit or a copy thereof shall be kept on the site of the work
until the completion of the project.
(Prior Code, § 6-1-33)
§ 156.067 TEMPORARY USES AND STRUCTURES.
   (A)   General. The Building Official is authorized to issue a permit for
temporary structures and temporary uses. Such permits shall be limited as to
time of service, but shall not be permitted for more than 180 days. The
Building Official is authorized to grant extensions for demonstrated cause.
(Prior Code, § 6-1-39)
   (B)   Conformance. Temporary structures and uses shall conform to the
structural strength, fire safety, means of egress, accessibility, light,
ventilation, and sanitary requirements of this chapter as necessary to ensure
the public health, safety, and general welfare.
(Prior Code, § 6-1-40)
   (C)   Temporary power.
      (1)   The Building Official is authorized to give permission to
temporarily supply and use power in part of an electric installation before
such installation has been fully completed and the final certificate of
completion has been issued.
      (2)   The part covered by the temporary certificate shall comply with the
requirements specified for temporary lighting, heat, or power in the National
Electrical Code NFPA 70/2005.
(Prior Code, § 6-1-41)
   (D)   Termination of approval. The Building Official is authorized to
terminate such permit for a temporary structure or use and to order the
temporary structure or use to be discontinued.
(Prior Code, § 6-1-42)
CONSTRUCTION DOCUMENTS
§ 156.080 SUBMITTAL DOCUMENTS.
   (A)   Generally and special conditions.
      (1)   Preparation. Construction documents, special inspection and
structural observation programs, and other data shall be submitted in one or
more sets with each application for a permit. The construction documents shall
be prepared by a registered design professional where required by the statutes
of the jurisdiction in which the project is to be constructed. Where special
conditions exist, the Building Official is authorized to require additional
construction documents to be prepared by a registered design professional.
      (2)   Exception. The Building Official is authorized to waive the
submission of construction documents and other data not required to be prepared
by a registered design professional if it is found that the nature of the work
applied for is such that review of construction documents is not necessary to
obtain compliance with this chapter.
   (B)   (1)   Information on construction documents. Construction documents
shall be dimensioned and drawn upon suitable material. Electronic media
documents are permitted to be submitted when approved by the Building Official.
Construction documents shall be of sufficient clarity to indicate the location,
nature and extent of the work proposed and show in detail that it will conform
to the provisions of this chapter and relevant laws, ordinances, rules, and
regulations, as determined by the Building Official.
      (2)   Fire protection system shop drawings. Shop drawings for the fire
protection system(s) shall be submitted to indicate conformance with this
chapter and the construction documents and shall be approved prior to the start
of system installation. Shop drawings shall contain all information as required
by the referenced installation standards in Chapter 9.
   (C)   Means of egress. The construction documents shall show in sufficient
detail the location, construction, size, and character of all portions of the
means of egress in compliance with the provisions of this chapter. In other
than occupancies in Groups R-2, R-3, as applicable in §
156.003, and I-1, the construction documents shall designate the number of
occupants to be accommodated on every floor, and in all rooms and spaces.
   (D)   Exterior wall envelope. Construction documents for all buildings shall
describe the exterior wall envelope in sufficient detail to determine
compliance with this chapter. The construction documents shall provide details
of the exterior wail envelope as required, including flashing, intersections
with dissimilar materials, corners, end details, control joints, intersections
at roof, eaves or parapets, means of drainage, water-resistive membrane and
details around openings. The construction documents shall include
manufacturer’s installation instructions that provide supporting documentation
that the proposed penetration and opening details described in the construction
documents maintain the weather resistance of the exterior wall envelope. The
supporting documentation shall fully describe the exterior wall system which
was tested, where applicable, as well as the test procedure used.
(Prior Code, § 6-1-34)
§ 156.081 SITE PLAN.
   The construction documents submitted with the application for permit shall
be accompanied by a site plan showing to scale the size and location of new
construction and existing structures on the site, distances from lot lines, the
established street grades and the proposed finished grades and, as applicable,
flood hazard areas, floodways, and design flood elevations; and it shall be
drawn in accordance with an accurate boundary line survey. In the case of
demolition, the site plan shall show construction to be demolished and the
location and size of existing structures and construction that are to remain on
the site or plot. The Building Official is authorized to waive or modify the
requirements for a site plan when the application for permit is for alteration
or repair or when otherwise warranted.
(Prior Code, § 6-1-35)
§ 156.082 EXAMINATION OF DOCUMENTS.
   The Building Official shall examine or cause to be examined the accompanying
construction documents and shall ascertain by such examinations whether the
construction indicated and described is in accordance with the requirements of
this chapter and other pertinent laws or ordinances.
   (A)   Approval of construction documents. When the Building Official issues
a permit, the construction documents shall be approved, in writing or by stamp,
as “Reviewed for Code Compliance.” One set of construction documents so
reviewed shall be retained by the Building Official. The other set shall be
returned to the applicant, shall be kept at the site of work and shall be open
to inspection by the Building Official or a duly authorized representative.
   (B)   Previous approvals. This chapter shall not require changes in the
construction documents, construction or designated occupancy of a structure for
which a lawful permit has been heretofore issued or otherwise lawfully
authorized, and the construction of which has been pursued in good faith within
180 days after the effective date of this chapter and has not been abandoned.
   (C)   Phased approval.
      (1)   The Building Official is authorized to issue a permit for the
construction of foundations or any other part of a building or structure before
the construction documents for the whole building or structure have been
submitted; provided that adequate information and detailed statements have been
filed complying with pertinent requirements of this chapter.
      (2)   The holder of such permit for the foundation or other parts of a
building or structure shall proceed at the holder’s own risk with the building
operation and without assurance that a permit for the entire structure will be
granted.
   (D)   Design professional in responsible charge.
      (1)   General.
         (a)   When it is required that documents be prepared by a registered
design professional, the Building Official shall be authorized to require the
owner to engage and designate on the building permit application a registered
design professional in responsible charge.
         (b)   If the circumstances require, the owner shall designate a
substitute registered design professional in responsible charge who shall
perform the duties required of the original registered design professional in
responsible charge. The Building Official shall be notified in writing by the
owner if the registered design professional in responsible charge is changed or
is unable to continue to perform the duties.
         (c)   The registered design professional in responsible charge shall
be responsible for reviewing and coordinating submittal documents prepared by
others, including phased and deferred submittal items, for compatibility with
the design of the building. Where structural observation is required by Section
1709, the inspection program shall name the individual or firms who are to
perform structural observation and describe the stages of construction at which
structural observation is to occur (see also duties specified in Section 1704).
      (2)   Deferred submittals.
         (a)   For the purposes of this section, deferred submittals are
defined as those portions of the design that are not submitted at the time of
the application and that are to be submitted to the Building Official within a
specified period. Deferral of any submittal items shall have the prior approval
of the Building Official.
         (b)   The registered design professional in responsible charge shall
list the deferred submittals on the construction documents for review by the
Building Official. Documents for deferred submittal items shall be submitted to
the registered design professional in responsible charge who shall review them
and forward them to the Building Official with a notation indicating that the
deferred submittal documents have been reviewed and been found to be in general
conformance to the design of the building.
   (B)   The deferred submittal items shall not be installed until the design
and submittal documents have been approved by the Building Official.
(Prior Code, § 6-1-36)
§ 156.083 AMENDED DOCUMENTS.
   Work shall be installed in accordance with the approved construction
documents, and any changes made during construction that are not in compliance
with the approved construction documents shall be resubmitted for approval as
an amended set of construction documents.
(Prior Code, § 6-1-37)
§ 156.084 RETENTION OF DOCUMENTS.
   One set of approved construction documents shall be retained by the Building
Official for a period of not less than 180 days from date of completion of the
permitted work, or as required by state or local laws.
(Prior Code, § 6-1-38)
FEES AND PAYMENT
§ 156.095 PAYMENT OF FEES REQUIRED.
   No permit to begin work for new construction, alteration, removal,
demolition, or other building operation shall be issued until the fees
prescribed in this chapter have been paid to the County Department of Building
Inspection or other authorized agency of the jurisdiction, nor shall an
amendment to a permit necessitating an additional fee be approved until the
additional fee has been paid.
(Prior Code, § 6-1-43)
§ 156.096 SPECIAL FEES.
   (A)   The payment of the fee for the construction, alteration, removal, or
demolition for all work done in connection with or concurrently with the work
contemplated by a building permit shall not relieve the applicant or holder of
the permit from the payment of other fees that are prescribed by law or
ordinance for water taps, sewer connections, electrical permits, erection of
signs and display structures, marquees or other appurtenant structures, or fees
of inspections, certificates of occupancy, or other privileges or requirements,
both within and without the jurisdiction of the Department of Building
Inspection.
(Prior Code, § 6-1-44)
§ 156.097 NEW CONSTRUCTION AND ALTERATIONS.
   The fees for plan examination, building permit, and inspections shall be as
prescribed in this chapter and the Code Enforcement Officer is authorized to
establish by approved rules a schedule of unit rates for buildings and
structures of all use group and types of construction as classified and defined
in the International Building Code, 2003 edition.
(Prior Code, § 6-1-45)
§ 156.098 PERMIT FEES.
   (A)   The permit fees shall be as follows.
      (1)   For a building permit and inspections of modular home or
manufactured home, the fee shall be $150. For a modular home or manufactured
home placed over a basement, the fee shall be $300.
      (2)   For a building permit and inspections for residential remodeling
with a construction cost of $50,000 or less, the fee shall be $200; for
construction costs of over $50,000, the fee shall be $300.
      (3)   For a building permit and inspections for a multi-family residence
with four units and under, the fee shall be $700; for each additional unit, the
fee shall be $175.
      (4)   For a building permit and inspections for sheds 120 to 200 square
feet, the fee shall be $25; for sheds that are over 200 square feet, the fee
shall be $120.
      (5)   For a building permit and inspections for decks and carports, the
fee shall be $50.
      (6)   For a building permit and inspections for garages and pole barns,
the fee shall be $120.
      (7)   For a building permit and inspections for garage or pole barn
additions, the fee shall be $75.
      (8)   For a building permit and inspections for in-ground swimming pools,
the fee shall be $150; for above-ground swimming pools, the fee shall be $50.
      (9)   Building permits are not required for the following: sidewalks,
driveways, concrete patios, siding and replacement of windows or doors.
      (10)   The standard permit fee, plan review fee, and inspection fee are
all included in the aforementioned fees. Fees for any additional inspection (an
ADDITIONAL INSPECTION is defined as an inspection which is required as a result
of unusual or complicated construction) required including inspections for
compliance with approved development or site plans or fees for any extra
inspection (an EXTRA INSPECTION is defined as an inspection, which is made as a
result of non-compliance, not ready, lock out, and the like) that may be
required are not shown here and shall be added to the total payment fee at the
rate of $50 per inspection.
      (11)   The following structures shall be exempt from building inspections
and fees, provided that the structure is used exclusively for a related
activity:
         (a)   Public schools;
         (b)   Townships structures; and
         (c)   Agricultural structures.
      (12)   This division (A) does not include the applicant fee for the
certificate of zoning compliance.
(Prior Code, § 6-1-46)
   (B)   (1)   Commercial and industrial construction permit fees shall be as
follows.
Cost       Fee    Cost       Fee    Cost       Fee Amount Cost       Fee Amount
(Thousand) Amount (Thousand) Amount (Thousand)            (Thousand)
Cost       Fee Amount Cost       Fee Amount Cost       Fee Amount  Cost       Fee Amount
(Thousand)            (Thousand)            (Thousand)             (Thousand)
Up to 1    $104.68    Up to 37   $473.49    Up to 115  $1,122.53   Up to 390  $3,193.64
Up to 2    $143.34    Up to 38   $489.60    Up to 120  $1,174.06   Up to 400  $3,259.67
Up to 3    $169.10    Up to 39   $491.21    Up to 125  $1,204.66   Up to 420  $3,390.12
Up to 4    $196.48    Up to 40   $505.70    Up to 130  $1,256.20   Up to 440  $3,536.68
Up to 5    $244.80    Up to 42   $521.81    Up to 135  $1,288.41   Up to 460  $3,668.74
Up to 6    $278.62    Up to 44   $537.91    Up to 140  $1,336.72   Up to 480  $3,813.69
Up to 7    $293.11    Up to 46   $552.40    Up to 145  $1,368.93   Up to 500  $3,944.14
Up to 8    $325.32    Up to 48   $571.73    Up to 150  $1,417.25   Up to 520  $4,074.59
Up to 9    $339.82    Up to 50   $586.23    Up to 155  $1,451.07   Up to 540  $4,222.76
Up to 10   $343.04    Up to 52   $603.94    Up to 160  $1,483.28   Up to 560  $4,351.60
Up to 11   $343.04    Up to 54   $634.54    Up to 165  $1,531.60   Up to 580  $4,483.66
Up to 12   $343.04    Up to 56   $636.15    Up to 170  $1,563.81   Up to 600  $4,610.89
Up to 13   $343.04    Up to 58   $650.65    Up to 175  $1,615.34   Up to 620  $4,742.95
Up to 14   $343.04    Up to 60   $669.97    Up to 180  $1,647.55   Up to 640  $4,875.01
Up to 15   $343.04    Up to 62   $684.47    Up to 185  $1,679.76   Up to 660  $5,003.85
Up to 16   $344.65    Up to 64   $702.18    Up to 190  $1,728.08   Up to 680  $5,134.31
Up to 17   $357.53    Up to 66   $716.68    Up to 195  $1,760.29   Up to 700  $5,266.37
Up to 18   $357.53    Up to 68   $734.39    Up to 200  $1,792.50   Up to 720  $5,395.21
Up to 19   $376.86    Up to 70   $750.50    Up to 210  $1,874.61   Up to 740  $5,525.66
Up to 20   $376.86    Up to 72   $766.60    Up to 220  $1,955.16   Up to 760  $5,656.11
Up to 21   $376.86    Up to 74   $782.71    Up to 230  $2,030.85   Up to 780  $5,786.56
Up to 22   $378.47    Up to 76   $798.81    Up to 240  $2,103.33   Up to 800  $5,918.62
Up to 23   $376.86    Up to 78   $814.92    Up to 250  $2,183.85   Up to 820  $6,047.47
Up to 24   $391.35    Up to 80   $831.02    Up to 260  $2,248.27   Up to 840  $6,160.20
Up to 25   $391.35    Up to 82   $848.74    Up to 270  $2,332.02   Up to 860  $6,290.65
Up to 26   $409.07    Up to 84   $864.84    Up to 280  $2,332.02   Up to 880  $6,421.10
Up to 27   $409.07    Up to 86   $879.34    Up to 290  $2,478.57   Up to 900  $6,551.55
Up to 28   $423.56    Up to 88   $879.34    Up to 300  $2,541.38   Up to 920  $6,665.90
Up to 29   $423.56    Up to 90   $929.26    Up to 310  $2,571.98   Up to 940  $6,796.35
Up to 30   $423.56    Up to 92   $945.37    Up to 320  $2,691.16   Up to 960  $6,925.19
Up to 31   $439.67    Up to 94   $963.08    Up to 330  $2,752.36   Up to 980  $7,041.15
Up to 32   $439.67    Up to 96   $977.58    Up to 340  $2,834.50
Up to 33   $349.67    Up to 98   $995.30    Up to 350  $2,900.53
Up to 34   $455.77    Up to 100  $1,009,79  Up to 360  $2,981.05
Up to 35   $455.77    Up to 105  $1,043.61  Up to 370  $3,048.70
Up to 36   $471.88    Up to 110  $1,091.93  Up to 380  $3,111.51
Up to 1.1  $7,756.22  Up to 5.4  $30,586.81 Up to 16.5 $81,308.21  Up to 34.5 $166,945.47
Up to 1.2  $8,355.33  Up to 5.6  $31,561.16 Up to 17.0 $83,772.29  Up to 40.0 $196,068.32
Up to 1.3  $8,957.66  Up to 5.8  $32,533.91 Up to 17.5 $86,234.76  Up to 40.5 $198,522.74
Up to 1.4  $9,540.66  Up to 6.0  $33,490.56 Up to 18.0 $88,697.23  Up to 41.0 $200,969.10
Up to 1.5  $10,125.28 Up to 6.2  $34,463.30 Up to 18.5 $91,161.31  Up to 41.5 $203,423.52
Up to 1.6  $10,708.28 Up to 6.4  $35,423.17 Up to 19.0 $93,623.78  Up to 42.0 $205,869.88
Up to 1.7  $11,278.40 Up to 6.6  $36,345.99 Up to 19.5 $96,086.25  Up to 42.5 $208,324.30
Up to 1.8  $11,845.30 Up to 6.8  $37,318.74 Up to 20.0 $98,382.83  Up to 43.0 $210,770.66
Up to 1.9  $12,413.81 Up to 7.0  $38,260.89 Up to 20.5 $100,845.30 Up to 43.5 $213,225.08
Up to 2.0  $12,980.71 Up to 7.2  $39,201.42 Up to 21.0 $103,301.33 Up to 44.0 $215,671.45
Up to 2.1  $13,531.51 Up to 7.4  $40,141.96 Up to 21.5 $105,763.80 Up to 44.5 $218,125.86
Up to 2.2  $14,083.91 Up to 7.6  $41,084.11 Up to 22.0 $108,218.22 Up to 45.0 $220,572.23
Up to 2.3  $14,636.31 Up to 7.8  $42,008.54 Up to 22.5 $110,680.69 Up to 45.5 $223,028.26
Up to 2.4  $15,187.11 Up to 8.0  $42,934.59 Up to 23.0 $113,135.11 Up to 46.0 $225,473.01
Up to 2.5  $15,739.51 Up to 8.2  $43,860.63 Up to 23.5 $115,599.19 Up to 46.5 $227,929.04
Up to 2.6  $16,275.81 Up to 8.4  $44,783.45 Up to 24.0 $118,053.60 Up to 47.0 $230,375.40
Up to 2.7  $16,808.89 Up to 8.6  $45,709.49 Up to 24.5 $120,516.07 Up to 47.5 $232,829.82
Up to 2.8  $17,343.58 Up to 8.8  $46,617.82 Up to 25.0 $122,970.49 Up to 48.0 $235,_____
Up to 2.9  $17,881.49 Up to 9.0  $47,526.15 Up to 25.5 $125,434.57 Up to 48.5 $237,_____
Up to 3.0  $18,417.79 Up to 9.2  $48,436.09 Up to 26.0 $127,888.99 Up to 49.0 $240,176.97
Up to 3.1  $18,954.09 Up to 9.4  $49,344.42 Up to 26.5 $130,351.46 Up to 49.5 $242,631.38
Up to 3.2  $19,471.07 Up to 9.6  $50,252.74 Up to 27.0 $132,805.88 Up to 50.0 $244,660.63
Up to 3.3  $19,991.26 Up to 9.8  $51,161.07 Up to 27.5 $135,268.35
Up to 3.4  $20,527.56 Up to 10.0 $52,053.29 Up to 28.0 $137,722.76
Up to 3.5  $20,997.83 Up to 10.5 $54,291.90 Up to 28.5 $140,186.84
Up to 3.6  $21,555.07 Up to 11.0 $56,516.02 Up to 29.0 $142,641.26
Up to 3.7  $22,067.21 Up to 11.5 $58,722.42 Up to 29.5 $145,103.73
Up to 3.8  $22,587.40 Up to 12.0 $60,928.81 Up to 30.0 $147,308.52
Up to 3.9  $23,091.49 Up to 12.5 $63,103.00 Up to 30.5 $149,762.94
Up to 4.0  $23,610.08 Up to 13.0 $65,278.80 Up to 31.0 $152,218.96
Up to 4.2  $24,615.03 Up to 13.5 $67,433.66 Up to 31.5 $154,673.38
Up to 4.4  $25,636.10 Up to 14.0 $69,593.36 Up to 32.0 $157,127.80
Up to 4.6  $26,628.17 Up to 14.5 $71,735.34 Up to 32.5 $159,582.21
Up to 4.8  $27,634.74 Up to 15.0 $73,861.21 Up to 33.0 $162,036.63
Up to 5.0  $2,853.82  Up to 15.5 $76,383.27 Up to 33.5 $164,491.05
Up to 5.2  $29,614.06 Up to 16.0 $78.845.74 Up to 34.0 $166,945.47
 
      (2)   (a)   The fee for a building permit and inspection of commercial
and industrial construction shall be determined by applying the tables above of
fee rates to the total estimated cost of construction, as determined
heretofore.
         (b)   Permit processing, plan review, and inspection charges are
included in the fee rate shown.
(Prior Code, § 6-1-47)
   (C)   (1)   A $50 permit shall be required prior to any upgrading of service
or change of service made to any existing installation of electrical wiring or
equipment. A $75 permit shall be required prior to any upgrade of service and
rewiring to any existing installation of electrical equipment.
      (2)   The standard permit fee, plan review fee and inspection fee, are
all included in the total fee shown. Fees for any additional inspections (an
ADDITIONAL INSPECTION is defined as an inspection which is required as a result
of unusual or complicated construction) required including inspections for
compliance with approved development or site plans or fees for any extra
inspection (an EXTRA INSPECTION is defined as an inspection which is made as a
result of non-compliance, not ready, lock out, and the like) that may be
required are not shown here and shall be added to the total payment fee at the
rate of $50 for each inspection.
(Prior Code, § 6-1-49)
   (D)   The fee for a demolition permit and inspections of structure being
demolished or removed, shall be $50.
(Prior Code, § 6-1-50)
§ 156.099 ACCOUNTING.
   The Code Enforcement Officer shall keep an accurate account of all fees
collected and such collected fees shall be deposited weekly with the County
Treasurer.
(Prior Code, § 6-1-51)
§ 156.100 REFUNDS.
   In the case of a revocation of a permit or abandonment or discontinuance of
a building project, the portion of the work actually completed shall be
computed and any excess fee for the incomplete work shall be returned to the
permit holder upon written request. All plan examination and permit processing
fees and all penalties that have been imposed on the permit holder under the
requirements of this chapter shall first be collected.
(Prior Code, § 6-1-52)
INSPECTIONS
§ 156.115 PERMITTED WORK SUBJECT TO INSPECTION.
   (A)   Construction or work for which a permit is required shall be subject
to inspection by the Building Official and such construction or work shall
remain accessible and exposed for inspection purposes until approved. Approval
as a result of an inspection shall not be construed to be an approval of a
violation of the provisions of this chapter or of other ordinances of the
jurisdiction.
   (B)   (1)   Inspections presuming to give authority to violate or cancel the
provisions of this chapter or of other ordinances of the jurisdiction shall not
be valid. It shall be the duty of the permit applicant to cause the work to
remain accessible and exposed for inspection purposes.
      (2)   Neither the Building Official, nor the jurisdiction shall be liable
for expense entailed in the removal or replacement of any material required to
allow inspection.
(Prior Code, § 6-1-53)
§ 156.116 PRELIMINARY INSPECTION.
   Before issuing a permit, the Building Official is authorized to examine or
cause to be examined buildings, structures, and sites for which an application
has been filed.
(Prior Code, § 6-1-54)
§ 156.117 REQUIRED INSPECTIONS.
   The Building Official, upon notification, shall make the inspections set
forth in divisions (A) through (K) below.
   (A)   Footing and foundation inspection.
      (1)   Footing and foundation inspections shall be made after excavations
for footings are complete and any required reinforcing steel is in place.
      (2)   For concrete foundations, any required forms shall be in place
prior to inspection. Materials for the foundation shall be on the job, except
where concrete is ready mixed in accordance with ASTM C 94, the concrete need
not be on the job.
   (B)   Concrete slab and under-floor inspection. Concrete slab and under-
floor inspections shall be made after in-slab or under-floor reinforcing steel
and building service equipment, conduit, piping accessories and other ancillary
equipment items are in place, but before any concrete is placed or floor
sheathing installed, including the subfloor.
   (C)   Lowest floor elevation. In flood hazard areas, upon placement of the
lowest floor, including the basement, and prior to further vertical
construction, the elevation certification required in Section 1612.5 shall be
submitted to the Building Official.
   (D)   Frame inspection. Framing inspections shall be made after the roof
deck or sheathing, all framing, fire blocking, and bracing are in place and
pipes, chimneys, and vents to be concealed are complete and the rough
electrical, plumbing, heating wires, pipes, and ducts are approved.
   (E)   Lath and gypsum board inspection.
      (1)   Lath and gypsum board inspections shall be made after lathing and
gypsum board, interior and exterior, is in place, but before any plastering is
applied or gypsum board joints and fasteners are taped and finished.
      (2)   Exception: gypsum board that is not part of a fire-resistance-rated
assembly or a shear assembly.
   (F)   Fire-resistant penetrations. Protection of joints and penetrations in
fire-resistance-rated assemblies shall not be concealed from view until
inspected and approved.
   (G)   Energy efficiency inspections. Inspections shall be made to determine
compliance with Chapter 13 and shall include, but not be limited to,
inspections for: envelope insulation R- and U-values, fenestration U-value,
duct system R-value, and HVAC and water-heating equipment efficiency.
   (H)   Other inspections. In addition to the inspections specified above, the
Building Official is authorized to make or require other inspections of any
construction work to ascertain compliance with the provisions of this chapter
and other laws that are enforced by the Department of Building Safety.
   (I)   Special inspections. For special inspections, see Section 1704.
   (J)   Final inspection. The final inspection shall be made after all work
required by the building permit is completed.
(Prior Code, § 6-1-55)
§ 156.118 INSPECTIONS AGENCIES.
   The Building Official is authorized to accept reports of approved inspection
agencies; provided such agencies satisfy the requirements as to qualifications
and reliability.
(Prior Code, § 6-1-56)
§ 156.119 INSPECTION REQUESTS.
   (A)   It shall be the duty of the holder of the building permit or their
duly authorized agent to notify the Building Official when work is ready for
inspection.
   (B)   It shall be the duty of the permit holder to provide access to and
means for inspections of such work that are required by this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 6-1-57)
§ 156.120 APPROVAL REQUIRED.
   (A)   Work shall not be done beyond the point indicated in each successive
inspection without first obtaining the approval of the Building Official.
   (B)   The Building Official, upon notification, shall make the requested
inspections and shall either indicate the portion of the construction that is
satisfactory as completed, or notify the permit holder or his or her agent
wherein the same fails to comply with this chapter.
   (C)   Any portions that do not comply shall be corrected and such portion
shall not be covered or concealed until authorized by the Building Official.
(Prior Code, § 6-1-58)
CERTIFICATE OF OCCUPANCY
§ 156.135 USE AND OCCUPANCY.
   (A)   No non-owner occupied residential property, as defined in §
156.008, shall be used or occupied after any change occurs in the existing
occupancy of said building or structure or portion thereof until the Building
Official has issued a certificate of occupancy as provided herein.
   (B)   (1)   A change in the existing occupancy of a building or structure
shall be said to occur when:
         ( a)   All individuals residing within said building or structure, or
portion thereof, move out of or no longer reside within said building or
structure, or any other portion thereof; or
         (b)   When any individual, not previously residing within said
building or structure or any portion thereof moves into or begins to reside
within said building or structure or any other portion thereof.
      (2)   This does not apply if any individual that is moving into said
building or structure is the parent, sibling, or child of the owner of said
building or structure.
   (B)   No owner occupied residential property, as defined in §
156.008, shall be used or occupied after completion of construction on said
building or structure, or portion thereof, until the Building Official has
issued a certificate of occupancy as provided herein.
(Prior Code, § 6-1-59) (Ord. 16-05, passed 6-6-2016)
§ 156.136 CERTIFICATE ISSUED.
   After the Building Official inspects the building or structure and finds no
violations of the provisions of this chapter or other laws that are enforced by
the Department of Building Safety, the Building Official shall issue a
certificate of occupancy that contains the following:
   (A)   The building permit number;
   (B)   The address of the structure;
   (C)   The name and address of the owner;
   (D)   A description of that portion of the structure for which the
certificate is issued;
   (E)   A statement that the described portion of the structure has been
inspected for compliance with the requirements of this chapter for the
occupancy and division of occupancy and the use for which the proposed
occupancy is classified;
   (F)   The name of the Building Official;
   (G)   The edition of the code under which the permit was issued;
   (H)   The use and occupancy, in accordance with the provisions of Chapter 3;
   (I)   The type of construction as defined in Chapter 6;
   (J)   The design occupant load;
   (K)   If an automatic sprinkler system is provided, whether the sprinkler
system is required; and
   (L)   Any special stipulations and conditions of the building permit.
(Prior Code, § 6-1-60)
§ 156.137 TEMPORARY OCCUPANCY.
   (A)   The Building Official is authorized to issue a temporary certificate
of occupancy before the completion of the entire work covered by the permit;
provided that such portion or portions shall be occupied safely.
   (B)   The Building Official shall set a time period during which the
temporary certificate of occupancy is valid.
(Prior Code, § 6-1-61)
§ 156.138 REVOCATION.
   The Building Official is authorized to, in writing, suspend or revoke a
certificate of occupancy or completion issued under the provisions of this
chapter wherever the certificate is issued in error, or on the basis of
incorrect information supplied, or where it is determined that the building or
structure or portion thereof is in violation of any ordinance or regulation or
any of the provisions of this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 6-1-62)
SERVICE UTILITIES
§ 156.150 CONNECTION OF SERVICE UTILITIES.
   No person shall make connections from a utility, source of energy, fuel, or
power to any building or system that is regulated by this chapter for which a
permit is required, until released by the Building Official.
(Prior Code, § 6-1-63)
§ 156.151 TEMPORARY CONNECTION.
   The Building Official shall have the authority to authorize the temporary
connection of the building or system to the utility source of energy, fuel, or
power.
(Prior Code, § 6-1-64)
§ 156.152 AUTHORITY TO DISCONNECT SERVICE UTILITIES.
   The Building Official shall have the authority to authorize disconnection of
utility service to the building, structure, or system regulated by this chapter
and the codes referenced in case of emergency where necessary to eliminate an
immediate hazard to life or property. The Building Official shall notify the
serving utility, and wherever possible the owner and occupant of the building,
structure, or service system of the decision to disconnect prior to taking such
action. If not notified prior to disconnecting, the owner or occupant of the
building, structure, or service system shall be notified, in writing, as soon
as practical thereafter.
(Prior Code, § 6-1-65)
APPEALS; BOARD OF APPEALS
§ 156.165 APPLICATION FOR APPEAL.
   (A)   Any person affected by a decision of the Code Enforcement Officer or a
notice or order issued under this chapter shall have the right to appeal to the
Board of Appeals; provided that a written application for appeal is filed
within 20 days after the day the decision, notice or order was served. An
application for appeal shall be based on a claim that the true intent of this
chapter or the rules legally adopted thereunder have been incorrectly
interpreted, the provisions of this chapter do not dully apply, or the
requirements of this chapter are adequately satisfied by other means.
   (B)   The fee for an application of appeal of $50 is to be paid at the time
application is filed and shall be non-refundable.
(Prior Code, § 6-1-66)
§ 156.166 MEMBERSHIP OF THE BOARD OF APPEALS.
   (A)   Appointment. The Board of Appeals shall consist of five members
appointed by the chief appointing authority as follows: one for five years, one
for four years, one for three years, one for two years, and one for one year.
Thereafter, each new member shall serve for five years or until a successor has
been appointed.
   (B)   Alternate members.
      (1)   The chief appointing authority shall appoint two alternate members
who shall be called by the Board Chair to hear appeals during the absence or
disqualification of a member.
      (2)   Alternate members shall be appointed for five years or until a
successor has been appointed.
   (C)   Chair. The Board of Appeals shall annually select one of its members
to serve as Chair.
   (D)   Disqualification of member. A member shall not hear an appeal in which
that member has any personal, professional, or financial interest.
   (E)   Secretary. The chief administrative officer shall designate a
qualified clerk to serve as Secretary to the Board. The Secretary shall file a
detailed record of all proceedings in the office of the chief administrative
officer, and in the office of the Code Enforcement Officer.
(Prior Code, § 6-1-67)
§ 156.167 NOTICE OF MEETING.
   The Board shall meet upon notice from the Chair within ten days of the
filing of an appeal or at stated periodic meetings.
(Prior Code, § 6-1-68)
§ 156.168 OPEN HEARING.
   (A)   All hearings before the Board of Appeals shall be open to the public.
The appellant, that appellant’s representative, the Code Enforcement Officer,
and any person whose interests are affected shall be given an opportunity to be
heard.
   (B)   The Board of Appeals shall adopt and make available to the public
through the Secretary of the Board of Appeals, procedures under which a hearing
will be conducted. The procedures shall not require compliance with strict
rules of evidence, but shall mandate that only relevant information is
received.
(Prior Code, § 6-1-69)
§ 156.169 BOARD DECISION; COURT REVIEW.
   (A)   The Board of Appeals shall modify or reverse the decision of the Code
Enforcement Officer by a concurring vote of three members.
      (1)   The decision of the Board of Appeals shall be by resolution.
Certified copies shall be furnished to the appellant and the Code Enforcement
Officer.
      (2)   The Code Office shall take action within five working days in
accordance with the decision of the Board of Appeals.
(Prior Code, § 6-1-70)
   (B)   Any person, whether or not a previous party of the appeal, shall have
the right to apply to the appropriate court for a writ of certiorari to correct
errors of law. Application for review shall be made in the manner and time
required by law following the filing of the decision in the office of the chief
administrative officer.
(Prior Code, § 6-1-71)
STOP WORK ORDER
§ 156.180 AUTHORITY.
   Whenever the Building Official finds any work regulated by this chapter
being performed in a manner either contrary to the provisions of this chapter
or dangerous or unsafe, the Building Official is authorized to issue a stop
work order.
(Prior Code, § 6-1-76)
§ 156.181 ISSUANCE.
   (A)   The stop work order shall be in writing and shall be given to the
owner of the property involved, or to the owner’s agent, or to the person doing
the work. Upon issuance of a stop work order, the cited work shall immediately
cease.
   (B)   The stop work order shall state the reason for the order, and the
conditions under which the cited work will be permitted to resume.
(Prior Code, § 6-1-77)
§ 156.182 UNLAWFUL CONTINUANCE.
    Any person who shall continue any work after having been served with a stop
work order, except such work as that person is directed to perform to remove a
violation or unsafe condition, shall be subject to penalties as prescribed by
law.
(Prior Code, § 6-1-78) Penalty, see §
156.999
UNSAFE STRUCTURES AND EQUIPMENT
§ 156.195 CONDITIONS.
   (A)   Structures or existing equipment that are or hereafter become unsafe,
unsanitary, or deficient because of inadequate means of egress facilities,
inadequate light and ventilation, or which constitute a fire hazard, or are
otherwise dangerous to human life or the public welfare, or that involve
illegal or improper occupancy or inadequate maintenance, shall be deemed an
unsafe condition.
   (B)   Unsafe structures shall be taken down and removed or made safe, as the
Building Official deems necessary and as provided for in this subchapter. A
vacant structure that is not secured against entry shall be deemed unsafe.
(Prior Code, § 6-1-79)
§ 156.196 RECORD.
   The Building Official shall cause a report to be filed on an unsafe
condition. The report shall state the occupancy of the structure and the nature
of the unsafe condition.
(Prior Code, § 6-1-80)
§ 156.197 NOTICE.
   (A)   If an unsafe condition is found, the Building Official shall serve on
the owner, agent, or person in control of the structure a written notice that
describes the condition deemed unsafe and specifies the required repairs or
improvement to be made to abate the unsafe condition, or that requires the
unsafe structure to be demolished within a stipulated time. Such notice shall
require the person thus notified to declare immediately to the Building
Official acceptance or rejection of the terms of the order.
(Prior Code, § 6-1-81)
§ 156.198 METHOD OF SERVICE.
   (A)   Such notice shall be deemed properly served if a copy thereof is:
      (1)   Delivered to the owner personally;
      (2)   Sent by certified or registered mail addressed to the owner at the
last known address with the return receipt requested; or
      (3)   Delivered in any other manner as prescribed by local law.
   (B)   If the certified or registered letter is returned showing that the
letter was not delivered, a copy thereof shall be posted in a conspicuous place
in or about the structure affected by such notice. Service of such notice in
the foregoing manner upon the owner’s agent or upon the person responsible for
the structure shall constitute service of notice upon the owner.
(Prior Code, § 6-1-82)
§ 156.199 RESTORATION.
   The structure or equipment determined to be unsafe by the Building Official
is permitted to be restored to a safe condition. To the extra that repairs,
alterations, or additions are made or a change of occupancy occurs during the
restoration of the structure, such repairs, alterations, additions, or change
of occupancy shall comply with the requirements of §
156.061(B) and Chapter 153.
(Prior Code, § 6-1-83)
§ 156.999 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person who violates a provision of this chapter or fails to comply
with any of the requirements thereof or who erects, constructs, alters, or
repairs a building or structure in violation of the approved construction
documents or directive of the Building Official, or of a permit or certificate
issued under the provisions of this chapter, shall be subject being fined not
less than $75, nor more than $750, plus costs. Each day that a violation
continues shall be considered a separate offense.
   (B)   Nothing contained in this section shall prevent the county from taking
any other lawful action that may be necessary to secure compliance with this
chapter.
(Prior Code, § 6-1-75)
CHAPTER 157: RESIDENTIAL CODE
Section
General Provisions
   
157.001   Adoption
   
157.002   Title
   
157.003   Scope
   
157.004   Purpose
   
157.005   Violation
   
157.006   Amendments
Applicability
   
157.020   General
   
157.021   Other laws
   
157.022   Application of references
   
157.023   Referenced codes and standards
   
157.024   Appendices
   
157.025   Partial invalidity
   
157.026   Existing structures
   
157.027   Creation of enforcement agency
   
157.028   Appointment
   
157.029   Deputies
Administration
   
157.040   Building official
   
157.041   Applications and permits
   
157.042   Notices and orders
   
157.043   Inspections
   
157.044   Identification
   
157.045   Right of entry
   
157.046   Department records
   
157.047   Liability
   
157.048   Materials, equipment, modifications, and methods of construction
Permits
   
157.060   Permit required
   
157.061   Work exempt from permit
   
157.062   Application for permit
   
157.063   Validity of permit
   
157.064   Expiration
   
157.065   Suspension or revocation
   
157.066   Placement
   
157.067   Responsibility
   
157.068   Temporary structures and uses
Construction Documents
   
157.080   Submittal documents
   
157.081   Site plan
   
157.082   Examination of documents
   
157.083   Amended documents
   
157.084   Retention of documents
Fees and Payment
   
157.095   Payment of fees
   
157.096   Schedule of permit fees
   
157.097   Building permit valuations
   
157.098   Related fees
   
157.099   Refunds
Inspections
   
157.110   Types of inspections
   
157.111   Inspection agencies
   
157.112   Inspection requests
Stop Work Orders and Safety Provisions
   
157.125   Notice to owner
   
157.126   Unlawful continuance
   
157.127   Climatic and geographic design criteria
   
157.128   Carbon monoxide detectors
 
   
157.999   Penalty
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 157.001 ADOPTION.
   (A)   A certain document, three copies of which are on file in the office of
the Zoning Administrator of the county, being marked and designated as “The
International Residential Code, 2003 edition,” as published by the
International Code Council, be and is hereby adopted as the Building Code of
the County Board; for the control of buildings and structures as herein
provided; and each and all of the regulations, provisions, penalties,
conditions, and terms of said International Residential Code, 2003 edition, are
hereby referred to, adopted, and made a part hereof as if fully set out in this
chapter, with the additions, insertions, deletions, and changes, if any,
prescribed §
157.006.
(Prior Code, § 6-2-1)
   (B)   Administration and enforcement of the “The Residential Code, 2003
edition,” is hereby amended to read as follows.
(Prior Code, § 6-2-2)
§ 157.002 TITLE.
   These provisions shall be known as the “Residential Code for One-and Two-
Family Dwellings of the County of St. Clair,” and shall be cited as such and
will be referred to herein as “this Code” or “this chapter.”
(Prior Code, § 6-2-3)
§ 157.003 SCOPE.
   (A)   The provisions of the International Residential Code for One- and Two-
Family Dwellings shall apply to the construction, alteration, movement,
enlargement, replacement, repair, equipment, use and occupancy, location,
removal, and demolition of detached one- and two-family dwellings and multiple
single-family dwellings (townhouses) not more than three stories in height with
a separate means of egress and their accessory structures.
   (B)   Exception: existing buildings undergoing repair, alteration, or
additions, and change of occupancy shall be permitted to comply with Chapter
150.
(Prior Code, § 6-2-4)
§ 157.004 PURPOSE.
   The purpose of this chapter is to provide minimum requirements to safeguard
the public safety, health, and general welfare, through affordability,
structural strength, means of egress facilities, stability, sanitation, light
and ventilation, energy conservation, and safety to life and property from fire
and other hazards attributed to the built environment.
(Prior Code, § 6-2-5)
§ 157.005 VIOLATION.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to erect,
construct, alter, extend, repair, move, remove, demolish, or occupy any
building, structure, or equipment regulated by this chapter, or cause same to
be done, in conflict with or in violation of any of the provisions of this
chapter.
(Prior Code, § 6-2-62)
   (B)   (1)   The Building Official is authorized to serve a notice of
violation or order on the person responsible for the erection, construction,
alteration, extension, repair, moving, removal, demolition, or occupancy of a
building or structure in violation of the provisions of this chapter, or in
violation of a detail statement or a plan approved thereunder, or in violation
of a permit or certificate issued under the provisions of this chapter.
      (2)   Such order shall direct the discontinuance of the illegal action or
condition and the abatement of the violation.
(Prior Code, § 6-2-63)
   (C)   If the notice of violation is not complied within the time prescribed
by such notice, the Building Official is authorized to request the legal
counsel of the jurisdiction to institute the appropriate proceeding at law or
in equity to restrain, correct, or abate such violation, or to require the
removal or termination of the unlawful occupancy of the building or structure
in violation of the provisions of this chapter or of the order or direction
made pursuant thereto.
(Prior Code, § 6-2-64) Penalty, see §
157.999
§ 157.006 AMENDMENTS.
   The following provisions shall further apply and shall supersede any and all
references listed within the adopted edition of the International Residential
Code, 2003 edition.
   (A)   ICC Electric Code. Delete all and any reference to the ICC Electrical
Code and insert “the National Electric Code, 2005 edition.”
   (B)   International Plumbing Code.
      (1)   Delete all and any reference to the International Plumbing Code and
add the following: “The County Building Official shall require that the
provisions of the current ‘Illinois Plumbing Code Law,’ 225 ILCS 320/0.01 et
seq., as presently in force or as the same may be hereafter amended or modified
and the same is hereby incorporated herein by reference and adopted as the
standard for the purposes of this chapter.
      (2)   Any conflicts concerning the provisions of these codes shall be
determined by the strictest standard contained in the code provisions.”
   (C)   Wooden footing and foundation. All and any reference to wood footings
and foundation are deleted. The use of wood footings and foundations is
prohibited.
   (D)   Appendix G. Adopt Appendix G, “Swimming Pools, Spas, and Hot Tubs.”
   (E)   Appendix H. Adopt Appendix H, “Patio Covers.”
(Prior Code, § 6-2-70)
APPLICABILITY
§ 157.020 GENERAL.
   (A)   Where, in any specific case, different sections of this chapter
specify different materials, methods of construction, or other requirements,
the most restrictive shall govern.
   (B)   Where there is a conflict between a general requirement and a specific
requirement, the specific requirement shall be applicable.
(Prior Code, § 6-2-6)
§ 157.021 OTHER LAWS.
   The provisions of this chapter shall not be deemed to nullify any provisions
of local, state, or federal law.
(Prior Code, § 6-2-7)
§ 157.022 APPLICATION OF REFERENCES.
   References to chapter or section numbers, or to provisions not specifically
identified by number, shall be construed to refer to such chapter, section, or
provision of this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 6-2-8)
§ 157.023 REFERENCED CODES AND STANDARDS.
   (A)   The codes and standards referenced in this chapter shall be considered
part of the requirements of this chapter to the prescribed extent of each such
reference. Where differences occur between provisions of this chapter and
referenced codes and standards, the provisions of this chapter shall apply.
   (B)   Exception: where enforcement of a code provision would violate the
conditions of the listing of the equipment or appliance, the conditions of the
listing and manufacturers instructions shall apply.
(Prior Code, § 6-2-9)
§ 157.024 APPENDICES.
   Provisions in the appendices shall not apply unless specifically referenced
in the adopting ordinance.
(Prior Code, § 6-2-10)
§ 157.025 PARTIAL INVALIDITY.
   In the event that any part or provision of this chapter is held to be
illegal or void, this shall not have the effect of making void or illegal any
of the other parts or provisions.
(Prior Code, § 6-2-11)
§ 157.026 EXISTING STRUCTURES.
   The legal occupancy of any structure existing on the date of adoption of
this chapter shall be permitted to continue without change, except as is
specifically covered in this chapter,
Chapter 150, or the International Fire Code, or as is deemed necessary by the
Building Official for the general safety and welfare of the occupants and the
public. Additions, alterations, or repairs to any structure shall conform to
that required for a new structure without requiring the existing structure to
comply with all of the requirements of this chapter, unless otherwise stated.
Additions, alterations, or repairs shall not cause an existing structure to
become unsafe or adversely affect the performance of the building.
(Prior Code, § 6-2-12)
§ 157.027 CREATION OF ENFORCEMENT AGENCY.
   The Department of Building Safety is hereby created and the official in
charge thereof shall be known as the Building Official.
(Prior Code, § 6-2-13)
§ 157.028 APPOINTMENT.
   The Building Official shall be appointed by the chief appointing authority
of the jurisdiction.
(Prior Code, § 6-2-14)
§ 157.029 DEPUTIES.
   In accordance with the prescribed procedures of this jurisdiction and with
the concurrence of the appointing authority, the Building Official shall have
the authority to appoint a deputy building official, the related technical
officers, inspectors, plan examiners, and other employees. Such employees shall
have power as delegated by the Building Official.
(Prior Code, § 6-2-15)
ADMINISTRATION
§ 157.040 BUILDING OFFICIAL.
   (A)   The Building Official is hereby authorized and directed to enforce the
provisions of this chapter. The Building Official shall have the authority to
render interpretations of this chapter and to adopt policies and procedures in
order to clarify the application of its provisions. Such interpretations,
policies and procedures shall be in compliance with the intent and purpose of
this chapter.
      (B)   Such policies and procedures shall not have the effect of waiving
requirements specifically provided for in this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 6-2-16)
§ 157.041 APPLICATIONS AND PERMITS.
   The Building Official shall receive applications, review construction
documents, and issue permits for the erection and alteration of buildings and
structures, inspect the premises for which such permits have been issued, and
enforce compliance with the provisions of this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 6-2-17)
§ 157.042 NOTICES AND ORDERS.
   The Building Official shall issue all necessary notices or orders to ensure
compliance with this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 6-2-18)
§ 157.043 INSPECTIONS.
   (A)   The Building Official shall make all of the required inspections, or
the Building Official shall have the authority to accept reports of inspection
by approved agencies or individuals.
   (B)   Reports of such inspections shall be in writing and be certified by a
responsible officer of such approved agency or by the responsible individual.
   (C)   The Building Official is authorized to engage such expert opinion as
deemed necessary to report upon unusual technical issues that arise, subject to
the approval of the appointing authority.
(Prior Code, § 6-2-19)
§ 157.044 IDENTIFICATION.
   The Building Official shall carry proper identification when inspecting
structures or premises in the performance of duties under this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 6-2-20)
§ 157.045 RIGHT OF ENTRY.
   (A)   Where it is necessary to make an inspection to enforce the provisions
of this chapter, or where the Building Official has reasonable cause to believe
that there exists in a structure or upon a premises a condition which is
contrary to or in violation of this chapter which makes the structure or
premises unsafe, dangerous, or hazardous, the Building Official or designee is
authorized to enter the structure or premises at reasonable times to inspect or
to perform the duties imposed by this chapter; provided that if such structure
or premises be occupied, that credentials be presented to the occupant and
entry requested.
   (B)   If such structure or premises is unoccupied, the Building Official
shall first make a reasonable effort to locate the owner or other person having
charge or control of the structure or premises and request entry. If entry is
refused, the Building Official shall have recourse to the remedies provided by
law to secure entry.
(Prior Code, § 6-2-21)
§ 157.046 DEPARTMENT RECORDS.
   The Building Official shall keep official records of applications received,
permits, and certificates issued, fees collected, reports of inspections, and
notices and orders issued. Such records shall be retained in the official
records for the period required for retention of public records.
(Prior Code, § 6-2-22)
§ 157.047 LIABILITY.
   (A)   The Building Official, member of the Board of Appeals, or employee
charged with the enforcement of this chapter, while acting for the jurisdiction
in good faith and without malice in the discharge of the duties required by
this chapter or other pertinent law or ordinance, shall not thereby be rendered
liable personally and is hereby relieved from personal liability for any damage
accruing to persons or property as a result of any act or by reason of an act
or omission in the discharge of official duties.
   (B)   Any suit instituted against an officer or employee because of an act
performed by that officer or employee in the lawful discharge of duties and
under the provisions of this chapter shall be defended by legal representative
of the jurisdiction until the final termination of the proceedings.
   (C)   The Building Official or any subordinate shall not be liable for cost
in any action, suit, or proceeding that is instituted in pursuance of the
provisions of this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 6-2-23)
§ 157.048 MATERIALS, EQUIPMENT, MODIFICATIONS, AND METHODS OF CONSTRUCTION.
   (A)   Materials, equipment, and devices approved by the Building Official
shall be constructed and installed in accordance with such approval. Used
materials, equipment, and devices shall not be reused unless approved by the
Building Official.
(Prior Code, § 6-2-24)
   (B)    (1)   Wherever there are practical difficulties involved in carrying
out the provisions of this chapter, the Building Official shall have the
authority to grant modifications for individual cases; provided the Building
Official shall first find that special individual reason makes the strict
letter of this chapter impractical and the modification is in compliance with
the intent and purpose of this chapter and that such modification does not
lessen health, life, and fire safety requirements or structural.
      (2)   The details of action granting modifications shall be recorded and
entered in the files of the Department of Public Safety.
      (3)   The Building Official shall not grant modifications to any
provision related to areas prone to flooding as established by Table 6-2-67(A)
in §
157.127 without the granting of a variance to such provisions by the Board of
Appeals.
(Prior Code, § 6-2-25)
   (C)   (1)   The provisions of this chapter are not intended to prevent the
installation of any material or to prohibit any design or method of
construction not specifically prescribed by this chapter; provided that any
such alternative has been approved. An alternative material, design or method
of construction shall be approved where the Building Official finds that the
proposed design is satisfactory and complies with the intent of the provisions
of this chapter, and that the material, method or work offered is, for the
purpose intended, at least the equivalent of that prescribed in this chapter.
Compliance with the specific performance-based provisions of the International
Codes in lieu of specific requirements of this chapter shall also be permitted
as an alternate.
      (2)   Whenever there is insufficient evidence of compliance with the
provisions of this chapter, or evidence that a material or method does not
conform to the requirements of this chapter, or in order to substantiate claims
for alternative materials or methods, the Building Official shall have the
authority to require tests as evidence of compliance to be made at no expense
to the jurisdiction. Test methods shall be as specified in this chapter or by
other recognized test standards.
      (3)   In the absence of recognized and accepted test methods, the
Building Official shall approve the testing procedures. Tests shall be
performed by an approved agency. Reports of such tests shall be retained by the
Building Official for the period required for retention of public records.
(Prior Code, § 6-2-26)
PERMITS
§ 157.060 PERMIT REQUIRED.
   Any owner or authorized agent who intends to construct, enlarge, alter,
repair, move, demolish, or change the occupancy of a building or structure, or
to erect, install, enlarge, alter, repair, remove, convert or replace any
electrical, gas, mechanical or plumbing system, the installation of which is
regulated by this chapter, or to cause any such work to be done, shall first
make application to the Building Official and obtain the required permit.
(Prior Code, § 6-2-27)
§ 157.061 WORK EXEMPT FROM PERMIT.
   Permits shall not be required for the following. Exemption from the permit
requirements of this chapter shall not be deemed to grant authorization for any
work to be done in any manner in violation of the provisions of this chapter or
any other laws or ordinances of this jurisdiction.
   (A)   Building. Permits shall not be required for:
      (1)   One-story detached accessory structures; provided the floor area
does not exceed 200 square feet (18.58 meters2);
      (2)   Fences not over six feet (1,829 millimeters) high;
      (3)   Retaining walls that are not over four feet (1,219 millimeters) in
height measured from the bottom of the footing to the top of the wall, unless
supporting a surcharge;
      (4)   Water tanks supported directly on grade if the capacity does not
exceed 5,000 gallons (18,927 liters) and the ratio of height to diameter or
width does not exceed two to one (2:1);
      (5)   Sidewalks and driveways not more than 30 inches (762 millimeters)
above adjacent grade and not over any basement or story below;
      (6)   Painting, papering, tiling, carpeting, cabinets, countertops, and
similar finish work;
      (7)   Prefabricated swimming pools that are less than 24 inches (610
millimeters) deep;
      (8)   Swings and other playground equipment accessory to a one- or two-
family dwelling; and
      (9)   Window awnings supported by an exterior wall which do not project
more than 54 inches (1,372 millimeters) from the exterior wall and do not
require additional support.
   (B)   Electrical. A permit shall not be required for minor repair work,
including the replacement of lamps or the connection of approved portable
electrical equipment to approved permanently installed receptacles.
   (C)   Gas. Permits shall not be required for:
      (1)   Portable heating, cooking, or clothes drying appliances;
      (2)   Replacement of any minor part that does not alter approval of
equipment or make such equipment unsafe; and
      (3)   Portable fuel cell appliances that are not connected to a fixed
piping system and are not interconnected to a power grid.
   (D)   Mechanical. Permits shall not be required for:
      (1)   Portable heating appliance;
      (2)   Portable ventilation appliances;
      (3)   Portable cooling unit;
      (4)   Steam, hot, or chilled water piping within any heating or cooling
equipment regulated by this chapter;
      (5)   Replacement of any minor part that does not alter approval of
equipment or make such equipment unsafe;
      (6)   Portable evaporative cooler;
      (7)   Self-contained refrigeration systems containing ten pounds (4.54
kilograms) or less of refrigerant or that are actuated by motors of one
horsepower (746 watts) or less; and
      (8)   Portable fuel cell appliances that are not connected to a fixed
piping system and are not interconnected to a power grid.
   (E)   Plumbing. Permits shall not be required for:
      (1)   The stopping of leaks in drains, water, soil, waste, or vent pipe;
provided, however, that if any concealed trap, drain pipe, water, soil, waste,
or vent pipe becomes defective and it becomes necessary to remove and replace
the same with new material, such work shall be considered as new work and a
permit shall be obtained and inspection made as provided in this chapter; and
      (2)   The clearing of stoppages or the repairing of leaks in pipes,
valves, or fixtures, and the removal and reinstallation of water closets;
provided such repairs do not involve or require the replacement or
rearrangement of valves, pipes or fixtures.
   (F)   Emergency repairs. Where equipment replacements and repairs must be
performed in an emergency situation, the permit application shall be submitted
within the next working business day to the Building Official.
   (G)   Repairs. Application or notice to the Building Official is not
required for ordinary repairs to structures, replacement of lamps, or the
connection of approved portable electrical equipment to approved permanently
installed receptacles. Such repairs shall not include the cutting away of any
wall, partition or portion thereof, the removal or cutting of any structural
beam or load-bearing support, or the removal or change of any required means of
egress, or rearrangement of parts of a structure affecting the egress
requirements; nor shall ordinary repairs include addition to, alteration of,
replacement of, or relocation of any water supply, sewer, drainage, drain
leader, gas, soil, waste, vent, or similar piping, electric wiring, mechanical
work, or other work affecting public health or general safety.
   (H)   Public service agencies. A permit shall not be required for the
installation, alteration, or repair of generation, transmission, distribution,
metering, or other related equipment that is under the ownership and control of
public service agencies by established right.
(Prior Code, § 6-2-28)
§ 157.062 APPLICATION FOR PERMIT.
   (A)   Application. To obtain a permit, the applicant shall first file an
application therefor in writing on a form furnished by the Department of
Building Safety for that purpose. Such application shall:
      (1)   Identify and describe the work to be covered by the permit for
which application is made;
      (2)   Describe the land on which the proposed work is to be done by legal
description, street address, or similar description that will readily identify
and definitely locate the proposed building or work;
      (3)   Indicate the use and occupancy for which the proposed work is
intended;
      (4)   Be accompanied by construction documents and other information as
required in §
157.080;
      (5)   State the valuation of the proposed work;
      (6)   Be signed by the applicant or the applicants’ authorized agent; and
      (7)   Give such other data and information as required by the Building
Official.
   (B)   Action on application. The Building Official shall examine or cause to
be examined applications for permits and amendments thereto within a reasonable
time after filing. If the application or the construction documents do not
conform to the requirements of pertinent laws, the Building Official shall
reject such application in writing, stating the reasons therefor. If the
Building Official is satisfied that the proposed work conforms to the
requirements of this chapter and laws and ordinances applicable thereto, the
Building Official shall issue a permit therefor as soon as practicable.
      (1)   For applications for reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, or
other improvement of existing buildings or structure located in an area prone
to flooding as established by Table 6-2-67(A) in §
157.127, the Building Official shall examine or cause to be examined the
construction documents and shall prepare a finding with regard to the value of
the proposed work.
      (2)   For buildings that have sustained damage or any origin, the value
of the proposed work shall include the cost to repair the building or structure
to its pre-damage condition. If the Building Official finds that the value of
proposed work equals or exceeds 50% of the market value of the building or
structure before the damage has occurred or the improvement is started, the
finding shall be provided to the Board of Appeals for a determination of
substantial improvement or substantial damage. Applications determined by the
Board of Appeals to constitute substantial improvement or substantial damage
shall meet the requirements of Section R323.
      (3)   An application for a permit for any proposed work shall be deemed
to have been abandoned 180 days after the date of filing, unless such
application has been pursued in good faith or a permit has been issued; except
that the Building Official is authorized to grant one or more extensions of
time for additional periods not exceeding 180 days each. The extension shall be
requested in writing and justifiable cause demonstrated.
(Prior Code, § 6-2-29)
§ 157.063 VALIDITY OF PERMIT.
   (A)   The issuance or granting of a permit shall not be construed to be a
permit for, or an approval of, any violation of any of the provisions of this
chapter or of any other ordinance of the jurisdiction. Permits presuming to
give authority to violate or cancel the provisions of this chapter or other
ordinances of the jurisdiction shall not be valid. The issuance of a permit
based on construction documents and other data shall not prevent the Building
Official from requiring the correction of errors in the construction documents
and other data.
   (B)   The Building Official is also authorized to prevent occupancy or use
of a structure where in violation of this chapter or of any other ordinances of
this jurisdiction.
(Prior Code, § 6-2-30)
§ 157.064 EXPIRATION.
   (A)   Every permit issued shall become invalid unless the work authorized by
such permit is commenced within 180 days after its issuance, or if the work
authorized by such permit is suspended or abandoned for a period of 180 days
after the time the work is commenced.
   (B)   The Building Official is authorized to grant, in writing, one or more
extensions of time, for periods not more than 180 days each. The extension
shall be requested in writing and justifiable cause demonstrated.
(Prior Code, § 6-2-31)
§ 157.065 SUSPENSION OR REVOCATION.
   The Building Official is authorized to suspend or revoke a permit issued
under the provisions of this chapter wherever the permit is issued in error or
on the basis of incorrect, inaccurate or incomplete information, or in
violation of any ordinance or regulation or any of the provisions of this
chapter.
(Prior Code, § 6-2-32)
§ 157.066 PLACEMENT.
   The building permit or copy thereof shall be kept on the site of the work
until the completion of the project.
(Prior Code, § 6-2-33)
§ 157.067 RESPONSIBILITY.
   It shall be the duty of every person who performs work for the installation
or repair of building, structure, electrical, gas, mechanical, or plumbing
systems, for which this chapter is applicable, to comply with this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 6-2-34)
§ 157.068 TEMPORARY STRUCTURES AND USES.
   (A)   The Building Official is authorized to issue a permit for temporary
structures and temporary uses. Such permits shall be limited as to time of
service, but shall not be permitted for more than 180 days. The Building
Official is authorized to grant extensions for demonstrated cause.
(Prior Code, § 6-2-40)
   (B)   Temporary structures and uses shall conform to the structural
strength, fire safety, means of egress, light, ventilation, and sanitary
requirements of this chapter as necessary to ensure the public health, safety,
and general welfare.
(Prior Code, § 6-2-41)
   (C)   (1)   The Building Official is authorized to give permission to
temporarily supply and use power in part of an electric installation before
such installation has been fully completed and the final certificate of
completion has been issued.
      (2)   The part covered by the temporary certificate shall comply with the
requirements specified for temporary lighting, heat, or power in the National
Electrical Code NFPA 70/2005.
(Prior Code, § 6-2-42)
   (D)   The Building Official is authorized to terminate such permit for a
temporary structure or use and to order the temporary structure or use to be
discontinued.
(Prior Code, § 6-2-43)
CONSTRUCTION DOCUMENTS
§ 157.080 SUBMITTAL DOCUMENTS.
   (A)   Construction documents required.
      (1)   Construction documents, special inspection and structural
observation programs, and other data shall be submitted in one or more sets
with each application for a permit. The construction documents shall be
prepared by a registered design professional where required by the statutes of
the jurisdiction in which the project is to be constructed. Where special
conditions exist, the Building Official is authorized to require additional
construction documents to be prepared by a registered design professional.
      (2)   Exception: the Building Official is authorized to waive the
submission of construction documents and other data not required to be prepared
by a registered design professional if it is found that the nature of the work
applied for is such that review of construction documents is not necessary to
obtain compliance with this chapter.
   (B)   Information on construction documents.
      (1)   Construction documents shall be drawn upon suitable material.
Electronic media documents are permitted to be submitted when approved by the
Building Official.
      (2)   Construction documents shall be of sufficient clarity to indicate
the location, nature, and extent of the work proposed and show in detail that
it will conform to the provisions of this chapter and relevant laws,
ordinances, rules, and regulations, as determined by the Building Official.
   (C)   Manufacturers installation instructions. Manufacturers installation
instructions, as required by this chapter, shall be available on the job site
at the time of inspection.
   (D)   Information for construction in areas prone to flooding. For buildings
and structures in flood hazard areas as established by Table 6-2-51(A) in §
157.127, construction documents shall include:
      (1)   Delineation of flood hazard areas, floodway boundaries, and flood
zones, and the design flood elevation, as appropriate;
      (2)   The elevation of the proposed lowest floor, including basement; in
areas of shallow flooding (AO Zones), the height of the proposed lowest floor,
including basement, above the highest adjacent grade;
      (3)   The elevation of the bottom of the lowest horizontal structural
member in coastal high hazard areas (V Zone); and
      (4)   If design flood elevations are not included on the communities
Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM), the Building Official and the applicant shall
obtain and reasonably utilize any design flood elevation and floodway data
available from other sources.
(Prior Code, § 6-2-35)
§ 157.081 SITE PLAN.
   The construction documents submitted with the application for permit shall
be accompanied by a site plan showing the size and location of new construction
and existing structures on the site and distances from lot lines. In the case
of demolition, the site plan shall show construction to be demolished and the
location and size of existing structures and construction that are to remain on
the site or plot.
(Prior Code, § 6-2-36)
§ 157.082 EXAMINATION OF DOCUMENTS.
   The Building Official shall examine or cause to be examined construction
documents for compliance with this chapter.
   (A)   Approval of construction documents. When the Building Official issues
a permit, the construction documents shall be approved in writing or by stamp.
      (1)   One set of construction documents so reviewed shall be retained by
the Building Official.
      (2)   The other set shall be returned to the applicant, shall be kept at
the site of work and shall be open to inspection by the Building Official or
his or her authorized representative.
   (B)   Previous approvals. This chapter shall not require changes in the
construction documents, construction, or designated occupancy of a structure
for which a lawful permit has been heretofore issued or otherwise lawfully
authorized, and the construction of which has been pursued in good faith within
180 days after the effective date of this chapter and has not been abandoned.
   (C)   Phased approval. The Building Official is authorized to issue a permit
for the construction of foundations or any other part of a building or
structure before the construction documents for the whole building or structure
have been submitted, provided that adequate information and detailed statements
have been filed complying with pertinent requirements of this chapter. The
holder of such permit for the foundation or other parts of a building or
structure shall proceed at the holder’s own risk with the building operation
and without assurance that a permit for the entire structure will be granted.
(Prior Code, § 6-2-37)
§ 157.083 AMENDED DOCUMENTS.
   Work shall be installed in accordance with the approved construction
documents, and any changes made during construction that are not in compliance
with the approved construction documents shall be resubmitted for approval as
an amended set of construction documents.
(Prior Code, § 6-2-38)
§ 157.084 RETENTION OF DOCUMENTS.
   One set of approved construction documents shall be retained by the Building
Official for a period of not less than 180 days from date of completion of the
permitted work, or as required by state or local laws.
(Prior Code, § 6-2-39)
FEES AND PAYMENT
§ 157.095 PAYMENT OF FEES.
   (A)   A permit shall not be valid until the fees prescribed by law have been
paid.
   (B)   Nor shall an amendment to a permit be released until the additional
fee, if any, has been paid.
(Prior Code, § 6-2-44)
§ 157.096 SCHEDULE OF PERMIT FEES.
   On buildings, structures, electrical, gas, mechanical, and plumbing systems
or alterations requiring a permit, a fee for each permit shall be paid as
required, in accordance with the schedule as established by the applicable
governing authority.
(Prior Code, § 6-2-45)
§ 157.097 BUILDING PERMIT VALUATIONS.
   Building permit valuation shall include total value of the work for which a
permit is being issued, such as electrical, gas, mechanical, plumbing
equipment, and other permanent systems, including materials and labor.
(Prior Code, § 6-2-46)
§ 157.098 RELATED FEES.
   The payment of the fee for the construction, alteration, removal, or
demolition for work done in connection with or concurrently with the work
authorized by a building permit shall not relieve the applicant or holder of
the permit from the payment of other fees that are prescribed by law.
(Prior Code, § 6-2-47)
§ 157.099 REFUNDS.
   The Building Official is authorized to establish a refund policy.
(Prior Code, § 6-2-48)
INSPECTIONS
§ 157.110 TYPES OF INSPECTIONS.
   (A)   Necessary inspections. For onsite construction, from time to time the
Building Official, upon notification from the permit holder or his or her
agent, shall make or cause to be made any necessary inspections and shall
either approve that portion of the construction as completed or shall notify
the permit holder or his or her agent wherein the same fails to comply with
this chapter.
   (B)   Foundation inspection.
      (1)   Inspection of the foundation shall be made after poles or piers are
set or trenches or basement areas are excavated and any required forms erected
and any required reinforcing steel is in place and prior to the placing of
concrete.
      (2)   The foundation inspection shall include excavations for thickened
slabs intended for the support of bearing walls, partitions, structural
supports, or equipment and special requirements for wood foundations.
   (C)   Plumbing, mechanical, gas, and electrical systems inspection. Rough
inspection of plumbing, mechanical, gas and electrical systems shall be made
prior to covering or concealment, before fixtures or appliances are set or
installed, and prior to framing inspection.
   (D)   Exception. Ground-source heat pump loop systems tested in accordance
with Section M2105.1 shall be permitted to be back-filled prior to inspection.
   (E)   Floodplain inspections. For construction in areas prone to flooding as
established by Table 6-2-67(A) in §
157.127, upon placement of the lowest floor, including basement, and prior to
further vertical construction, the Building Official shall require submission
of documentation, prepared and sealed by a registered design professional, of
the elevation of the lowest floor, including basement, required in Section
R323.
   (F)   Frame and masonry inspection. Inspection of framing and masonry
construction shall be made after the roof, masonry, all framing, fire stopping,
draft stopping, and bracing are in place and after the plumbing, mechanical,
and electrical rough inspections are approved.
   (G)   Other inspections.
      (1)   In addition to the called inspections above, the Building Official
may make or require any other inspections to ascertain compliance with this
chapter and other laws enforced by the Building Official.
      (2)   Where fire-resistance-rated construction is required between
dwelling units or due to location on property, the Building Official shall
require an inspection of such construction after all lathing and/or wallboard
is in place, but before any plaster is applied, or before wallboard joints and
fasteners are taped and finished.
   (H)   Final inspection. Final inspection shall be made after the permitted
work is complete and prior to occupancy.
(Prior Code, § 6-2-49)
§ 157.111 INSPECTION AGENCIES.
   The Building Official is authorized to accept reports of approved inspection
agencies; provided such agencies satisfy the requirements as to qualifications
and reliability.
(Prior Code, § 6-2-50)
§ 157.112 INSPECTION REQUESTS.
   (A)   It shall be the duty of the permit holder or their agent to notify the
Building Official that such work is ready for inspection.
   (B)   It shall be the duty of the person requesting any inspections required
by this chapter to provide access to and means for inspection of such work.
(Prior Code, § 6-2-51)
STOP WORK ORDERS AND SAFETY PROVISIONS
§ 157.125 NOTICE TO OWNER.
   (A)   Upon notice from the Building Official that work on any building or
structure is being prosecuted contrary to the provisions of this chapter or in
an unsafe and dangerous manner, such work shall be immediately stopped.
   (B)   The stop work order shall be in writing and shall be given to the
owner of the property involved, or to the owner’s agent, or to the person doing
the work; and shall state the conditions under which work will be permitted to
resume.
(Prior Code, § 6-2-66)
§ 157.126 UNLAWFUL CONTINUANCE.
   Any person who shall continue any work in or about the structure after
having been served with a stop work order, except such work as that person is
directed to perform to remove a violation or unsafe condition, shall be subject
to penalties as prescribed by law.
(Prior Code, § 6-2-67)
§ 157.127 CLIMATIC AND GEOGRAPHIC DESIGN CRITERIA.
   Table 6-2-67(A) insert the following table.
 
Grou                                                       Winter  Ice                Air
nd   Wind   Seismic               Frost                    Design  Shield    Flood    Freezi Mean Annual
Snow Speede Design    Weatheringa Line   Termitec Decayd   Tempera Under-    Hazardsh ng     Temperaturek
Load (mph ) Category9             Depthb                   turef   Layme nt           Indexi
                                                                   Requiredj
     3                                                                       See
     secon                        32     Moder    Slight                     local
20   d 90   D-1       Severe      inches ate to   to       6°     No        flood    1,000  55°
     normal                              heavy    moderate                   ordina
     75                                                                      nce
 
(Prior Code, § 6-2-68)
§ 157.128 CARBON MONOXIDE DETECTORS.
   Effective January 1, 2007, all dwellings shall be in compliance with the
following.
   (A)   Definitions. For the purpose of this section, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.
      APPROVED CARBON MONOXIDE ALARM or ALARM. A carbon monoxide alarm that
complies with all the requirements of the rules and regulations of the State
Fire Marshal, bears the label of a nationally recognized testing laboratory,
and complies with the most recent standards of the Underwriters Laboratories or
the Canadian Standard Association.
      DWELLING UNIT. A room or suite of rooms used for human habitation, and
includes a single-family residence as well as each living unit of a multiple-
family residence and each living unit in a mixed-use building.
   (B)   Carbon monoxide detector. Every dwelling unit shall be equipped with
at least one approved carbon monoxide alarm in an operating condition within 15
feet of every room used for sleeping purposes. The carbon monoxide alarm may be
combined with smoke detecting devices provided that the combined unit complies
with respective provisions of the administrative code, reference standards, and
departmental rules relating to both smoke detecting devices and carbon monoxide
alarms and provided that the combined unit emits an alarm in a manner that
clearly differentiates the hazard.
      (1)   Every structure that contains more than one dwelling unit shall
contain at least one approved carbon monoxide alarm in operating condition
within 15 feet of every room used for sleeping purposes.
      (2)   (a)   It is the responsibility of the owner of a structure to
supply and install all required alarms. It is the responsibility of a tenant to
test and to provide general maintenance for the alarms within the tenants
dwelling unit or rooming unit, and to notify the owner or the authorized agent
of the owner in writing of any deficiencies that the tenant cannot correct. The
owner is responsible for providing one tenant per dwelling unit with written
information regarding alarm testing and maintenance.
         (b)   The tenant is responsible for replacement of any required
batteries in the carbon monoxide alarms in the tenants dwelling unit, except
that the owner shall ensure that the batteries are in operating condition at
the time the tenant takes possession of the dwelling unit. The tenant shall
provide the owner or the authorized agent of the owner with access to the
dwelling unit to correct any deficiencies in the carbon monoxide alarm that
have been reported in writing to the owner or the authorized agent of the
owner.
      (3)   The carbon monoxide alarms required under this section and the
Carbon Monoxide Alarm Detector Act, being 430 ILCS 135/1 et seq., may be either
battery powered, plug-in with battery back up, or wired into the structure’s AC
power line with secondary battery back up.
      (4)   New construction carbon monoxide alarms required to be
interconnected to the smoke detector and be both 110 volts and battery back up.
   (C)   Violation.
      (1)   Willful failure to install or maintain in operating condition any
carbon monoxide alarm required by this section and the Carbon Monoxide Alarm
Detector Act, being 430 ILCS 135/1 et seq., is a Class B misdemeanor.
      (2)   Tampering with, removing, destroying, disconnecting, or removing
the batteries from any installed carbon monoxide alarm, except in the course of
inspection, maintenance, or replacement of the alarm, is a Class A misdemeanor
in the case of a first conviction and a Class 4 felony in the case of a second
or subsequent conviction.
   (D)   Exemptions. Exemptions include:
      (1)   A residential unit in a building that:
         (a)   Does not rely on combustion of fossil fuel for heat,
ventilation, or hot water;
         (b)   Is not connected in any way to a garage; and
         (c)   Is not sufficiently close to any ventilated source of carbon
monoxide, as determined by the local building commissioner, to receive carbon
monoxide from that source.
      (2)   A residential unit that is not sufficiently close to any source of
carbon monoxide so as to be at risk of receiving carbon monoxide from that
source, as determined by local building commissioner.
(Prior Code, § 6-2-69)
§ 157.999 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person who violates a provision of this chapter or fails to comply
with any of the requirements thereof or who erects, constructs, alters, or
repairs a building or structure in violation of the approved construction
documents or directive of the Building Official, or of a permit or certificate
issued under the provisions of this chapter, shall be subject being fined not
less than $75, nor more than $750, plus costs. Each day that a violation
continues shall be considered a separate offense.
   (B)   Nothing contained in this section shall prevent the county from taking
any other lawful action that may be necessary to secure compliance with this
chapter.
(Prior Code, § 6-2-65)
CHAPTER 158: MECHANICAL CODE
Section
General Provisions
   
158.001 Adoption
   
158.002 Title
   
158.003 Scope
   
158.004 Intent
   
158.005 Violations
   
158.006 Amendments
Applicability
   
158.020 General
   
158.021 Existing installations
   
158.022 Maintenance
   
158.023 Additions, alteration, or repairs
   
158.024 Change in occupancy
   
158.025 Historic buildings
   
158.026 Moved buildings
   
158.027 Referenced codes and standards
   
158.028 Requirements not covered by this code
Administration
   
158.040 Department of Mechanical Inspection; appointment
   
158.041 Deputies
   
158.042 Liability
   
158.043 Code Enforcement Officer
   
158.044 Rule-making authority
   
158.045 Applications and permits
   
158.046 Inspections
   
158.047 Right of entry
   
158.048 Identification
   
158.049 Notices and orders
   
158.050 Department records
   
158.051 Modifications, materials, methods, equipment, and appliances
Permits and Fees
   
158.065 When permits required
   
158.066 Application
   
158.067 Issuance
   
158.068 Fees
Inspections and Testing
   
158.080 Required inspections and testing
   
158.081 Testing
   
158.082 Approval
   
158.083 Temporary connection
Stop Work Orders
   
158.095 Notice
   
158.096 Abatement of violation
   
158.097 Unsafe mechanical systems
   
158.098 Means of appeal
 
   
158.999 Penalty
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 158.001 ADOPTION.
   (A)   A certain document, three copies of which are on file in the office of
the Zoning Administrator of the county, being marked and designated as “The
International Mechanical Code, 2003 edition,” as published by the International
Code Council, be and is hereby adopted as the Building Code of the County
Board; for the control of buildings and structures as herein provided; and each
and all of the regulations, provisions, penalties, conditions, and terms of
said International Mechanical Code, 2003 edition, are hereby referred to,
adopted, and made a part hereof as if fully set out in this chapter, with the
additions, insertions, deletions, and changes, if any, prescribed §
158.006.
(Prior Code, § 6-3-1)
   (B)   Administration and enforcement of the “The International Mechanical
Code, 2003 edition,” is hereby amended to read as follows.
(Prior Code, § 6-3-2)
§ 158.002 TITLE.
    These regulations shall be known as “the Mechanical Code of St. Clair
County,” hereinafter referred to as “this Code” or “this chapter.”
(Prior Code, § 6-3-3)
§ 158.003 SCOPE.
   (A)   (1)   This chapter shall regulate the design, installation,
maintenance, alteration, and inspection of mechanical systems that are
permanently installed and utilized to provide control of environmental
conditions and related processes within buildings.
      (2)   This chapter shall also regulate those mechanical systems, system
components, equipment, and appliances specifically addressed herein. The
installation of fuel gas distribution piping and equipment, fuel gas-fired
appliances, and fuel gas-fired appliance venting systems shall be regulated by
the International Fuel Gas Code.
   (B)   Exceptions include:
      (1)   Detached one- and two-family dwellings and multiple single-family
dwellings (town houses) not more than three stories high with separate means of
egress and their accessory structures shall comply with the International
Residential Code; and
      (2)   Mechanical systems in existing buildings undergoing repair,
alterations, or additions, and change of occupancy shall be permitted to comply
with Chapter 150.
   (C)   Provisions in the appendices shall not apply unless specifically
adopted.
(Prior Code, § 6-3-4)
§ 158.004 INTENT.
   The purpose of this chapter is to provide minimum standards to safeguard
life or limb, health, property, and public welfare by regulating and
controlling the design, construction, installation, quality of materials,
location, operation, and maintenance or use of mechanical systems.
(Prior Code, § 6-3-5)
§ 158.005 VIOLATIONS.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person, firm, or corporation to erect,
construct, alter, repair, remove, demolish, or utilize a mechanical system, or
cause same to be done, in conflict with or in violation of any of the
provisions of this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 6-3-41)
   (B)   (1)   The Code Enforcement Officer shall serve a notice of violation
or order to the person responsible for the erection, installation, alteration,
extension, repair, removal, or demolition of mechanical work in violation of
the provisions of this chapter, or in violation of a detail statement or the
approved construction documents thereunder, or in violation of a permit or
certificate issued under the provisions of this chapter.
      (2)   Such order shall direct the discontinuance of the illegal action or
condition and the abatement of the violation.
(Prior Code, § 6-3-42)
   (C)   If the notice of violation is not complied with promptly, the Code
Enforcement Officer shall request the legal counsel of the jurisdiction to
institute the appropriate proceeding at law or in equity to restrain, correct,
or abate such violation, or to require the removal or termination of the
unlawful occupancy of the structure in violation of the provisions of this
chapter or of the order or direction made pursuant thereto.
(Prior Code, § 6-3-43)
§ 158.006 AMENDMENTS.
   The following provisions shall further apply and shall supersede any and all
references listed within the adopted edition of the International Mechanical
Code, 2003 edition.
   (A)   ICC Electrical Code. Delete all and any reference to the ICC
Electrical Code and insert “the National Electric Code, 2005 edition.”
   (B)   International Plumbing Code. Delete all and any reference to the
International Plumbing Code and add the following: “The County Building
Official shall require that the provisions of the current ‘Illinois Plumbing
License Law,’ 225 ILCS 320/0.01 et seq., as presently in force or as the same
may be hereafter amended or modified and the same is hereby incorporated herein
by reference and adopted as the standard for the purposes of this chapter. Any
conflicts concerning the provisions of these codes shall be determined by the
strictest standard contained in the code provisions.”
(Prior Code, § 6-3-49)
APPLICABILITY
§ 158.020 GENERAL.
   The provisions of this chapter shall apply to all matters affecting or
relating to structures and premises. Where, in a specific case, different
sections of this chapter specify different materials, methods of construction,
or other requirements, the most restrictive shall govern.
(Prior Code, § 6-3-7)
§ 158.021 EXISTING INSTALLATIONS.
   Except as otherwise provided for in this chapter, a provision in this
chapter shall not require the removal, alteration or abandonment of, nor
prevent the continued utilization and maintenance of, a mechanical system
lawfully in existence at the time of the adoption of this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 6-3-8)
§ 158.022 MAINTENANCE.
   (A)   Mechanical systems, both existing and new, and parts thereof shall be
maintained in proper operating condition in accordance with the original design
and in a safe and sanitary condition.
   (B)   Devices or safeguards which are required by this chapter shall be
maintained in compliance with the code edition under which they were installed.
   (C)   The owner or the owner’s designated agent shall be responsible for
maintenance of mechanical systems.
   (D)   To determine compliance with this provision, the Code Enforcement
Officer shall have the authority to require a mechanical system to be
reinspected.
(Prior Code, § 6-3-9)
§ 158.023 ADDITIONS, ALTERATION, OR REPAIRS.
   (A)   Additions, alterations, renovations, or repairs to a mechanical system
shall conform to that required for a new mechanical system without requiring
the existing mechanical system to comply with all of the requirements of this
chapter. Additions, alterations, or repairs shall not cause an existing
mechanical system to become unsafe, hazardous, or overloaded.
   (B)   Minor additions, alterations, renovations, and repairs to existing
mechanical systems shall meet the provisions for new construction, unless such
work is done in the same manner and arrangement as was in the existing system,
is not hazardous and is approved.
(Prior Code, § 6-3-10)
§ 158.024 CHANGE IN OCCUPANCY.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful to make a change in the occupancy of any
structure which will subject the structure to any special provision of this
code applicable to the new occupancy without approval.
   (B)   The Code Enforcement Officer shall certify that such structure meets
the intent of the provisions of law governing building construction for the
proposed new occupancy and that such change of occupancy does not result in any
hazard to the public health, safety, or welfare.
(Prior Code, § 6-3-11)
§ 158.025 HISTORIC BUILDINGS.
   The provisions of this chapter relating to the construction, alteration,
repair, enlargement, restoration, relocation, or moving of buildings or
structures shall not be mandatory for existing buildings or structures
identified and classified by the state or local jurisdiction as historic
buildings when such buildings or structures are judged by the Code Enforcement
Officer to be safe and in the public interest of health, safety, and welfare
regarding any proposed construction, alteration, repair, enlargement,
restoration, relocation, or moving of buildings.
(Prior Code, § 6-3-12)
§ 158.026 MOVED BUILDINGS.
   Except as determined by §
158.021, mechanical systems that are a part of buildings or structures moved
into or within the jurisdiction shall comply with the provisions of this
chapter for new installations.
(Prior Code, § 6-3-13)
§ 158.027 REFERENCED CODES AND STANDARDS.
   (A)   The codes and standards referenced herein shall be those that are
listed herein and such codes and standards shall be considered as part of the
requirements of this chapter to the prescribed extent of each such reference.
   (B)   Where differences occur between provisions of this chapter and the
referenced standards, the provisions of this chapter shall apply.
(Prior Code, § 6-3-14)
§ 158.028 REQUIREMENTS NOT COVERED BY THIS CODE.
   Requirements necessary for the strength, stability, or proper operation of
an existing or proposed mechanical system, or for the public safety, health,
and general welfare, not specifically covered by this chapter, shall be
determined by the Code Enforcement Officer.
(Prior Code, § 6-3-15)
ADMINISTRATION
§ 158.040 DEPARTMENT OF MECHANICAL INSPECTION; APPOINTMENT.
   (A)   The Department of Mechanical Inspection is hereby created and the
executive official in charge thereof shall be known as the Code Enforcement
Officer.
(Prior Code, § 6-3-16)
   (B)   The Code Enforcement Officer shall be appointed by the chief
appointing authority of the jurisdiction; and the Code Enforcement Officer
shall not be removed from office except for cause and after full opportunity to
be heard on specific and relevant charges by and before the appointing
authority.
(Prior Code, § 6-3-17)
§ 158.041 DEPUTIES.
   In accordance with the prescribed procedures of this jurisdiction and with
the concurrence of the appointing authority, the Code Enforcement Officer shall
have the authority to appoint a deputy code official, other related technical
officers, inspectors, and other employees.
(Prior Code, § 6-3-18)
§ 158.042 LIABILITY.
   (A)   The Code Enforcement Officer, officer, or employee charged with the
enforcement of this chapter, while acting for the jurisdiction, shall not
thereby be rendered liable personally, and is hereby relieved from all personal
liability for any damage accruing to persons or property as a result of an act
required or permitted in the discharge of official duties.
   (B)   (1)   Any suit instituted against any office or employee because of an
act performed by that officer or employee in the lawful discharge of duties and
under the provisions of this chapter shall be defended by the legal
representative of the jurisdiction until the final termination of the
proceedings.
      (2)   The Code Enforcement Officer or any subordinate shall not be liable
for costs in an action, suit, or proceeding that is instituted in pursuance of
the provisions of this chapter; and any officer of the Department of Mechanical
Inspection, acting in good faith and without malice, shall be free from
liability for acts performed under any of its provisions or by reason of any
act or omission in the performance of official duties in connection therewith.
(Prior Code, § 6-3-19)
§ 158.043 CODE ENFORCEMENT OFFICER.
   The Code Enforcement Officer shall enforce the provisions of this chapter
and shall act on any question relative to the installation, alteration, repair,
maintenance or operation of mechanical systems, except as otherwise
specifically provided for by statutory requirements or as provided for in §§
158.044 through
158.050.
(Prior Code, § 6-3-20)
§ 158.044 RULE-MAKING AUTHORITY.
   The Code Enforcement Officer shall have authority as necessary in the
interest of public health, safety, and general welfare, to adopt and promulgate
rules and regulations; to interpret and implement the provisions of this
chapter; to secure the intent thereof; and to designate requirements applicable
because of local climatic or other conditions. Such rules shall not have the
effect of waiving structural or fire performance requirements specifically
provided for in this chapter, or of violating accepted engineering methods
involving public safety.
(Prior Code, § 6-3-21)
§ 158.045 APPLICATIONS AND PERMITS.
   The Code Enforcement Officer shall receive applications and issue permits
for the installation and alteration of mechanical systems, inspect the premises
for which such permits have been issued, and enforce compliance with the
provisions of this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 6-3-22)
§ 158.046 INSPECTIONS.
   (A)   The Code Enforcement Officer shall make all of the required
inspections, or shall accept reports of inspection by approved agencies or
individuals. All reports of such inspections shall be in writing and be
certified by a responsible officer of such approved agency or by the
responsible individual.
   (B)   The Code Enforcement Officer is authorized to engage such expert
opinion as deemed necessary to report upon unusual technical issues that arise,
subject to the approval of the appointing authority.
(Prior Code, § 6-3-23)
§ 158.047 RIGHT OF ENTRY.
   (A)   (1)   Where it is necessary to make an inspection to enforce the
provisions of this chapter, or where the Code Enforcement Officer has
reasonable cause to believe that there exists in a building or upon any
premises any conditions or violations of this chapter which make the building
or premises unsafe, unsanitary, dangerous or hazardous, the Code Enforcement
Officer shall have the authority to enter the building or premises at all
reasonable times to inspect or to perform the duties imposed upon the Code
Enforcement Officer by this chapter.
      (2)   If such building or premises is occupied, the Code Enforcement
Officer shall present credentials to the occupant and request entry.
      (3)   If such building or premises is unoccupied, the Code Enforcement
Officer shall first make a reasonable effort to locate the owner or other
person having charge or control of the building or premises and request entry.
If entry is refused, the Code Enforcement Officer has recourse to every remedy
provided by law to secure entry.
   (B)   When the Code Enforcement Officer has first obtained a proper
inspection warrant or other remedy provided by law to secure entry, an owner or
occupant or person having charge, care, or control of the building or premises
shall not fail or neglect, after proper request is made as herein provided, to
promptly permit entry therein by the Code Enforcement Officer for the purpose
of inspection and examination pursuant to this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 6-3-24)
§ 158.048 IDENTIFICATION.
   The Code Enforcement Officer shall carry proper identification when
inspecting structures or premises in the performance of duties under this
chapter.
(Prior Code, § 6-3-25)
§ 158.049 NOTICES AND ORDERS.
   The Code Enforcement Officer shall issue all necessary notices or orders to
ensure compliance with this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 6-3-26)
§ 158.050 DEPARTMENT RECORDS.
   The Code Enforcement Officer shall keep official records of applications
received, permits and certificates issued, fees collected, reports of
inspections, and notices and orders issued. Such records shall be retained in
the official records as long as the building or structure to which such records
relate remains in existence, unless otherwise provided for by other
regulations.
(Prior Code, § 6-3-27)
§ 158.051 MODIFICATIONS, MATERIALS, METHODS, EQUIPMENT, AND APPLIANCES.
   (A)    (1)   Wherever there are practical difficulties involved in carrying
out the provisions of this chapter, the Code Enforcement Officer shall have the
authority to grant modifications for individual cases; provided the Code
Enforcement Officer shall first find that special individual reason makes the
strict letter of this chapter impractical and the modification is in compliance
with the intent and purpose of this chapter and does not lessen health, life,
and fire safety requirements.
      (2)   The details of action granting modifications shall be recorded and
entered in the files of the Mechanical Inspection Department.
(Prior Code, § 6-3-28)
   (B)   The provisions of this chapter are not intended to prevent the
installation of any material or to prohibit any method of construction not
specifically prescribed by this chapter; provided that any such alternative has
been approved. An alternative material or method of construction shall be
approved where the Code Enforcement Officer finds that the proposed design is
satisfactory and complies with the intent of the provisions of this chapter,
and that the material, method, or work offered is, for the purpose intended, at
least the equivalent of that prescribed in this chapter in quality, strength,
effectiveness, fire resistance, durability, and safety.
(Prior Code, § 6-3-29)
   (C)   Whenever there is insufficient evidence of compliance with the
provisions of this chapter, or evidence that a material or method does not
conform to the requirements of this chapter, or in order to substantiate claims
for alternative materials or methods, the Code Enforcement Officer shall have
the authority to require tests as evidence of compliance to be made at no
expense to the jurisdiction.
      (1)   Test methods shall be as specified in this chapter or by other
recognized test standards. In the absence of recognized and accepted test
methods, the Code Enforcement Officer shall approve the testing procedures.
      (2)   All tests shall be performed by an approved agency.
      (3)   Reports of tests shall be retained by the Code Enforcement Officer
for the period required for retention of public records.
(Prior Code, § 6-3-30)
   (D)   Materials, equipment, appliances, and devices shall not be reused
unless such elements have been reconditioned, tested, and placed in good and
proper working condition and approved.
(Prior Code, § 6-3-31)
PERMITS AND FEES
§ 158.065 WHEN PERMITS REQUIRED.
   (A)   (1)   Any owner, authorized agent, or contractor who desires to erect,
install, enlarge, alter, repair, remove, convert, or replace a mechanical
system, the installation of which is regulated by this chapter, or to cause
such work to be done, shall first make application to the Code Enforcement
Officer and obtain the required permit for the work.
      (2)   Exception: where equipment and appliance replacements or repairs
must be performed in an emergency situation, the permit application shall be
submitted within the next working business day of the Department of Mechanical
Inspection.
(Prior Code, § 6-3-32)
   (B)   (1)   Permits shall not be required for the following:
         (a)   Portable heating appliances;
         (b)   Portable ventilation appliances and equipment;
         (c)   Portable cooling units;
         (d)   Steam, hot, or chilled water piping within any heating or
cooling equipment or appliances regulated by this chapter;
         (e)   The replacement of any minor part that does not alter the
approval of equipment or an appliance or make such equipment or appliance
unsafe;
         (f)   Portable evaporative coolers;
         (g)   Self-contained refrigeration systems that contain ten pounds
(4.5 kilograms) or less of refrigerant, and that are actuated by motors of one
horsepower (0.75 kilowatt) or less; and
         (h)   Portable fuel cell appliances that are not connected to a fixed
piping system and are not interconnected to a power grid.
      (2)   Exemption from the permit requirements of this chapter shall not be
deemed to grant authorization for work to be done in violation of the
provisions of this chapter or other laws or ordinances of this jurisdiction.
(Prior Code, § 6-3-33)
§ 158.066 APPLICATION.
   (A)   (1)   Each application for a permit, with the required fee, shall be
filed with the Code Enforcement Officer on a form furnished for that purpose
and shall contain a general description of the proposed work and its location.
The application shall be signed by the owner or an authorized agent.
      (2)   The permit application shall indicate the proposed occupancy of all
parts of the building and of that portion of the site or lot, if any, not
covered by the building or structure, and shall contain such other information
required by the Code Enforcement Officer.
   (B)   (1)   Construction documents, engineering calculations, diagrams, and
other data shall be submitted in two or more sets with each application for a
permit. The Code Enforcement Officer shall require construction documents,
computations, and specifications to be prepared and designed by a registered
design professional when required by state law.
      (2)   Construction documents shall be drawn to scale and shall be of
sufficient clarity to indicate the location, nature, and extent of the work
proposed and show in detail that the work conforms to the provisions of this
chapter. Construction documents for buildings more than two stories in height
shall indicate where penetrations will be made for mechanical systems, and the
materials and methods for maintaining required structural safety, fire-
resistance rating and fire blocking.
   (C)   Exception: the Code Enforcement Officer shall have the authority to
waive the submission of construction documents, calculations, or other data if
the nature of the work applied for is such that reviewing of construction
documents is not necessary to determine compliance with this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 6-3-34)
§ 158.067 ISSUANCE.
   (A)   The application, construction documents, and other data filed by an
applicant for a permit shall be reviewed by the Code Enforcement Officer. If
the Code Enforcement Officer finds that the proposed work conforms to the
requirements of this chapter and all laws and ordinances applicable thereto,
and that the fees specified in §
158.068 have been paid, a permit shall be issued to the applicant.
   (B)   (1)   When the Code Enforcement Officer issues the permit where
construction documents are required, the construction documents shall be
endorsed in writing and stamped “APPROVED.” Such approved construction
documents shall not be changed, modified, or altered without authorization from
the Code Enforcement Officer. Work shall be done in accordance with the
approved construction documents.
      (2)   The Code Enforcement Officer shall have the authority to issue a
permit for the construction of part of a mechanical system before the
construction documents for the entire system have been submitted or approved;
provided adequate information and detailed statements have been filed complying
with all pertinent requirements of this chapter. The holder of such permit
shall proceed at his or her own risk without assurance that the permit for the
entire mechanical system will be granted.
   (C)   The issuance of a permit or approval of construction documents shall
not be construed to be a permit for, or an approval of, any violation of any of
the provisions of this chapter or of other ordinances of the jurisdiction. A
permit presuming to give authority to violate or cancel the provisions of this
chapter shall be invalid. The issuance of a permit based upon construction
documents and other data shall not prevent the Code Enforcement Officer from
thereafter requiring the correction of errors in said construction documents
and other data or from preventing building operations from being carried on
thereunder when in violation of this chapter or of other ordinances of this
jurisdiction.
   (D)   Every permit issued by the Code Enforcement Officer under the
provisions of this chapter shall expire by limitation and become null and void
if the work authorized by such permit is not commenced within 180 days from the
date of such permit, or if the work authorized by such permit is suspended or
abandoned at any time after the work is commenced for a period of 180 days.
Before such work recommences, a new permit shall be first obtained and the fee
therefor, shall be one-half the amount required for a new permit for such work;
provided no changes have been made or will be made in the original construction
documents for such work; and provided further that such suspension or
abandonment has not exceeded one year.
   (E)   A permittee holding an unexpired permit shall have the right to apply
for an extension of time within which the permittee will commence work under
that permit when work is unable to be commenced within the time required by
this section for good and satisfactory reasons. The Code Enforcement Officer
shall extend the time for action by the permittee for a period not exceeding
180 days if there is reasonable cause. A permit shall not be extended more than
once.
   (F)   The Code Enforcement Officer shall revoke a permit or approval issued
under the provisions of this chapter in case of any false statement or
misrepresentation of fact in the application or on the construction documents
upon which the permit or approval was based.
   (G)   One set of construction documents shall be retained by the Code
Enforcement Officer until final approval of the work covered therein. One set
of approved construction documents shall be returned to the applicant, and said
set shall be kept on the site of the building or job at all times during which
the work authorized thereby is in progress.
(Prior Code, § 6-3-35)
§ 158.068 FEES.
   (A)   A permit shall not be issued until the fees prescribed in division (B)
below have been paid, nor shall an amendment to a permit be released until the
additional fee, if any, due to an increase of the mechanical system, has been
paid.
   (B)   Any person who commences work on a mechanical system before obtaining
the necessary permits shall be subject to 100% of the usual permit fee in
addition to the required permit fees.
   (C)   See §§
156.095 through
156.100 for the schedule of fees.
   (D)   See §
156.100 for fee refunds.
   (E)   Any returned check will be an additional fee of $25.
(Prior Code, § 6-3-36)
INSPECTIONS AND TESTING
§ 158.080 REQUIRED INSPECTIONS AND TESTING.
   (A)   Inspection types. The Code Enforcement Officer, upon notification from
the permit holder or the permit holder’s agent, shall make the following
inspections and other such inspections as necessary, and shall either release
that portion of the construction or shall notify the permit holder or the
permit holder’s agent of violations that must be corrected. The holder of the
permit shall be responsible for the scheduling of such inspections.
      (1)   Underground inspection shall be made after trenches or ditches are
excavated and bedded, piping installed, and before back-fill is put in place.
When excavated soil contains rocks, broken concrete, frozen chunks, and other
rubble that would damage or break the piping or cause corrosive action, clean
back-fill shall be on the job site.
      (2)   Rough-in inspection shall be made after the roof, framing, fire
blocking, and bracing are in place and all ducting and other components to be
concealed are complete, and prior to the installation of wall or ceiling
membranes.
      (3)   Final inspection shall be made upon completion of the mechanical
system.
      (4)   (a)   Exception: ground-source heat pump loop systems tested in
accordance with Section 1208.1.1 shall be permitted to be back-filled prior to
inspection.
         (b)   The requirements of this section shall not be considered to
prohibit the operation of any heating equipment or appliances installed to
replace existing heating equipment or appliances serving an occupied portion of
a structure; provided that a request for inspection of such heating equipment
or appliances has been filed with the department not more than 48 hours after
such replacement work is completed, and before any portion of such equipment or
appliances is concealed by any permanent portion of the structure.
   (B)   Approved inspection agencies. The Code Enforcement Officer shall
accept reports of approved agencies; provided that such agencies satisfy the
requirements as to qualifications and reliability.
   (C)   Evaluation and follow-up inspection services. Prior to the approval of
a prefabricated construction assembly having concealed mechanical work and the
issuance of a mechanical permit, the Code Enforcement Officer shall require the
submittal of an evaluation report on each prefabricated construction assembly,
indicating the complete details of the mechanical system, including a
description of the system and its components, the basis upon which the system
is being evaluated, test results, and similar information, and other data as
necessary for the Code Enforcement Officer to determine conformance to this
chapter.
      (1)   The Code Enforcement Officer shall designate the evaluation service
of an approved agency as the evaluation agency, and review such agency’s
evaluation report for adequacy and conformance to this chapter.
      (2)   (a)   Except where ready access is provided to mechanical systems,
service equipment, and accessories for complete inspection at the site without
disassembly or dismantling, the Code Enforcement Officer shall conduct the in-
plant inspections as frequently as necessary to ensure conformance to the
approved evaluation report or shall designate an independent, approved
inspection agency to conduct such inspections.
         (b)   The inspection agency shall furnish the Code Enforcement Officer
with the follow-up inspection manual and a report of inspections upon request,
and the mechanical system shall have an identifying label permanently affixed
to the system indicating that factory inspections have been performed.
      (3)   Required test and inspection records shall be available to the Code
Enforcement Officer at all times during the fabrication of the mechanical
system and the erection of the building, or such records as the Code
Enforcement Officer designates shall be filed.
(Prior Code, § 6-3-37)
§ 158.081 TESTING.
   Mechanical systems shall be tested as required in this chapter and in
accordance with divisions (A) through (C) below. Tests shall be made by the
permit holder and observed by the Code Enforcement Officer.
   (A)   New, altered, extended, or repaired systems. New mechanical systems
and parts of existing systems which have been altered, extended, renovated, or
repaired shall be tested as prescribed herein to disclose leaks and defects.
   (B)   Apparatus, material, and labor for tests. Apparatus, material, and
labor required for testing a mechanical system or part thereof shall be
furnished by the permit holder.
   (C)   Re-inspection and testing. Where any work or installation does not
pass an initial test or inspection, the necessary corrections shall be made so
as to achieve compliance with this chapter. The work or installation shall then
be resubmitted to the Code Enforcement Officer for inspection and testing.
(Prior Code, § 6-3-38)
§ 158.082 APPROVAL.
   After the prescribed tests and inspections indicate that the work complies
in all respects with this chapter, a notice of approval shall be issued by the
Code Enforcement Officer.
(Prior Code, § 6-3-39)
§ 158.083 TEMPORARY CONNECTION.
   The Code Enforcement Officer shall have the authority to authorize the
temporary connection of a mechanical system to the sources of energy for the
purpose of testing mechanical systems or for use under a temporary certificate
of occupancy.
(Prior Code, § 6-3-40)
STOP WORK ORDERS
§ 158.095 NOTICE.
   (A)   Upon notice from the Code Enforcement Officer that mechanical work is
being done contrary to the provisions of this Code or in a dangerous or unsafe
manner, such work shall immediately cease. Such notice shall be in writing and
shall be given to the owner of the property, or to the owner’s agent, or to the
person doing the work.
   (B)   The notice shall state the conditions under which work is authorized
to resume. Where an emergency exists, the Code Enforcement Officer shall not be
required to give a written notice prior to stopping the work.
(Prior Code, § 6-3-45)
§ 158.096 ABATEMENT OF VIOLATION.
   The imposition of the penalties herein prescribed shall not preclude the
legal officer of the jurisdiction from instituting appropriate action to
prevent unlawful construction or to restrain, correct, or abate a violation, or
to prevent illegal occupancy of a building, structure, or premises, or to stop
an illegal act, conduct, business, or utilization of the mechanical system on
or about any premises.
(Prior Code, § 6-3-46)
§ 158.097 UNSAFE MECHANICAL SYSTEMS.
   (A)   Declaration. A mechanical system that is unsafe, constitutes a fire or
health hazard, or is otherwise dangerous to human life, as regulated by this
chapter, is hereby declared as an unsafe mechanical system. Use of a mechanical
system regulated by this chapter constituting a hazard to health, safety, or
welfare by reason of inadequate maintenance, dilapidation, fire hazard,
disaster, damage, or abandonment is hereby declared an unsafe use. Such unsafe
equipment and appliances are hereby declared to be a public nuisance and shall
be abated by repair, rehabilitation, demolition, or removal.
   (B)   Authority to condemn mechanical systems.
      (1)   Whenever the Code Enforcement Officer determines that any
mechanical system, or portion thereof regulated by this chapter has become
hazardous to life, health, property, or has become unsanitary, the Code
Enforcement Officer shall order, in writing, that such system either be removed
or restored to a safe condition. A time limit for compliance with such order
shall be specified in the written notice. A person shall not use or maintain a
defective mechanical system after receiving such notice.
      (2)   When such mechanical system is to be disconnected, written notice,
as prescribed in §
158.005(C), shall be given. In cases of immediate danger to life or property,
such disconnection shall be made immediately without such notice.
   (C)   Authority to order disconnection of energy sources. The Code
Enforcement Officer shall have the authority to order disconnection of energy
sources supplied to a building, structure, or mechanical system regulated by
this code, when it is determined that the mechanical system or any portion
thereof has become hazardous or unsafe. Written notice of such order to
disconnect service and the causes therefor shall be given within 24 hours to
the owner and occupant of such building, structure, or premises; provided,
however, that in cases of immediate danger to life or property, such
disconnection shall be made immediately without such notice. Where energy
sources are provided by a public utility, the Code Enforcement Officer shall
immediately notify the serving utility in writing of the issuance of such order
to disconnect.
   (D)   Connection after order to disconnect.
      (1)   A person shall not make energy source connections to mechanical
systems regulated by this code which have been disconnected or ordered to be
disconnected by the Code Enforcement Officer, or the use of which has been
ordered to be discontinued by the Code Enforcement Officer until the Code
Enforcement Officer authorizes the reconnection and use of such mechanical
systems.
      (2)   When a mechanical system is maintained in violation of this
chapter, and in violation of a notice issued pursuant to the provisions of this
section, the Code Enforcement Officer shall institute appropriate action to
prevent, restrain, correct, or abate the violation.
(Prior Code, § 6-3-47)
§ 158.098 MEANS OF APPEAL.
   See §§ 156.165 through 156.169 for further provisions.
(Prior Code, § 6-3-48)
§ 158.999 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person who violates a provision of this chapter or fails to comply
with any of the requirements thereof or who erects, constructs, alters, or
repairs a building or structure in violation of the approved construction
documents or directive of the Building Official, or of a permit or certificate
issued under the provisions of this chapter, shall be subject being fined not
less than $75, nor more than $750, plus costs. Each day that a violation
continues shall be considered a separate offense.
(Prior Code, § 6-3-44)
   (B)   Any person who shall continue any work on the system after having been
served with a stop work order, as described in §
158.095, except such work as that person is directed to perform to remove a
violation or unsafe condition, shall be liable for a fine of not less than $75,
nor more than $750.
(Prior Code, § 6-3-45)
CHAPTER 159: FUEL GAS CODE
Section
General Provisions
   
159.001 Adoption
   
159.002 Title
   
159.003 Scope
   
159.004 Appendices
   
159.005 Intent
   
159.006 Violations
   
159.007 Amendments
Applicability
   
159.020 General
   
159.021 Existing installations
   
159.022 Maintenance
   
159.023 Additions, alterations, or repairs
   
159.024 Change in occupancy
   
159.025 Historic buildings
   
159.026 Moved buildings
   
159.027 Referenced codes and standards
   
159.028 Requirements not covered by code
Administration
   
159.040 Department of Inspection; appointment
   
159.041 Deputies
   
159.042 Liability
   
159.043 Code Enforcement Officer
   
159.044 Rule-making authority
   
159.045 Applications and permits
   
159.046 Inspections
   
159.047 Right of entry
   
159.048 Identification
   
159.049 Notices and orders
   
159.050 Department records
   
159.051 Modifications, materials, methods, equipment, and appliances
Permits and Fees
   
159.065 When permits required
   
159.066 Application
   
159.067 Issuance
   
159.068 Fees
Inspections and Testing
   
159.080 Required inspections and testing
   
159.081 Testing
   
159.082 Approval
   
159.083 Temporary connection
Stop Work Orders
   
159.095 Notice
   
159.096 Abatement of violation
   
159.097 Unsafe installations
   
159.098 Means of appeal
 
   
159.999 Penalty
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 159.001 ADOPTION.
   (A)   A certain document, three copies of which are on file in the office of
the County Zoning Administrator, being marked and designated as “The
International Fuel Gas Code, 2003 edition,” as published by the International
Code Council, be and is hereby adopted as the Building Code of the County
Board; for the control of buildings and structures as herein provided; and each
and all of the regulations, provisions, penalties, conditions, and terms of
said International Fuel Gas Code, 2003 edition, are hereby referred to,
adopted, and made a part hereof as if fully set out in this chapter, with the
additions, insertions, deletions, and changes, if any, prescribed § 159.007.
(Prior Code, § 6-4-1)
   (B)   Administration and enforcement of the International Fuel Gas Code,
2003 edition, is hereby amended to read as follows.
(Prior Code, § 6-4-2)
§ 159.002 TITLE.
   These regulations shall be known as “the Fuel Gas Code of St. Clair County,”
hereinafter referred to as “this Code” or “this chapter.”
(Prior Code, § 6-4-3)
§ 159.003 SCOPE.
   This chapter shall apply to the installation of fuel-gas piping systems,
fuel-gas utilization equipment, and related accessories in accordance with
divisions (A) through (E) below.
   (A)   Exceptions. Exceptions to these provisions include:
      (1)   Detached one- and two-family dwellings and multiple single-family
dwellings (town houses) not more than three stories high with separate means of
egress and their accessory structures shall comply with the International
Residential Code; and
      (2)   As an alternative to the provisions of this chapter, fuel-gas
piping systems, fuel-gas utilization equipment, and related accessories in
existing buildings that are undergoing repairs, alterations, changes in
occupancy, or construction of additions shall be permitted to comply with the
provisions of Chapter 150.
   (B)   Gaseous hydrogen systems. Gaseous hydrogen systems shall be regulated
by Chapter 7.
   (C)   Piping systems. These regulations cover piping systems for natural gas
with an operating pressure of 125 pounds per square inch gauge (psig) (862 kPa
gauge) or less, and for LP-gas with an operating pressure of 20 psig (140 kPa
gauge) or less, except as provided in Section 402.6.1. Coverage shall extend
from the point of delivery to the outlet of the equipment shut-off valves.
Piping systems requirements shall include design, materials, components,
fabrication, assembly, installation, testing, inspection, operation, and
maintenance.
   (D)   Gas utilization equipment. Requirements for gas utilization equipment
and related accessories shall include installation, combustion, and ventilation
air and venting and connections to piping systems.
   (E)   Systems and equipment outside the scope. This chapter shall not apply
to the following:
      (1)   Portable LP-gas equipment of all types that is not connected to a
fixed fuel piping system;
      (2)   Installation of farm equipment such as brooders, dehydrators,
dryers, and irrigation equipment;
      (3)   Raw material (feedstock) applications except for piping to special
atmosphere generators;
      (4)   Oxygen-fuel gas cutting and welding systems;
      (5)   Industrial gas applications using gases such as acetylene and
acetylenic compounds, hydrogen, ammonia, carbon monoxide, oxygen, and nitrogen;
      (6)   Petroleum refineries, pipeline compressor, or pumping stations,
loading terminals, compounding plants, refinery tank farms, and natural gas
processing plants;
      (7)   Integrated chemical plants or portions of such plants where
flammable or combustible liquids or gases are produced by, or used in, chemical
reactions;
      (8)   LP-gas installations at utility gas plants;
      (9)   Liquefied natural gas (LNG) installations;
      (10)   Fuel gas piping in power and atomic energy plants;
      (11)   Proprietary items of equipment, apparatus, or instruments such as
gas-generating sets, compressors, and calorimeters;
      (12)   LP-gas equipment for vaporization, gas mixing, and gas
manufacturing;
      (13)   Temporary LP-gas piping for buildings under construction or
renovation that is not to become part of the permanent piping system;
      (14)   Installation of LP-gas systems for railroad switch heating;
      (15)   Installation of hydrogen gas, LP-gas, and compressed natural gas
(CNG) systems on vehicles;
      (16)   Except as provided in Section 401.1.1 of the International
Building Code, gas piping, meters, gas pressure regulators, and other
appurtenances used by the serving gas supplier in the distribution of gas,
other than undiluted LP-gas;
      (17)   Building design and construction, except as specified herein;
      (18)   Piping systems for mixtures of gas and air within the flammable
range with an operating pressure greater than 10 psig (69 kPa gauge); and
      (19)   Portable fuel cell appliances that are neither connected to a
fixed piping system, nor interconnected to a power grid.
   (F)   Other fuels. The requirements for the design, installation,
maintenance, alteration, and inspection of mechanical systems operating with
fuels other than fuel gas shall be regulated by the International Mechanical
Code.
(Prior Code, § 6-4-4)
§ 159.004 APPENDICES.
   Provisions in the appendices shall not apply unless specifically adopted.
(Prior Code, § 6-4-5)
§ 159.005 INTENT.
   The purpose of this chapter is to provide minimum standards to safeguard
life or limb, health, property, and public welfare by regulating and
controlling the design, construction, installation, quality of materials,
location, operation and maintenance, or use of fuel gas systems.
(Prior Code, § 6-4-6)
§ 159.006 VIOLATIONS.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person, firm, or corporation to erect,
construct, alter, repair, remove, demolish, or utilize an installation, or
cause same to be done, in conflict with or in violation of any of the
provisions of this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 6-4-42)
   (B)   The Code Enforcement Officer shall serve a notice of violation or
order to the person responsible for the erection, installation, alteration,
extension, repair, removal, or demolition of work in violation of the
provisions of this chapter, or in violation of a detail statement or the
approved construction documents thereunder, or in violation of a permit or
certificate issued under the provisions of this chapter. Such order shall
direct the discontinuance of the illegal action or condition and the abatement
of the violation.
(Prior Code, § 6-4-43)
   (C)   If the notice of violation is not complied with promptly, the Code
Enforcement Officer shall request the legal counsel of the jurisdiction to
institute the appropriate proceeding at law or in equity to restrain, correct,
or abate such violation, or to require the removal or termination of the
unlawful occupancy of the structure in violation of the provisions of this
chapter or of the order or direction made pursuant thereto.
(Prior Code, § 6-4-44)
Penalty, see § 159.999
§ 159.007 AMENDMENTS.
   The following provisions shall further apply and shall supersede any and all
references listed within the adopted edition of the International Fuel Gas
Code, 2003 edition.
   (A)   ICC Electrical Code. Delete all and any reference to the ICC
Electrical Code and insert “the National Electric Code, 2005 edition.”
   (B)   International Plumbing Code.
      (1)   Delete all and any reference to the International Plumbing Code and
add the following: “The County Building Official shall require that the
provisions of the current ‘Illinois Plumbing License Law’ 225 Illinois Compiled
Statutes 320/0.01 et seq., as presently in force or as the same may be
hereafter amended or modified and the same is hereby incorporated herein by
reference and adopted as the standard for the purposes of this chapter.
      (2)   Any conflicts concerning the provisions of these codes shall be
determined by the strictest standard contained in the code provisions.”
(Prior Code, § 6-4-50)
APPLICABILITY
§ 159.020 GENERAL.
   (A)   The provisions of this chapter shall apply to all matters affecting or
relating to structures and premises, as set forth in Section 101.
   (B)   Where, in a specific case, different sections of this chapter specify
different materials, methods of construction, or other requirements, the most
restrictive shall govern.
(Prior Code, § 6-4-8)
§ 159.021 EXISTING INSTALLATIONS.
   Except as otherwise provided for in this chapter, a provision in this
chapter shall not require the removal, alteration, or abandonment of, nor
prevent the continued utilization and maintenance of, existing installations
lawfully in existence at the time of the adoption of this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 6-4-9)
§ 159.022 MAINTENANCE.
   (A)   Installations, both existing and new, and parts thereof shall be
maintained in proper operating condition in accordance with the original design
and in a safe and sanitary condition.
   (B)   Devices or safeguards which are required by this chapter shall be
maintained in compliance with the code edition under which they were installed.
   (C)   The owner or the owner’s designated agent shall be responsible for
maintenance of installations. To determine compliance with this provision, the
Code Enforcement Officer shall have the authority to require an installation to
be reinspected.
(Prior Code, § 6-4-10)
§ 159.023 ADDITIONS, ALTERATIONS, OR REPAIRS.
   (A)   (1)   Additions, alterations, renovations, or repairs to installations
shall conform to that required for a new installations without requiring the
existing installation to comply with all of the requirements of this chapter.
      (2)   Additions, alterations, or repairs shall not cause an existing
installation to become unsafe, hazardous, or overloaded.
   (B)   Minor additions, alterations, renovations, and repairs to existing
installations shall meet the provisions for new construction, unless such work
is done in the same manner and arrangement as was in the existing system, is
not hazardous and is approved.
(Prior Code, § 6-4-11)
§ 159.024 CHANGE IN OCCUPANCY.
   It shall be unlawful to make a change in the occupancy of any structure
which will subject the structure to the special provisions of this chapter
applicable to the new occupancy without approval. The Code Enforcement Officer
shall certify that such structure meets the intent of the provisions of law
governing building construction for the proposed new occupancy and that such
change of occupancy does not result in any hazard to the public health, safety,
or welfare.
(Prior Code, § 6-4-12)
§ 159.025 HISTORIC BUILDINGS.
   The provisions of this chapter relating to the construction, alteration,
repair, enlargement, restoration, relocation, or moving of buildings or
structures shall not be mandatory for existing buildings or structures
identified and classified by the state or local jurisdiction as historic
buildings when such buildings or structures are judged by the Code Enforcement
Officer to be safe and in the public interest of health, safety, and welfare
regarding any proposed construction, alteration, repair, enlargement,
restoration, relocation, or moving of buildings.
(Prior Code, § 6-4-13)
§ 159.026 MOVED BUILDINGS.
   Except as determined, installations that are a part of buildings or
structures moved into or within the jurisdiction shall comply with the
provisions of this chapter for new installations.
(Prior Code, § 6-4-14)
§ 159.027 REFERENCED CODES AND STANDARDS.
   (A)   The codes and standards referenced in this chapter shall be those that
are listed herein and such codes and standards shall be considered part of the
requirements of this chapter to the prescribed extent of each such reference.
Where differences occur between provisions of this chapter and the referenced
standards, the provisions of this chapter shall apply.
   (B)   Exception: where enforcement of a code provision would violate the
conditions of the listing of the equipment or appliance, the conditions of the
listing and the manufacturer’s installation instructions shall apply.
§ 159.028 REQUIREMENTS NOT COVERED BY CODE.
   Requirements necessary for the strength, stability, or proper operation of
an existing or proposed installation, or for the public safety, health, and
general welfare not specifically covered by this chapter shall be determined by
the Code Enforcement Officer.
(Prior Code, § 6-4-16)
ADMINISTRATION
§ 159.040 DEPARTMENT OF INSPECTION; APPOINTMENT.
   (A)   The Department of Inspection is hereby created and the executive
official in charge thereof shall be known as the Code Enforcement Officer.
(Prior Code, § 6-4-17)
   (B)   The Code Enforcement Officer shall be appointed by the chief
appointing authority of the jurisdiction; and the Code Enforcement Officer
shall not be removed from office except for cause and after full opportunity to
be heard on specific and relevant charges by and before the appointing
authority.
(Prior Code, § 6-4-18)
§ 159.041 DEPUTIES.
   In accordance with the prescribed procedures of this jurisdiction and with
the concurrence of the appointing authority, the Code Enforcement Officer shall
have the authority to appoint a deputy code official, other related technical
officers, inspectors, and other employees.
(Prior Code, § 6-4-19)
§ 159.042 LIABILITY.
   (A)   The Code Enforcement Officer, officer, or employee charged with the
enforcement of this Code, while acting for the jurisdiction, shall not thereby
be rendered liable personally, and is hereby relieved from all personal
liability for any damage accruing to persons or property as a result of an act
required or permitted in the discharge of official duties.
   (B)   (1)   Any suit instituted against any officer or employee because of
an act performed by that officer or employee in the lawful discharge of duties
and under the provisions of this chapter shall be defended by the legal
representative of the jurisdiction until the final termination of the
proceedings.
      (2)   The Code Enforcement Officer or any subordinate shall not be liable
for costs in an action, suit, or proceeding that is instituted in pursuance of
the provisions of this chapter; and any officer of the Department of
Inspection, acting in good faith and without malice, shall be free from
liability for acts performed under any of its provisions or by reason of any
act or omission in the performance of official duties in connection therewith.
(Prior Code, § 6-4-20)
§ 159.043 CODE ENFORCEMENT OFFICER.
   The Code Enforcement Officer shall enforce the provisions of this chapter
and shall act on any question relative to the installation, alteration, repair,
maintenance, or operation of systems, except as otherwise specifically provided
for by statutory requirements or as provided for in §§ 159.044 through 159.050
(Prior Code, § 6-4-21)
§ 159.044 RULE-MAKING AUTHORITY.
   (A)   The Code Enforcement Officer shall have authority as necessary in the
interest of public health, safety, and general welfare to adopt and promulgate
rules and regulations; interpret and implement the provisions of this chapter;
to secure the intent thereof and designate requirements applicable because of
local climatic or other conditions.
   (B)   Such rules shall not have the effect of waiving structural or fire
performance requirements specifically provided for in this chapter, or of
violating accepted engineering methods involving public safety.
(Prior Code, § 6-4-22)
§ 159.045 APPLICATIONS AND PERMITS.
   The Code Enforcement Officer shall receive applications and issue permits
for installations and alterations under the scope of this chapter, inspect the
premises for which such permits have been issued and enforce compliance with
the provisions of this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 6-4-23)
§ 159.046 INSPECTIONS.
   (A)   (1)   The Code Enforcement Officer shall make all of the required
inspections, or shall accept reports of inspection by approved agencies or
individuals.
      (2)   All reports of such inspections shall be in writing and shall be
certified by a responsible officer of such approved agency or by the
responsible individual.
   (B)   The Code Enforcement Officer is authorized to engage such expert
opinion as deemed necessary to report upon unusual technical issues that arise,
subject to the approval of the appointing authority.
(Prior Code, § 6-4-24)
§ 159.047 RIGHT OF ENTRY.
   (A)   (1)   Where it is necessary to make an inspection to enforce the
provisions of this chapter, or whenever the Code Enforcement Officer has
reasonable cause to believe that there exists in a building or upon any
premises any conditions or violations of this chapter that make the building or
premises unsafe, dangerous, or hazardous, the Code Enforcement Officer shall
have the authority to enter the building or premises at all reasonable times to
inspect or to perform the duties imposed upon the Code Enforcement Officer by
this chapter.
      (2)   (a)   If such building or premises is occupied, the Code
Enforcement Officer shall present credentials to the occupant and request
entry.
         (b)   If such building or premises is unoccupied, the Code Enforcement
Officer shall first make a reasonable effort to locate the owner or other
person having charge or control of the building or premises and request entry.
         (c)   If entry is refused, the Code Enforcement Officer has recourse
to every remedy provided by law to secure entry.
   (B)   When the Code Enforcement Officer has first obtained a proper
inspection warrant or other remedy provided by law to secure entry, an owner or
occupant or person having charge, care, or control of the building or premises
shall not fail or neglect, after proper request is made as herein provided, to
promptly permit entry therein by the Code Enforcement Officer for the purpose
of inspection and examination pursuant to this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 6-4-25)
§ 159.048 IDENTIFICATION.
   The Code Enforcement Officer shall carry proper identification when
inspecting structures or premises in the performance of duties under this
chapter.
(Prior Code, § 6-4-26)
§ 159.049 NOTICES AND ORDERS.
   The Code Enforcement Officer shall issue all necessary notices or orders to
ensure compliance with this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 6-4-27)
§ 159.050 DEPARTMENT RECORDS.
   The Code Enforcement Officer shall keep official records of applications
received, permits, and certificates issued, fees collected, reports of
inspections, and notices and orders issued. Such records shall be retained in
the official records as long as the building or structure to which such records
relate remains in existence, unless otherwise provided for by other
regulations.
(Prior Code, § 6-4-28)
§ 159.051 MODIFICATIONS, MATERIALS, METHODS, EQUIPMENT, AND APPLIANCES.
   (A)   (1)   Wherever there are practical difficulties involved in carrying
out the provisions of this chapter, the Code Enforcement Officer shall have the
authority to grant modifications for individual cases; provided the Code
Enforcement Officer shall first find that special individual reason makes the
strict letter of this Code impractical and the modification is in compliance
with the intent and purpose of this chapter and does not lessen health, life,
and fire safety requirements.
      (2)   The details of action granting modifications shall be recorded and
entered in the files of the Department of Inspection.
(Prior Code, § 6-4-29)
   (B)   (1)   The provisions of this chapter are not intended to prevent the
installation of any material or to prohibit any method of construction not
specifically prescribed by this chapter; provided that any such alternative has
been approved.
      (2)   An alternative material or method of construction shall be approved
where the Code Enforcement Officer finds that the proposed design is
satisfactory and complies with the intent of the provisions of this chapter,
and that the material, method or work offered is, for the purpose intended, at
least the equivalent of that prescribed in this chapter in quality, strength,
effectiveness, fire resistance, durability, and safety.
(Prior Code, § 6-4-30)
   (C)   Whenever there is insufficient evidence of compliance with the
provisions of this chapter, evidence that a material or method does not conform
to the requirements of this chapter, or in order to substantiate claims for
alternative materials or methods, the Code Enforcement Officer shall have the
authority to require tests as evidence of compliance to be made at no expense
to the jurisdiction.
      (1)   Test methods shall be as specified in this chapter or by other
recognized test standards. In the absence of recognized and accepted test
methods, the Code Enforcement Officer shall approve the testing procedures.
      (2)   All tests shall be performed by an approved agency.
      (3)   Reports of tests shall be retained by the Code Enforcement Officer
for the period required for retention of public records.
(Prior Code, § 6-4-31)
   (D)   Materials, equipment, and devices shall not be reused unless such
elements have been reconditioned, tested, and placed in good and proper working
condition, and approved.
(Prior Code, § 6-4-32)
PERMITS AND FEES
§ 159.065 WHEN PERMITS REQUIRED.
   (A)   (1)   Any owner, authorized agent, or contractor who desires to erect,
install, enlarge, alter, repair, remove, convert, or replace an installation
regulated by this chapter, or to cause such work to be done, shall first make
application to the Code Enforcement Officer and obtain the required permit for
the work.
      (2)   Exception: where equipment replacements and repairs are required to
be performed in an emergency situation, the permit application shall be
submitted within the next working business day of the Department of Inspection.
(Prior Code, § 6-4-33)
   (B)   (1)   Permits shall not be required for the following:
         (a)   Any portable heating appliance; or
         (b)   Replacement of any minor component of equipment that does not
alter approval of such equipment or make such equipment unsafe.
      (2)   Exemption from the permit requirements of this chapter shall not be
deemed to grant authorization for work to be done in violation of the
provisions of this chapter or of other laws or ordinances of this jurisdiction.
(Prior Code, § 6-4-34)
§ 159.066 APPLICATION.
   (A)   Each application for a permit, with the required fee, shall be filed
with the Code Enforcement Officer on a form furnished for that purpose and
shall contain a general description of the proposed work and its location. The
application shall be signed by the owner or an authorized agent. The permit
application shall indicate the proposed occupancy of all parts of the building
and of that portion of the site or lot, if any, not covered by the building or
structure and shall contain such other information required by the Code
Enforcement Officer.
   (B)   Construction documents, engineering calculations, diagrams, and other
data shall be submitted in two or more sets with each application for a permit.
The Code Enforcement Officer shall require construction documents,
computations, and specifications to be prepared and designed by a registered
design professional when required by state law. Construction documents shall be
drawn to scale and shall be of sufficient clarity to indicate the location,
nature, and extent of the work proposed and show in detail that the work
conforms to the provisions of this chapter. Construction documents for
buildings more than two stories in height shall indicate where penetrations
will be made for installations and shall indicate the materials and methods for
maintaining required structural safety, fire-resistance rating, and fire
blocking.
   (C)   Exception: the Code Enforcement Officer shall have the authority to
waive the submission of construction documents, calculations, or other data if
the nature of the work applied for is such that reviewing of construction
documents is not necessary to determine compliance with this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 6-4-35)
§ 159.067 ISSUANCE.
   (A)   Review. The application, construction documents, and other data filed
by an applicant for a permit shall be reviewed by the Code Enforcement Officer.
If the Code Enforcement Officer finds that the proposed work conforms to the
requirements of this chapter and all laws and ordinances applicable thereto,
and that the fees specified in §
159.068 have been paid, a permit shall be issued to the applicant.
   (B)   Approved construction documents.
      (1)   When the Code Enforcement Officer issues the permit where
construction documents are required, the construction documents shall be
endorsed in writing and stamped “APPROVED.” Such approved construction
documents shall not be changed, modified, or altered without authorization from
the Code Enforcement Officer. Work shall be done in accordance with the
approved construction documents.
      (2)   The Code Enforcement Officer shall have the authority to issue a
permit for the construction of part of an installation before the construction
documents for the entire installation have been submitted or approved, provided
adequate information and detailed statements have been filed complying with all
pertinent requirements of this chapter. The holder of such permit shall proceed
at his or her own risk without assurance that the permit for the entire
installation will be granted.
   (C)   Validity. The issuance of a permit or approval of construction
documents shall not be construed to be a permit for, or an approval of, any
violation of any of the provisions of this chapter or of other ordinances of
the jurisdiction. A permit presuming to give authority to violate or cancel the
provisions of this chapter shall be invalid. The issuance of a permit based
upon construction documents and other data shall not prevent the Code
Enforcement Officer from thereafter requiring the correction of errors in said
construction documents and other data or from preventing building operations
from being carried on thereunder when in violation of this chapter or of other
ordinances of this jurisdiction.
   (D)   Expiration. Every permit issued by the Code Enforcement Officer under
the provisions of this chapter shall expire by limitation and become null and
void if the work authorized by such permit is not commenced within 180 days
from the date of such permit, or is suspended or abandoned at any time after
the work is commenced for a period of 180 days. Before such work recommences, a
new permit shall be first obtained and the fee therefor shall be one-half the
amount required for a new permit for such work; provided no changes have been
or will be made in the original construction documents for such work; and
further provided that such suspension or abandonment has not exceeded one year.
   (E)   Extensions. A permittee holding an unexpired permit shall have the
right to apply for an extension of time within which he or she will commence
work under that permit when work is unable to be commenced within the time
required by this section for good and satisfactory reasons. The Code
Enforcement Officer shall extend the time for action by the permittee for a
period not exceeding 180 days if there is reasonable cause. A permit shall not
be extended more than once. The fee for an extension shall be one-half the
amount required for a new permit for such work.
   (F)   Suspension or revocation of permit. The Code Enforcement Officer shall
revoke a permit or approval issued under the provisions of this chapter in case
of any false statement or misrepresentation of fact in the application or on
the construction documents upon which the permit or approval was based.
   (G)   Retention of construction documents. One set of construction documents
shall be retained by the Code Enforcement Officer until final approval of the
work covered therein. One set of approved construction documents shall be
returned to the applicant, and said set shall be kept on the site of the
building or work at all times during which the work authorized thereby is in
progress.
(Prior Code, § 6-4-36)
§ 159.068 FEES.
   (A)   A permit shall not be issued until the fees prescribed in division (A)
(2) below have been paid, nor shall an amendment to a permit be released until
the additional fee, if any, due to an increase of the installation, has been
paid.
      (1)   Any person who commences work on an installation before obtaining
the necessary permits shall be subject to 100% of the usual permit fee in
addition to the required permit fees.
      (2)   See §§ 156.095 through 156.100 for the fee schedule.
      (3)   See § 156.100 for fee refunds.
   (B)   The Code Enforcement Officer shall not authorize the refunding of any
fee paid, except upon written application filed by the original permittee not
later than 180 days after the date of fee payment.
(Prior Code, § 6-4-37)
INSPECTIONS AND TESTING
§ 159.080 REQUIRED INSPECTIONS AND TESTING.
   (A)   (1)   The Code Enforcement Officer, upon notification from the permit
holder or the permit holder’s agent, shall make the following inspections and
other such inspections as necessary, and shall either release that portion of
the construction or notify the permit holder or the permit holder’s agent of
violations that are required to be corrected.
      (2)   The holder of the permit shall be responsible for the scheduling of
such inspections.
         (a)   Underground inspection shall be made after trenches or ditches
are excavated and bedded, piping is installed, and before back-fill is put in
place.
         (b)   When excavated soil contains rocks, broken concrete, frozen
chunks, and other rubble that would damage or break the piping or cause
corrosive action, clean back-fill shall be on the job site.
         (c)   Rough-in inspection shall be made after the roof, framing, fire
blocking, and bracing are in place and components to be concealed are complete,
and prior to the installation of wall or ceiling membranes.
         (d)   Final inspection shall be made upon completion of the
installation.
   (B)   The requirements of this section shall not be considered to prohibit
the operation of any heating equipment installed to replace existing heating
equipment serving an occupied portion of a structure in the event a request for
inspection of such heating equipment has been filed with the department not
more than 48 hours after replacement work is completed, and before any portion
of such equipment is concealed by any permanent portion of the structure.
   (C)   The Code Enforcement Officer shall accept reports of approved
agencies; provided that such agencies satisfy the requirements as to
qualifications and reliability.
   (D)   Prior to the approval of a prefabricated construction assembly having
concealed work and the issuance of a permit, the Code Enforcement Officer shall
require the submittal of an evaluation report on each prefabricated
construction assembly, indicating the complete details of the installation,
including a description of the system and its components, the basis upon which
the system is being evaluated, test results and similar information and other
data as necessary for the Code Enforcement Officer to determine conformance to
this chapter.
      (1)   The Code Enforcement Officer shall designate the evaluation service
of an approved agency as the evaluation agency, and review such agency’s
evaluation report for adequacy and conformance to this chapter.
      (2)   Except where ready access is provided to installations, service
equipment and accessories for complete inspection at the site without
disassembly or dismantling, the Code Enforcement Officer shall conduct the in-
plant inspections as frequently as necessary to ensure conformance to the
approved evaluation report or shall designate an independent, approved
inspection agency to conduct such inspections.
      (3)   The inspection agency shall furnish the Code Enforcement Officer
with the follow- up inspection manual and a report of inspections upon request,
and the installation shall have an identifying label permanently affixed to the
system indicating that factory inspections have been performed.
      (3)   Required test and inspection records shall be available to the Code
Enforcement Officer at all times during the fabrication of the installation and
the erection of the building; or such records as the Code Enforcement Officer
designates shall be filed.
(Prior Code, § 6-4-38)
§ 159.081 TESTING.
   (A)   Installations shall be tested as required in this chapter and in
accordance with division (B) below.
   (B)   (1)   Tests shall be made by the permit holder and observed by the
Code Enforcement Officer. New installations and parts of existing systems,
which have been altered, extended, renovated, or repaired, shall be tested as
prescribed herein to disclose leaks and defects.
      (2)   Apparatus, instruments, material, and labor required for testing an
installation or part thereof shall be furnished by the permit holder. Where any
work or installation does not pass an initial test or inspection, the necessary
corrections shall be made so as to achieve compliance with this chapter. The
work or installation shall then be resubmitted to the Code Enforcement Officer
for inspection and testing.
(Prior Code, § 6-4-39)
§ 159.082 APPROVAL.
   After the prescribed tests and inspections indicate that the work complies
in all respects with this chapter, a notice of approval shall be issued by the
Code Enforcement Officer.
(Prior Code, § 6-4-40)
§ 159.083 TEMPORARY CONNECTION.
   The Code Enforcement Officer shall have the authority to authorize the
temporary connection of an installation to the sources of energy for the
purpose of testing the installation or for use under a temporary certificate of
occupancy.
(Prior Code, § 6-4-41)
STOP WORK ORDERS
§ 159.095 NOTICE.
   (A)   Upon notice from the Code Enforcement Officer that work is being done
contrary to the provisions of this chapter or in a dangerous or unsafe manner,
such work shall immediately cease.
   (B)   Such notice shall be in writing and shall be given to the owner of the
property, or to the owner’s agent, or the person doing the work. The notice
shall state the conditions under which work is authorized to resume.
   (C)   Where an emergency exists, the Code Enforcement Officer shall not be
required to give a written notice prior to stopping the work.
(Prior Code, § 6-4-46)
§ 159.096 ABATEMENT OF VIOLATION.
   The imposition of the penalties herein prescribed shall not preclude the
legal officer of the jurisdiction from instituting appropriate action to
prevent unlawful construction, restrain, correct, or abate a violation, prevent
illegal occupancy of a building, structure or premises, or to stop an illegal
act, conduct, business, or utilization of the installations on or about any
premises.
(Prior Code, § 6-4-47)
§ 159.097 UNSAFE INSTALLATIONS.
   (A)   An installation that is unsafe, constitutes a fire or health hazard,
or is otherwise dangerous to human life, as regulated by this chapter, is
hereby declared as an unsafe installation. Use of an installation regulated by
this chapter constituting a hazard to health, safety, or welfare by reason of
inadequate maintenance, dilapidation, fire hazard, disaster, damage, or
abandonment is hereby declared an unsafe use. Such unsafe installations are
hereby declared to be a public nuisance and shall be abated by repair,
rehabilitation, demolition, or removal.
   (B)   Whenever the Code Enforcement Officer determines that any
installation, or portion thereof, regulated by this chapter has become
hazardous to life, health, or property, he or she shall order in writing that
such installations either be removed or restored to a safe condition. A time
limit for compliance with such order shall be specified in the written notice.
A person shall not use or maintain a defective installation after receiving
such notice. When such installation is to be disconnected, written notice as
prescribed shall be given. In cases of immediate danger to life or property,
such disconnection shall be made immediately without such notice.
   (C)   The Code Enforcement Officer shall have the authority to require
disconnection of utility service to the building, structure, or system
regulated by the technical codes in case of emergency where necessary to
eliminate an immediate hazard to life or property. The Code Enforcement Officer
shall notify the serving utility, and wherever possible, the owner and occupant
of the building, structure, or service system of the decision to disconnect
prior to taking such action. If not notified prior to disconnection, the owner
or occupant of the building, structure, or service system shall be notified in
writing, as soon as practicable thereafter.
   (D)   A person shall not make energy source connections to installations
regulated by this chapter which have been disconnected or ordered to be
disconnected by the Code Enforcement Officer, or the use of which has been
ordered to be discontinued by the Code Enforcement Officer until the Code
Enforcement Officer authorizes the reconnection and use of such installations.
When an installation is maintained in violation of this chapter, and in
violation of a notice issued pursuant to the provisions of this section, the
Code Enforcement Officer shall institute appropriate action to prevent,
restrain, correct, or abate the violation.
(Prior Code, § 6-4-48)
§ 159.098 MEANS OF APPEAL.
   See §§ 156.165 through 156.169.
(Prior Code, § 6-4-49)
§ 159.999 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person who violates a provision of this chapter or fails to comply
with any of the requirements thereof or who erects, constructs, alters, or
repairs a building or structure in violation of the approved construction
documents or directive of the Building Official, or of a permit or certificate
issued under the provisions of this chapter, shall be subject being fined not
less than $75, nor more than $750, plus costs. Each day that a violation
continues shall be considered a separate offense.
(Prior Code, § 6-4-45)
   (B)   Any person who shall continue any work on the system after having been
served with a stop work order via § 159.095, except such work as that person is
directed to perform to remove a violation or unsafe condition, shall be liable
for a fine of not less than $75, nor more than $750.
(Prior Code, § 6-4-46)
CHAPTER 160: ENERGY CONSERVATION CODE
Section
General Provisions
   
160.001 Adoption
   
160.002 Title
   
160.003 Scope
   
160.004 Intent
   
160.005 Applicability
   
160.006 Compliance
Materials, Systems, and Equipment
   
160.020 Identification
   
160.021 Installation
   
160.022 Maintenance information
   
160.023 Alternate material, methods, design, or insulating systems
Required Documents and Inspections
   
160.035 Construction documents
   
160.036 Inspections, approval, and reinspection
   
160.037 Validity
   
160.038 Referenced standards
   
160.039 Conflicting requirements
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 160.001 ADOPTION.
   (A)   A certain document, three copies of which are on file in the office of
the County Zoning Administrator, being marked and designated as “The
International Energy Conservation Code, 2006 edition,” as published by the
International Code Council, be and is hereby adopted as the Building Code of
the County Board; for the control of buildings and structures as herein
provided; and each and all of the regulations, provisions, penalties,
conditions, and terms of said International Energy Conservation Code, 2006
edition, are hereby referred to, adopted, and made a part hereof as if fully
set out in this chapter, with the additions, insertions, deletions, and
changes, if any, prescribed Division of this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 6-5-1)
   (B)   Administration and enforcement of the “The International Energy
Conservation Code, 2006 edition,” is hereby amended to read as follows.
(Prior Code, § 6-5-2)
§ 160.002 TITLE.
   This chapter shall be known as “the International Energy Conservation Code
of County of St. Clair,” and shall be cited as such. It is referred to herein
as “this Code” or “this chapter.”
(Prior Code, § 6-5-3)
§ 160.003 SCOPE.
    This chapter applies to residential and commercial buildings.
(Prior Code, § 6-5-4)
§ 160.004 INTENT.
   This chapter shall regulate the design and construction of buildings for the
effective use of energy. This chapter is intended to provide flexibility to
permit the use of innovative approaches and techniques to achieve the effective
use of energy. This chapter is not intended to abridge safety, health, or
environmental requirements contained in other applicable codes or ordinances.
(Prior Code, § 6-5-5)
§ 160.005 APPLICABILITY.
   (A)   Existing buildings. Except as specified in this chapter, this chapter
shall not be used to require the removal, alteration, or abandonment of, nor
prevent the continued use and maintenance of, an existing building or building
system lawfully in existence at the time of adoption of this chapter.
   (B)   Historic buildings. Any building or structure that is listed in the
State or National Register or Historic Places; designated as a historic
property under local or state designation law or survey; certified as a
contributing source with a National Register listed or locally designated
historic district; or with an opinion or certification that the property is
eligible to be listed on the National or State registers of Historic Places
either individually or as a contributing building to a historic district by the
State Historic Preservation Officer or the Keeper of the National Register of
Historic Places, are exempt from this chapter.
   (C)   Additions, alterations, renovations, or repairs.
      (1)   Additions, alterations, renovations, or repairs to an existing
building, building system, or portion thereof shall conform to the provisions
of this chapter as they relate to new construction without requiring the
unaltered portion(s) of the existing building or building system to comply with
this chapter. Additions, alterations, renovations, or repairs shall not create
an unsafe or hazardous condition or overload existing building systems.
      (2)   Exception: the following need not comply provided the energy use of
the building is not increased:
         (a)   Storm windows installed over existing fenestration;
         (b)   Glass only replacements in an existing sash and frame;
         (c)   Existing ceiling, wall, or floor cavities exposed during
construction; provided that these cavities are filled with insulation; and
         (d)   Construction where the existing roof, wall, or floor cavity is
not exposed.
   (D)   Change in occupancy. Buildings undergoing a change in occupancy that
would result in an increase in demand for either fossil fuel or electrical
energy shall comply with this chapter.
   (E)   Mixed occupancy. Where a building includes both residential and
commercial occupancies, each occupancy shall be separately considered and meet
the applicable provisions for residential and commercial.
(Prior Code, § 6-5-6)
§ 160.006 COMPLIANCE.
   (A)   Residential buildings shall meet the provisions of Chapter 4.
Commercial buildings shall meet the provisions hereof.
   (B)   The Code Enforcement Officer shall be permitted to approve specific
computer software, worksheets, compliance manuals, and other similar materials
that meet the intent of this chapter.
   (C)   The following buildings, or portions thereof, separated from the
remainder of the building by building thermal envelope assemblies complying
with this chapter shall be exempt from the building thermal envelope provisions
of this chapter:
      (1)   Those with a peak design rate of energy usage less than 3.4 Btu/
h•ft2 (10.7 W/m2) or 1.0 watt/ft2 (10.7 W/m2) of floor area for space
conditioning purposes; and
      (2)   Those that do not contain conditioned space.
(Prior Code, § 6-5-7)
MATERIALS, SYSTEMS, AND EQUIPMENT
§ 160.020 IDENTIFICATION.
   Materials, systems, and equipment shall be identified in a manner that will
allow a determination of compliance with the applicable provisions of this
chapter.
   (A)   Building, thermal envelope insulation. An R-value identification mark
shall be applied by the manufacturer to each piece of building thermal envelope
insulation 12 inches (305 millimeters) or greater in width. Alternately, the
insulation installers shall provide a certification listing the type,
manufacturer, and R-value of insulation installed in each element of the
building thermal envelope. For blown or sprayed insulation (fiberglass and
cellulose), the initial installed thickness settled thickness, settled R-value,
installed density, coverage area, and number of bags installed shall be listed
on the certification. For sprayed polyurethane foam (SPF) insulation, the
installed thickness of the areas covered and R-value of installed thickness
shall be listed on the certification. The insulation installer shall sign,
date, and post the certification in a conspicuous location on the job site.
   (B)   Blown or sprayed roof/ceiling insulation. The thickness of blown in or
sprayed roof/ceiling insulation (fiberglass or cellulose) shall be written in
inches (millimeters) on markers that are installed at least one for every 300
square feet (28 meters2) throughout the attic space. The markers shall be
affixed to the trusses or joists and marked with the minimum initial installed
thickness with numbers a minimum of one inch (25 millimeters) in height. Each
marker shall face the attic access opening. Spray polyurethane foam thickness
and installed R-value shall be listed on certification provided by the
insulation installer.
   (C)   Insulation mark installation. Insulating materials shall be installed
such that the manufacturer’s R-value mark is readily observable upon
inspection.
   (D)   Fenestration product rating.
      (1)   U-factors of fenestration products (windows, doors, and skylights)
shall be determined in accordance with NFRC 100 by an accredited, independent
laboratory, and labeled and certified by the manufacturer. Products lacking
such a labeled U-factor shall be assigned a default U-factor.
      (2)   The solar heat gain coefficient (SHGC) of glazed fenestration
products (windows, glazed doors, and skylights) shall be determined in
accordance with NFRC 200 by an accredited, independent laboratory, and labeled
and certified by the manufacturer. Products lacking such a labeled SHGC shall
be assigned a default SHGC.
 
Default Glazed Fenestration U-Factor
Frame Type               Single Pane Double Pane Skylight
                                                 Single Double
Glazed Block             0.06
Metal                    1.20        0.80        2.00   1.30
Metal with thermal break 1.10        0.65        1.90   1.10
Non-metal or metal clad  0.95        0.55        1.75   1.05
 
 
Default Door U-Factors
Door Type                                                          U-Factor
Insulated metal                                                    0.60
Insulated, non-metal edge, maximum 45% glazing, and glazing double 0.35
pane
Uninsulated metal                                                  1.20
Wood                                                               0.50
 
 
Default Glazed Fenestration SHGC
Single Glazed Double Glazed Glazed Block
Clear Tinted  Clear Tinted
0.8   0.7     0.7   0.6     0.6
 
(Prior Code, § 6-5-8)
§ 160.021 INSTALLATION.
   (A)   All materials, systems, and equipment shall be installed in accordance
with the manufacturer’s installation instructions and the International
Building Code.
   (B)   Insulation applied to the exterior of basement walls, crawlspace
walls, and the perimeter of slab-on-grade floors shall have a rigid, opaque,
and weather-resistant protective covering to prevent the degradation of the
insulation’s thermal performance. The protective covering shall cover the
exposed exterior insulation and extend a minimum of six inches (153
millimeters) below grade.
(Prior Code, § 6-5-9)
§ 160.022 MAINTENANCE INFORMATION.
   Maintenance instructions shall be furnished for equipment and systems that
require preventive maintenance. Required regular maintenance actions shall be
clearly and incorporated on a readily accessible label. The label shall include
the title or publication number for the operation and maintenance manual for
the particular model and type of product.
(Prior Code, § 6-5-10)
§ 160.023 ALTERNATE MATERIAL, METHODS, DESIGN, OR INSULATING SYSTEMS.
   This chapter is not intended to prevent the use of any material, method of
construction, design, or insulating system not specifically prescribed herein;
provided that such construction, design, or insulating system has been approved
by the Code Enforcement Officer as meeting the intent of this chapter. The Code
Enforcement Officer or other authority having jurisdiction shall be permitted
to deem a national, state, or local energy efficiency program to exceed the
energy efficiency required by this chapter. Buildings approved in writing by
such an energy efficiency program shall be considered in compliance with this
chapter.
(Prior Code, § 6-5-11)
REQUIRED DOCUMENTS AND INSPECTIONS
§ 160.035 CONSTRUCTION DOCUMENTS.
   (A)   (1)   Construction documents and other supporting data shall be
submitted in one or more sets with each application for a permit. The Code
Enforcement Officer is authorized to require necessary construction documents
to be prepared by a registered design professional.
      (2)   Exception: the Code Enforcement Officer is authorized to waive the
requirements for construction documents or other supporting data if the Code
Enforcement Officer determines they are not necessary to confirm compliance
with this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 6-5-12)
   (B)   (1)   Construction documents shall be drawn to scale upon suitable
material. Electronic media documents are permitted to be submitted when
approved by the Code Enforcement Officer. Construction documents shall be of
sufficient clarity to indicate the location, nature, and extent of the work
proposed, and show in sufficient detail pertinent data and features of the
building, systems, and equipment as herein governed.
      (2)   Details shall include, but are not limited to, insulation materials
and their R-values, fenestration U-factors and SHGC’s; system and equipment
efficiencies, types, sizes, and controls, duct sealing, insulation and
location, and air sealing details.
(Prior Code, § 6-5-13)
§ 160.036 INSPECTIONS, APPROVAL, AND REINSPECTION.
   (A)   Construction or work for which a permit is required shall be subject
to inspection by the Code Enforcement Officer.
(Prior Code, § 6-5-14)
   (B)   No work shall be done on any part of the building beyond the point
indicated in each successive inspection without first obtaining the written
approval of the Code Enforcement Officer. No construction shall be concealed
without being inspected and approved.
(Prior Code, § 6-5-15)
   (C)   The building shall have a final inspection and not be occupied until
approved.
(Prior Code, § 6-5-16)
   (D)   A building shall be reinspected when determined necessary by the Code
Enforcement Officer.
(Prior Code, § 6-5-17)
§ 160.037 VALIDITY.
   If a portion of this chapter is held to be illegal or void, such a decision
shall not affect the validity of the remainder of this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 6-5-18)
§ 160.038 REFERENCED STANDARDS.
   The standards, and portions thereof, referred to in this chapter shall be
considered part of the requirements of this chapter to the extent of such
reference.
(Prior Code, § 6-5-19)
§ 160.039 CONFLICTING REQUIREMENTS.
   Where the provisions of this chapter and the reference standards conflicts,
the provisions of this chapter shall take precedence.
(Prior Code, § 6-5-20)
CHAPTER 161: ELECTRICAL CODE
Section
General Provisions
   
161.001   Adoption
   
161.002   Title
   
161.003   Reserved
   
161.004   Reserved
   
161.005   Amendments
   
161.006   Electrical Inspection Department; Inspector
   
161.007   Inspections required
   
161.008   Certification of inspection
   
161.009   Time of inspection
Administrative Provisions
   
161.020   Adoption
   
161.021   Title
   
161.022   Purpose
   
161.023   Scope
   
161.024   Applicability
 
   
161.999   Penalty
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 161.001 ADOPTION.
   (A)   A certain document, three copies of which are on file in the office of
the County Zoning Administrator, being marked and designated as “The National
Electrical Code, 2005 edition,” as published by the National Fire Protection
Association, Inc., be and is hereby adopted as the Building Code of the County
Board; for the control of buildings and structures as herein provided; and each
and all of the regulations, provisions, penalties, conditions, and terms of
said National Electrical Code, 2005 edition, are hereby referred to, adopted,
and made a part hereof as if fully set out in this subchapter, with the
additions, insertions, deletions, and changes, if any, prescribed §
161.005.
(Prior Code, § 6-6-1)
   (B)   Administration and enforcement of the “The National Electrical Code,
2005 edition,” is hereby amended to read as follows.
(Prior Code, § 6-6-2)
§ 161.002 TITLE.
   These regulations shall be known as “the National Electrical Code of County
of St. Clair,” and shall be cited as such. It is referred to herein as “this
Code” or “this subchapter.”
(Prior Code, § 6-6-3)
§ 161.003 RESERVED.
§ 161.004 RESERVED.
§ 161.005 AMENDMENTS.
   (A)   Article 210-19. Insert “All power wire shall be 12 AWG and larger.”
   (B)   Article 210-52. Insert “Four (4) receptacles per circuit in kitchen.
Dining room receptacles shall be on a separate circuit. All major appliances
shall be on a dedicated circuit [dishwasher, disposal, microwave, refrigerator,
etc.]. Heating and/or cooling unit blowers shall be on a dedicated circuit.
Note: All single outlets shall be installed so cords hang down properly.”
   (C)   Article 220-22. Insert “Entrance conductors and neutral must be of the
same size rating.”
   (D)   Article 230-71. Insert “All dwelling units service panels shall have a
single main disconnect. On new construction, all service panels shall have
three (3) spaces for future circuit. No one-half (1/2) size circuit breakers
permitted on new construction. Note: Also workspace shall be maintained and top
of main no more than 6’6”.”
   (E)   Article 550-6. Insert “The minimum size service for manufactured home
is 100 Amp.”
   (F)   Article 250-64b. Insert “Ground wire shall be in PVC conduit from
meter socket to ground rod.”
   (G)   Article 310-2b. Insert “Aluminum wire shall not be permitted for
dwelling units or manufactured homes.”
   (H)   Article 210 and 215. Insert “All buildings and their accessory
structures other than dwellings shall be in conduit or other material approved
by St. Clair County Electrical Inspector prior to installation (No MC Cable).”
   (I)   Article 550-6. Insert “All manufactured homes shall be connected from
their service disconnect to their panel in approved raceway.”
   (J)   Article. Insert “All dwellings shall have smoke detectors, they shall
be hard wired with battery back up and they shall be interconnected. Smoke
detectors shall be located in each bedroom and halls outside of bedroom within
fifteen (15) feet of bedroom and each level of the home. Smoke detectors hard
wired to security system will not be acceptable.”
   (K)   Article 210.8 B2. Insert “Commercial and institutional kitchens 15 and
20 ampere, 125-volt, receptacles serving refrigerators and freezers shall not
be required to have ground-fault circuit-interrupter protection.”
(Prior Code, § 6-6-13)
§ 161.006 ELECTRICAL INSPECTION DEPARTMENT; INSPECTOR.
   (A)   There is hereby established an Electrical Inspection Department of the
Building and Zoning Department.
(Prior Code, § 6-6-6)
   (B)   (1)   The Electrical Inspector whose office is hereby created shall
administer the Electrical Inspection Department. He or she shall be appointed
by the County Board Chair and with the advice and consent of the County Board.
      (2)   The person chosen or appointed to fill the office of Electrical
Inspector shall be a competent electrician of good moral character. He or she
shall have at least five years experience as a journeyperson in the practice of
his or her trade or three years training in a recognized college of electrical
engineering and in addition thereto, two years of practical experience in the
electrical construction industry, and have knowledge of the statutes of the
state relating to electrical work rules and regulations issued by the State
Fire Marshal under the authority of the safety rules and standards approved by
the American Engineer Standards Committee.
      (3)   The Electrical Inspector shall receive compensation for performing
his or her duties as set forth by the County Board. The Electrical Inspector
shall be immediately responsible to the Building Official.
(Prior Code, § 6-6-7)
   (C)   The powers and duties of the Electrical Inspector are to inspect all
the electrical materials and equipment within unincorporated areas of the
county in order to verify or certify that the requirements thereto be adopted
and/or enacted by the county are complied with.
(Prior Code, § 6-6-8)
§ 161.007 INSPECTIONS REQUIRED.
   The Electrical Inspector shall inspect and shall require that all work and
installations conform to the standards and specifications applicable thereto.
The Electrical Inspector shall have the right during reasonable hours to enter
any building in the discharge of his or her official duties, for the purpose of
making any inspection or test of the installation or alteration of electrical
currents and to cut or disconnect any conductors where such electrical currents
are dangerous to life or property. The said installation shall not again be
supplied with electricity until it is in compliance with the standards and
specifications applicable thereto.
(Prior Code, § 6-6-9)
§ 161.008 CERTIFICATION OF INSPECTION.
   Upon the completion of the installation or alteration of electrical
equipment in any building, it shall be the duty of the person installing or
altering the same, to notify the Electrical Inspector who shall inspect the
work and if such electrical equipment is found to fully be in compliance with
the standards and specifications applicable thereto and does not constitute a
hazard to life or property, he or she shall issue authorization for connection
to the electrical service and the turning on of current. All wiring which is to
be hidden from view shall be inspected before concealment and any person
installing such wires shall notify the Electrical Inspector giving him or her
48 hours in which to make the required inspection before such wires are
concealed.
(Prior Code, § 6-6-10)
§ 161.009 TIME OF INSPECTION.
   The provisions for inspection of work provided herein shall not be construed
as prohibiting the inspection of any electrical equipment whenever the
Electrical Inspector shall determine that the public safety requires it.
(Prior Code, § 6-6-11)
ADMINISTRATIVE PROVISIONS
§ 161.020 ADOPTION.
   (A)   A certain document, three copies of which are on file in the office of
the County Zoning Administrator, being marked and designated as “The Electrical
Code - Administrative Provisions, 2003 edition,” as published by the
International Code Council, be and is hereby adopted as the Building Code of
the County Board; for the control of buildings and structures as herein
provided; and each and all of the regulations, provisions, penalties,
conditions, and terms of said Electrical Code - Administrative Provisions, 2003
edition, are hereby referred to, adopted, and made a part hereof as if fully
set out in this subchapter, with the additions, insertions, deletions, and
changes, if any, prescribed in §
161.005.
(Prior Code, § 6-7-1)
   (B)   Administration and enforcement of the “The Electrical Code -
Administration Provisions, 2003 edition,” is hereby amended to read as follows.
(Prior Code, § 6-7-2)
§ 161.021 TITLE.
   These regulations shall be known as “the Electrical Code - Administrative
Provisions of County of St. Clair” and shall be cited as such and will be
referred to herein as “this Code” and “this subchapter.”
(Prior Code, § 6-7-3)
§ 161.022 PURPOSE.
   The purpose of this subchapter is to provide minimum standards to safeguard
life or limb, health, property, and public welfare by regulating and
controlling the design, construction, installation, quality of materials,
location, operation, and maintenance or use of electrical systems and
equipment.
(Prior Code, § 6-7-4)
§ 161.023 SCOPE.
   This subchapter shall regulate the design, construction, installation,
alteration, repairs, relocation, replacement, addition to, use, or maintenance
of electrical systems and equipment.
(Prior Code, § 6-7-5)
§ 161.024 APPLICABILITY.
   (A)   Generally. The provisions of this subchapter shall apply to all
matters affecting or relating to structures and premises, as set forth in §§
161.020 through
161.023.
      (1)   Existing installations. Except as otherwise provided for in this
subchapter, a provision in this chapter shall not require the removal,
alteration or abandonment of, nor prevent the continued utilization and
maintenance of, existing electrical systems and equipment lawfully in existence
at the time of the adoption of this subchapter.
      (2)   Maintenance.
         (a)   Electrical systems, equipment, materials, and appurtenances,
both existing and new, and parts thereof shall be maintained in proper
operating condition in accordance with the original design and in a safe,
hazard-free condition.
         (b)   Devices or safeguards that are required by this subchapter shall
be maintained in compliance with the code edition under which installed.
         (c)   The owner or the owner’s designated agent shall be responsible
for the maintenance of the electrical systems and equipment. To determine
compliance with this provision, the Code Enforcement Officer shall have the
authority to require that the electrical systems and equipment be reinspected.
      (3)   Additions, alterations, and repairs. Additions, alterations,
renovations, and repairs to electrical systems shall comply with the provisions
of the International Existing Building Code and this subchapter, as applicable.
      (4)   Change in occupancy. The provisions of the International Existing
Building Code shall apply to all buildings undergoing a change of occupancy.
      (5)   Moved buildings. Electrical systems and equipment that are a part
of buildings or structures moved into or within the jurisdiction shall comply
with the provisions of this subchapter for new installations.
(Prior Code, § 6-7-6)
   (B)   Differences. Where, in any specific case, different sections of this
subchapter specify different materials, methods of construction, or other
requirements, the most restrictive shall govern. Where there is a conflict
between a general requirement and a specific requirement, the specific
requirement shall be applicable.
(Prior Code, § 6-7-7)
   (C)   Other laws. The provisions of this subchapter shall not be deemed to
nullify any provisions of local, state, or federal law.
(Prior Code, § 6-7-8)
   (D)   Validity. In the event any part or provision of this subchapter is
held to be illegal or void, this shall not have the effect of making void or
illegal any of the other parts or provisions thereof, which are determined to
be legal; and it shall be presumed that this subchapter would have been adopted
without such illegal or invalid parts or provisions. Any invalid part of this
subchapter shall be segregated from the remainder of this subchapter by the
court holding such part invalid, and the remainder shall remain effective.
(Prior Code, § 6-7-9)
   (E)   Application of references. References to chapter or section numbers,
or to provisions not specifically identified by number, shall be construed to
refer to such chapters, sections, or provisions of this subchapter.
(Prior Code, § 6-7-10)
   (G)   Referenced codes and standards.
      (1)   Differences. Where differences occur between provisions of this
subchapter and referenced codes or standards, the provisions of this subchapter
shall apply.
      (2)   Exception. Where enforcement of a code provision would violate the
conditions of the listing of the equipment or appliance, the conditions of the
listing and manufacturer’s instructions shall apply.
(Prior Code, § 6-7-11)
   (H)   Appendices. Provisions in the appendices shall not apply unless
specifically referenced in the adopting ordinance.
(Prior Code, § 6-7-12)
   (I)   Subjects not regulated by this code. Where no applicable standards or
requirements are set forth in this subchapter, or are contained within other
laws, codes, regulations, ordinances, or bylaws adopted by the jurisdiction,
compliance with applicable standards of nationally recognized standards as are
approved shall be deemed as prima facie evidence of compliance with the intent
of this subchapter. Nothing herein shall derogate from the authority of the
Code Enforcement Officer to determine compliance with codes or standards for
those activities or installations within the Code Enforcement Officer’s
jurisdiction or responsibility.
(Prior Code, § 6-7-13)
§ 161.999 PENALTY.
   Any person, corporation, company, or firm whether as principal agent,
employee, or otherwise, who violates, disobeys, omits, neglects, refuses to
comply with, or who resists the enforcement of any of the rules, regulations,
or provisions provided and set forth in this subchapter or who refuses or
neglects to comply with or obey any of the rules, orders, or regulations of the
County Electrical Inspection Department, shall be referred by the Electrical
Inspector to the State Attorneys’ Office for prosecution, and, upon conviction
thereof, shall be fined not more than $750 for each offense; a separate offense
shall be deemed committed on each day during or on which a violation occurs or
continues.
(Prior Code, § 6-6-12)
CHAPTER 162: ACCESSIBILITY CODE
Section
   
162.001   Adoption
   
162.002   Title
   
162.003   Purpose
   
162.004   Standards incorporated by reference
   
162.005   Applicability
   
162.006   Civil enforcement
   
162.007   Local standards
   
162.008   Revisions to Code
   
162.009   Interpretation of the requirements
   
162.010   Permits/statement of compliance
§ 162.001 ADOPTION.
   (A)   A certain document, three copies of which are on file in the office of
the County Zoning Administrator, being marked and designated as “the Illinois
Accessibility Code, 1997 edition,” as published by the International Code
Council, be and is hereby adopted as the Building Code of the County Board; for
the control of buildings and structures as herein provided; and each and all of
the regulations, provisions, penalties, conditions, and terms of said State
Accessibility Code, 1997 edition, are hereby referred to, adopted, and made a
part hereof as if fully set out in this chapter, with the additions,
insertions, deletions, and changes, if any, prescribed in Division of this
Code.
(Prior Code, § 6-8-1)
   (B)   Administration and enforcement of the State Accessibility Code, 1997
edition, is hereby amended to read as follows.
(Prior Code, § 6-8-2)
§ 162.002 TITLE.
   These regulations shall be known as “the Illinois Accessibility Code of
County of St. Clair” and shall be cited as such and will be referred to herein
as “this Code” and “this chapter.”
(Prior Code, § 6-8-3)
§ 162.003 PURPOSE.
   (A)   (1)   The purpose of this chapter and the State Accessibility Code,
being 71 Ill. Adm. Code, pt. 400, is to implement the Environmental Barriers
Act (EBA) (410 ILCS 25) as amended to date, and to replace the former version
of the Code effective May 1, 1988. This chapter is intended to ensure that the
built environment, including all spaces and elements of all applicable building
and facilities in the state is so designed, constructed, and/or altered to
assure the safety and welfare of all members of society and to be readily
accessible to, and usable by, environmentally limited persons.
      (2)   This chapter is also intended to resolve areas of difference
between the federal accessibility standards, Americans with Disabilities Act
Accessibility Guidelines (ADAAG), which are applicable to buildings and
facilities covered by the Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA, being 42 U.S.C.
§§ 12101 et seq.), and the Illinois Accessibility Standards (IAC) which are
applicable to buildings and facilities in the state covered by the EBA. The
drafters of this chapter compared and adopted the stricter of state or federal
accessible design standards.
   (B)   This chapter, together with the Environmental Barriers Act (EBA) and
the standards incorporated by reference identified in §
162.004, has the force of a building code and as such is law in the state.
(Prior Code, § 6-8-4)
§ 162.004 STANDARDS INCORPORATED BY REFERENCE.
   For projects involving alterations to historic buildings only, the Secretary
of the Interior’s Standards for Rehabilitation Historic Buildings, revised
1992, United States Department of the Interior National Park Service,
Preservation Assistance Division, Washington, District of Colombia, shall
apply. The document is available from the United States Government Printing
Office, Document No. 024-005-010610-1 Washington District of Colombia 20402-
9325. It is also available from the State Historic Preservation Agency. The
Standards for Rehabilitation Historic Buildings do not include any later
amendments or editions.
(Prior Code, § 6-8-5)
§ 162.005 APPLICABILITY.
   (A)   This chapter applies to all public facilities and multi-story housing
units, as defined and governed by the EBA, and located in whole or in part
within the legal geographic boundaries of the state, unless specifically
exempted herein.
   (B)   The fact that a building or facility governed by the EBA is also a
facility financed by federal funds is no bar to the application of this
chapter.
   (C)   This chapter is applicable when work involving new construction,
alterations, additions, historic preservation, restoration, or reconstruction
in whole or in part begins after the effective date of this chapter. The
chapter becomes enforceable with the signing of a construction contract,
issuance of an official authorization or permit for construction, or the start
of construction, whichever occurs first.
(Prior Code, § 6-8-6)
§ 162.006 CIVIL ENFORCEMENT.
   (A)   The Attorney General shall enforce the EBA and this chapter in
accordance with § 6 of the EBA. The Attorney General shall investigate any
complaint or reported violation and, where necessary to ensure compliance, may
bring an action including, but not limited to, any or all of the following:
      (1)   Mandamus;
      (2)   Injunction to halt the construction, alteration, or use of any
public facility which has been or is being constructed, altered, or leased in
violation of the EBA and this chapter;
      (3)   Injunction to halt the construction or use of any multi-story
housing unit which has been or is being constructed in violation of the EBA and
this chapter;
      (4)   Actions to require compliance with the EBA and this chapter by
private persons, state and local authorities, and other entities;
      (5)   Actions to impose civil penalties in accordance with § 7 of the
EBA; and
      (6)   Other appropriate relief (§ 6f the EBA).
   (B)   Upon receipt of a complaint, the Executive Director of the Capital
Development Board will forward it to the Attorney General. Any other person may
request the State Attorney of the county in which the public facility or multi-
story housing unit is located to initiate prosecution under § 6 of the EBA, or
may forward the complaint to the Attorney General.
(Prior Code, § 6-8-7)
§ 162.007 LOCAL STANDARDS.
   The provisions of the EBA and this chapter constitute minimum requirements
for all governmental units, including home rule units. Any governmental unit
may prescribe more stringent requirements to increase and facilitate access to
the built environment by environmentally limited persons (§ 8 of the EBA).
(Prior Code, § 6-8-8)
§ 162.008 REVISIONS TO CODE.
   This chapter may be revised from time to time by the Capital Development
Board in accordance with the State Administrative Procedure Act (5 ILCS 100)
and § 4 of the EBA.
(Prior Code, § 6-8-9)
§ 162.009 INTERPRETATION OF THE REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   Words used in the singular number shall include the plural sense and
vice-versa.
   (B)   Unless otherwise specified in the chapter, each element or space of a
particular building or facility shall comply with the applicable requirements
of this chapter.
   (C)   Use of the terms “provide” or “shall” means the provision is
mandatory.
   (D)   Parenthetical references within this part are to the Americans with
Disabilities Act Accessibility Guidelines, being 36 C.F.R. § 1191.1, that
relate to the rule.
(Prior Code, § 6-8-10)
§ 162.010 PERMITS/STATEMENT OF COMPLIANCE.
   (A)   Where permits are required for the construction or alteration of any
public facility or multi-story housing unit, the plans and specifications
submitted by the owner to obtain such a permit shall be examined for compliance
with this chapter by the administrative authority which issues the permit for
construction.
   (B)   (1)   Section 5(d) of the EBA requires a statement of compliance by
the architect/engineer unless the cost of construction or alteration is less
than $50,000.
      (2)   For privately owned work, it shall be filed with the local
administrative authority or, in the absence of an administrative authority,
with the County Clerk.
      (3)   For publicly-owned work, it shall be filed with the governmental
unit contracting for the work.
      (4)   The statement of compliance shall be worded as follows and signed
by the architect/engineer:
STATEMENT OF COMPLIANCE
I have prepared, or caused to be prepared under my direct supervision, the
attached plans and specifications and state that, to the best of my knowledge
and belief and to the extent of my contractual obligation, they are in
compliance with the Environmental Barriers Act (410 ILCS 25) and the Illinois
Accessibility Code (71 III. Adm. Code 400).
                        Signed: __________________________________
                              Architect/Engineer
                        ILLINOIS REGISTRATION No.: _____________
SEAL
                        Date: ____________________________________
   (D)   The seal of the architect/engineer as required by § 14 of the State
Architecture Practice Act (225 ILCS 305), § 12 of State Structural Engineering
Licensing Act (225 ILCS 340), and § 14 of the State Professional Engineering
Practice Act (225 ILCS 325) may be provided in lieu of the statement of
compliance required in division (C) above.
(Prior Code, § 6-8-11)
CHAPTER 163: PLUMBING CODE
Section
   
163.001   Adoption
   
163.002   Title
§ 163.001 ADOPTION.
   (A)   A certain document, three copies of which are on file in the office of
the County Zoning Administrator, being marked and designated as “The Illinois
Plumbing Code, 2004 edition,” as published by the International Code Council,
be and is hereby adopted as the Building Code of the County Board; for the
control of buildings and structures as herein provided; and each and all of the
regulations, provisions, penalties, conditions, and terms of said State
Plumbing Code, 2004 edition, are hereby referred to, adopted, and made a part
hereof as if fully set out in this chapter, with the additions, insertions,
deletions, and changes, if any, prescribed in Division of this Code.
(Prior Code, § 6-9-1)
   (B)   Administration and enforcement of the State Plumbing Code, 2004
edition, is hereby amended to read as follows.
(Prior Code, § 6-9-2)
(Ord. 07-10, passed 6-18-2007)
§ 163.002 TITLE.
   These regulations shall be known as “the Illinois Plumbing Code of County of
St. Clair” and shall be cited as such and will be referred to herein as “this
Code” or “this chapter.”
(Prior Code, § 6-9-3) (Ord. 07-10, passed 6-18-2007)
TABLE OF SPECIAL ORDINANCES
   Table
      
I.   FRANCHISE AGREEMENTS
      
II.   PURCHASES AND CONTRACTS
TABLE I: FRANCHISE AGREEMENTS
 
Ord./ Date
Res.  Passed    Description
No.
                   An agreement with New Wave, LLP granting the right to construct, maintain,
96-11 3-5-1996     operate, and update cable television system within the franchise area for a
                   period of 15 years
                   (Prior Code, Ch. 9-1)
                   An agreement with Ameren IP granting non-exclusive rights to construct,
                   maintain, and operate a system for the distribution and sale of eclectic
07-09 7-16-2007    energy for a period of 25 years, and thereafter until terminated by 60 days’
                   written notice
                   (Prior Code, Ch. 10)
                   An agreement for Telecommunications Management New Wave LLC, dba New Wave, to
2018-              pay an annual service provider fee to the village in an amount equal to 3% of
06    7-2-2018     the annual gross revenues derived from the provision of cable or video service
                   to households located within the village
                   (Prior Code, Ch. 9-5)
2021-              Extending the agreement with Ameren Illinois granting non- exclusive rights to
04    6-14-2021    construct, maintain, and operate a system for the distribution and sale of
                   eclectic energy
2024- 11-20-2024   Amendment to Ord. 96-11 and Ord. 2018-06; changing “New Wave, L.L.L.P.” to
11                 “Sparklight”
                  
 
TABLE II: PURCHASES AND CONTRACTS
 
Ord./ Date
Res.  Passed    Description
No.
                   Approving and entering into a water purchase contract with Kaskaskia Water
96-11 5-7-2018     District (KWD)
                   (Prior Code, § 38-3-80, Exhibit A)
2018- 8-6-2018     Disposing of surplus property, being a 2008 Ford Crown Victoria, VIN No.
09                 2FAFP71V98X163161, via sale or other disposal means
                   Authorizing the sale of Lot 197 of Elizabeth Hamilton’s addition to Marissa
2019- 9-3-2019     Station/the village, being parcel No. 21-27.0-140-001, commonly knows as 201
06                 South Grace, Marissa, IL, 62257, to Lea McDonald and Anthony Lloyd for the
                   bid amount of $1,500
 
PARALLEL REFERENCES
References to Illinois Compiled Statutes
References to Prior Code
References to Ordinances
REFERENCES TO ILLINOIS COMPILED STATUTES
ILCS Cites Code Section
ILCS Cites                        Code Section
5 ILCS 70/1.01                    10.004
5 ILCS 70/1.02                    10.004
5 ILCS 70/1.03                    10.004
5 ILCS 70/1.04                    10.004
5 ILCS 70/1.05                    10.002
5 ILCS 70/1.07                    10.002
5 ILCS 70/1.08                    10.002
5 ILCS 70/1.09                    10.004
5 ILCS 70/1.10                    10.002
5 ILCS 70/1.11                    10.004
5 ILCS 70/1.12                    10.002
5 ILCS 70/1.15                    10.002
5 ILCS 70/1.16                    10.002
5 ILCS 70/1.17                    10.002
5 ILCS 70/1.20                    10.002
5 ILCS 70/1.24                    10.002
5 ILCS 70/1.28                    10.002
5 ILCS 70/1.29                    10.002
5 ILCS 70/2                       10.004
5 ILCS 100                        162.008
5 ILCS 120/1                      30.048;
                                  30.175
5 ILCS 120/1.02                   30.176
5 ILCS 120/1 et seq.              30.046;
                                  52.005
5 ILCS 120/2                      30.175
5 ILCS 120/2(c)                   30.107
5 ILCS 120/2.02                   30.047;
                                  30.052
5 ILCS 120/2.03                   30.047
5 ILCS 120/2.06                   30.048;
                                  30.175
5 ILCS 120/2.06(c)                30.107
5 ILCS 120/7                      30.176
5 ILCS 140                        32.096
5 ILCS 140/1 et seq.              33.100;
                                  35.001
                                  32.150;
5 ILCS 140/1.1 et seq.            33.096;
                                  33.097
5 ILCS 140/9                      33.101
5 ILCS 179/1 et seq.              33.027
5 ILCS 270/1                      30.070
5 ILCS 430/1-1 et seq.            33.060;
                                  33.999
5 ILCS 430/5-15                   33.060
5 ILCS 430/5-65                   33.079;
                                  33.999
5 ILCS 430/10-10—10-40          33.060
5 ILCS 430/15-10                  33.078
5 ILCS 430/50-5                   33.060
5 ILCS 430/70-5                   33.060
5 ILCS 430/70-5(a)                33.060
5 ILCS 430/70-5(c)                33.060
5 ILCS 1201 et seq.               52.005
10 ILCS                           30.065
                                  34.021;
20 ILCS 3305/1 et seq.            34.026;
                                  34.034
30 ILCS 235/6                     30.141
30 ILCS 405/1 et seq              53.001
30 ILCS 580/1 et seq.             33.040
35 ILCS 115/1 et seq.             110.001
35 ILCS 120/1 et seq.             110.001
35 ILCS 120/2027                  35.130
35 ILCS 630/1 et seq.             35.130
35 ILCS 635/1                     35.130
35 ILCS 636/5-1 et seq.           Ch. 110, Appx. A
35 ILCS 636/5-50                  35.133
35 ILCS 638/1                     35.130
35 ILCS 645/5-1 et seq.           93.063
40 ILCS 5/21-101 et seq.          35.056
                                  35.025;
50 ILCS 45/1 et seq.              35.027;
                                  116.006;
                                  116.007
50 ILCS 105/2                     30.024;
                                  30.066
50 ILCS 705/1 et seq.             34.061
50 ILCS 840/1 et seq.             Ch. 116, App. A
50 ILCS 840/90                    Ch. 116, App. A
65 ILCS                           30.045
65 ILCS 5                         10.002
65 ILCS 5/1-1-2                   10.002
65 ILCS 5/1-1-2.1                 10.002
65 ILCS 5/1-1-2[5]                10.002
65 ILCS 5/1-2-1                   10.999;
                                  152.001
65 ILCS 5/1-2-1.1                 10.999
65 ILCS 5/1-2-3                   10.001;
                                  10.009
65 ILCS 5/1-2-4                   30.107
65 ILCS 5/1-2-5                   30.107
65 ILCS 5/1-2-6                   10.001
65 ILCS 5/1-2-7                   10.999
65 ILCS 5/1-2-8                   10.999
65 ILCS 5/1-2-9.1                 10.999
65 ILCS 5/1-3-2                   130.001;
                                  130.002
65 ILCS 5/2-3-8                   11.002;
                                  30.001
65 ILCS 5/3.1-2-1                 10.017
65 ILCS 5/3.1-10-6                30.067
65 ILCS 5/3.1-10-10               30.065
65 ILCS 5/3.1-10-15               30.065
65 ILCS 5/3.1-10-30               30.067;
                                  30.070
65 ILCS 5/3.1-10-35               30.067;
                                  30.112
65 ILCS 5/3.1-10-40               30.067;
                                  30.115
65 ILCS 5/3.1-10-45               30.116;
                                  30.134
65 ILCS 5/3.1-10-50               30.068;
                                  30.090
65 ILCS 5/3.1-10-50(d)            30.045
65 ILCS 5/3.1-15-5                30.020
65 ILCS 5/3.1-15-10               30.022
65 ILCS 5/3.1-15-15               30.066
65 ILCS 5/3.1-15-20               30.067;
                                  30.110
65 ILCS 5/3.1-25-5                30.045
65 ILCS 5/3.1-25-15               30.020
65 ILCS 5/3.1-25-90               30.106
                                  30.024;
65 ILCS 5/3.1-30-5                30.131;
                                  30.155
65 ILCS 5/3.1-30-10               30.116
65 ILCS 5/3.1-35-5                30.026
65 ILCS 5/3.1-35-10               30.024
65 ILCS 5/3.1-35-20               30.022
65 ILCS 5/3.1-35-30               30.023
65 ILCS 5/3.1-35-35               30.021
65 ILCS 5/3.1-35-40               30.132;
                                  30.136
65 ILCS 5/3.1-35-40 et seq.       53.121;
                                  54.126
65 ILCS 5/3.1-35-45               30.132;
                                  30.137
65 ILCS 5/3.1-35-50               30.141
65 ILCS 5/3.1-35-55               30.133
65 ILCS 5/3.1-35-65               30.138
65 ILCS 5/3.1-35-70               30.139
65 ILCS 5/3.1-35-85               30.135
                                  11.002;
65 ILCS 5/3.1-35-90               30.107;
                                  30.108
65 ILCS 5/3.1-35-95               30.116
65 ILCS 5/3.1-35-102—5/3.1-35-1330.160
65 ILCS 5/3.1-35-110              30.107;
                                  30.111
65 ILCS 5/3.1-35-115              30.140
65 ILCS 5/3.1-40-15               30.051
65 ILCS 5/3.1-40-20               30.049;
                                  30.050
65 ILCS 5/3.1-40-25               30.046;
                                  30.047
65 ILCS 5/3.1-40-30               30.030
65 ILCS 5/3.1-40-35               30.048
65 ILCS 5/3.1-40-40               30.054
65 ILCS 5/3.1-40-45               30.054
65 ILCS 5/3.1-40-50               30.054
65 ILCS 5/3.1-40-55               30.054
                                  30.030;
65 ILCS 5/3.1-45-5                30.046—
                                  30.051;
                                  30.054
65 ILCS 5/3.1-50-5                30.009;
                                  30.072
65 ILCS 5/3.1-50-10               30.009;
                                  30.072
65 ILCS 5/3.1-50-15               30.009
65 ILCS 5/3.1-50-15(b)            30.003
65 ILCS 5/8-3-1                   35.056
65 ILCS 5/8-8-8                   35.056
65 ILCS 5/8-9-1                   30.001
65 ILCS 5/8-9-2                   30.001
65 ILCS 5/8-11-1                  35.071;
                                  35.091
65 ILCS 5/8-11-2                  35.070;
                                  35.999
65 ILCS 5/8-11-23                 35.150;
                                  35.152
65 ILCS 5/9-2-4.5                 150.008
65 ILCS 5/Art. 11, Div. 4         154.360
                                  90.022;
                                  90.056;
65 ILCS 5/11-1-1                  130.002;
                                  130.015;
                                  130.055
65 ILCS 5/11-1-2                  34.051
65 ILCS 5/11-1-3                  35.056
65 ILCS 5/11-1-5                  130.036
65 ILCS 5/11-1-6                  34.021
                                  111.002;
                                  131.016;
65 ILCS 5/11-5-2                  132.020;
                                  132.021;
                                  132.022
65 ILCS 5/11-5-3                  132.097
65 ILCS 5/11-5-6                  90.018;
                                  90.022
65 ILCS 5/11-8-4                  132.006
65 ILCS 5/11-12                   31.023
65 ILCS 5/11-12-4—5/11-12-12    31.015
65 ILCS 5/11-12-5                 153.002
                                  153.002;
65 ILCS 5/11-12-8                 153.041;
                                  153.098;
                                  153.130
65 ILCS 5/11-12-11                153.005
                                  31.020;
65 ILCS 5/11-12-12                152.001;
                                  153.002
65 ILCS 5/11-13-1                 154.002
65 ILCS 5/11-13-1 et seq.         154.375
65 ILCS 5/11-13-3                 154.335
65 ILCS 5/11-13-3(d)              154.355;
                                  154.360
65 ILCS 5/11-13-4                 154.378
65 ILCS 5/11-13-7                 154.377;
                                  154.397
                                  154.355;
65 ILCS 5/11-13-12                154.356;
                                  154.357;
                                  154.358
65 ILCS 5/11-13-14                154.426
65 ILCS 5/11-13-19                154.021
65 ILCS 5/11-13-25                154.205
65 ILCS 5/11-19-4                 35.056
65 ILCS 5/11-20-6                 91.036
65 ILCS 5/11-20-7                 91.036;
                                  91.072
65 ILCS 5/11-20-7(d)              91.073
65 ILCS 5/11-20-8(d)              91.073
                                  90.022;
65 ILCS 5/11-20-9                 90.023;
                                  90.056
65 ILCS 5/11-20-12                91.072
65 ILCS 5/11-20-12(d)             91.073
65 ILCS 5/11-20-13                91.037
65 ILCS 5/11-20-13(e)             91.073
65 ILCS 5/11-20-15                91.020;
                                  91.073
65 ILCS 5/11-20-15.1              91.070;
                                  91.073
65 ILCS 5/11-20-30                91.072
65 ILCS 5/11-30-2                 152.001
65 ILCS 5/11-30-8                 152.001
65 ILCS 5/11-31-1                 Ch. 91, App A;
                                  154.399
65 ILCS 5/11-31-1.01              91.072;
                                  91.073
65 ILCS 5/11-31.1-1 et seq.       150.008
65 ILCS 5/11-31-2                 152.001
65 ILCS 5/11-40-3.1               73.001;
                                  73.007
65 ILCS 5/11-60-2                 Ch. 91;
                                  91.018
65 ILCS 5/11-74.4-1 et seq.       35.001;
                                  35.002
65 ILCS 5/11-80-13                93.095;
                                  93.096
65 ILCS 5/11-80-17                93.006
65 ILCS 5/11-81-1                 35.056
65 ILCS 5/11-81-2                 35.056
65 ILCS 5/11-98-1                 35.056
65 ILCS 5/11-1426.1               74.016
65 ILCS 5/11-1428                 74.016
65 ILCS 5/32-5.1                  130.016
65 ILCS 8-9-1                     30.001
65 ILCS 8-9-2                     30.001
65 ILCS 11/20-8                   91.072
65 ILCS 11-20-15                  91.020
65 ILCS Art. 11, Division 31.1    150.008
70 ILCS 605/2-1—2-13            154.192
                                  153.041;
70 ILCS 405/22.02a                154.421;
                                  154.356;
                                  154.376
75 ILCS 5/3-1                     35.056
75 ILCS 5/3-4                     35.056
75 ILCS 5/4-1                     30.066
105 ILCS 5/26-1 et seq.           130.030
205 ILCS 740/1 et seq.            132.001
210 ILCS 25/101 et seq.           33.044
                                  151.002;
210 ILCS 115/1 et seq.            151.055;
                                  152.007
210 ILCS 115/2.1                  151.001
210 ILCS 115/2.2                  151.001;
                                  154.007
210 ILCS 115/2.3                  151.001;
                                  154.007
210 ILCS 115/2.4                  151.001;
                                  154.007
210 ILCS 115/2.5                  151.001;
                                  154.007
210 ILCS 115/2.7                  151.001;
                                  154.007
210 ILCS 115/2.10                 151.001
210 ILCS 120/1                    151.002
210 ILCS 120/1 et seq.            151.001;
                                  154.007
220 ILCS 5/Art. XXI               116.024;
                                  116.056
220 ILCS 5/3-105                  116.060
220 ILCS 5/9-221                  35.130
220 ILCS 5/9-222                  35.130
220 ILCS 5/9-222.1                35.130
220 ILCS 5/16-102                 116.060
220 ILCS 5/16-108.5(I)            116.060
                                  93.064;
220 ILCS 5/21-100 et seq.         116.024;
                                  116.055;
                                  Ch. 116, App. A
220 ILCS 5/21-201(v)              93.061
220 ILCS 5/21-301(c)              116.002;
                                  116.003
220 ILCS 5/21-401                 93.061;
                                  116.001
220 ILCS 5/21-401(b)(6)           116.002
220 ILCS 5/21-601                 116.044
220 ILCS 5/21-701                 116.025
220 ILCS 5/21-801                 116.001;
                                  116.007
220 ILCS 5/21-801(b)              116.001
220 ILCS 5/21-801(c)(l)(vi)       116.001
220 ILCS 5/21-801(d)              116.001
220 ILCS 5/21-1001                116.021
220 ILCS 5/21-1301(a)             116.024
220 ILCS 5/22-501                 116.040
220 ILCS 5/22-501(s)              116.043
220 ILCS 5/22-501(r)(l)           116.042
220 ILCS 50/1 et seq.             93.075
220 ILCS 65/0.01 et seq.          Ch. 116, App. A
220 ILCS 65/4                     93.064
225 ILCS 225/1—225/23           154.030
225 ILCS 225/1                    153.150
225 ILCS 225/1 et seq.            54.023
225 ILCS 305                      162.010
225 ILCS 305/1 et seq.            154.314
                                  157.006;
225 ILCS 320/0.01 et seq.         158.006;
                                  159.007
225 ILCS 320/3                    53.086
225 ILCS 325                      162.010
225 ILCS 340                      162.010
225 ILCS 340/4                    116.057;
                                  Ch. 116, App. A
230 ILCS 15                       112.004
230 ILCS 15/0.01 et seq.          112.007
230 ILCS 15/1                     112.001
230 ILCS 25/1 et seq.             115.051
230 ILCS 40/1 et seq.             115.051
235 ILCS                          115.001
235 ILCS 5/3.01 et seq.           115.001
                                  115.015;
                                  115.019;
                                  115.020;
                                  115.022;
235 ILCS 5/4-1                    115.025;
                                  115.050;
                                  115.052;
                                  115.054;
                                  115.070
235 ILCS 5/4-2                    30.028
235 ILCS 5/4-4                    115.056;
                                  115.096
235 ILCS 5/4-5                    115.017
235 ILCS 5/6-1                    115.021
235 ILCS 5/6-5                    115.058
235 ILCS 5/6-10                   115.057
235 ILCS 5/6-11                   115.041
235 ILCS 5/6-12                   115.041
235 ILCS 5/6-15                   115.058
                                  115.046;
235 ILCS 5/6-16                   115.053;
                                  115.073—
                                  115.076
235 ILCS 5/6-17                   115.058
                                  115.054;
235 ILCS 5/6-20                   115.071;
                                  115.072
235 ILCS 5/6-21                   115.023
235 ILCS 5/6-22                   115.058
235 ILCS 5/6-24                   115.024
235 ILCS 5/6-28                   115.040
235 ILCS 5/7-1                    115.016
235 ILCS 5/7-5                    115.096
235 ILCS 5/7-7                    115.097
235 ILCS 5/7-9                    115.098;
                                  115.099
235 ILCS 5/7-13                   115.095
235 ILCS 5/7-14                   115.042
235 ILCS 5/10-2                   115.090
235 ILCS 5/10-3                   115.091
235 ILCS 5/10-4                   115.092
235 ILCS 5/10-5                   115.092
235 ILCS 5/10-6                   115.093
235 ILCS 5/10-7                   115.094
235 ILCS 650/10                   115.049
330 ILCS 60/1 et seq.             32.057
410 ILCS 25                       162.003;
                                  162.010
410 ILCS 130/1                    35.150
410 ILCS 615/1 et seq.            132.096
410 ILCS 650/1 et seq.            115.048
415 ILCS 5/1 et seq.              52.002;
                                  Ch. 52, App. A
415 ILCS 5/4(e)                   53.086
415 ILCS 5/9(b)                   132.075
415 ILCS 5/39.2(a)(i)—(ix)      52.003;
                                  52.005
415 ILCS 10/1 et seq.             Ch. 52, App. A
415 ILCS 15/1 et seq.             Ch. 52, App. A
430 ILCS 66/1 et seq.             132.004
430 ILCS 115/1 et seq.            151.003
430 ILCS 135/1 et seq.            157.128
430 ILCS 150/1                    132.007
510 ILCS 5/1                      90.001
510 ILCS 5/2.02                   90.002
510 ILCS 5/2.03                   90.002
510 ILCS 5/2.05                   90.002
510 ILCS 5/2.06                   90.002
510 ILCS 5/2.11                   90.002
510 ILCS 5/2.12                   90.002
510 ILCS 5/2.13                   90.002
510 ILCS 5/2.14                   90.002
510 ILCS 5/2.15                   90.002
510 ILCS 5/2.16                   90.002
510 ILCS 5/2.18                   90.002
510 ILCS 5/2.19                   90.002
510 ILCS 5/8                      90.058
510 ILCS 5/10                     90.053
510 ILCS 5/24                     90.002
605 ILCS 5/1-101 et seq.          93.061
615 ILCS 5/5—29a                152.006
625 ILCS 5                        73.007;
                                  74.016
625 ILCS 5/1                      70.001
625 ILCS 5/1-100 et seq.          116.060
625 ILCS 5/1-109.01               154.007
625 ILCS 5/1-111.8                71.003
625 ILCS 5/1-169                  154.007
625 ILCS 5/1-188                  10.002
625 ILCS 5/3-821.1                72.004
625 ILCS 5/4-107(k)               73.00(9)
625 ILCS 5/4-201                  73.001
625 ILCS 5/4-202                  73.002
625 ILCS 5/4-204                  73.002;
                                  73.003
625 ILCS 5/4-205                  73.004
625 ILCS 5/4-206                  73.005
625 ILCS 5/4-207                  73.006
625 ILCS 5/4-208                  73.007
625 ILCS 5/4-209                  73.004;
                                  73.007
625 ILCS 5/4-209.1                73.007
625 ILCS 5/4-210                  73.007
625 ILCS 5/4-211                  73.008
625 ILCS 5/4-212.1                73.010
625 ILCS 5/4-213                  73.010
625 ILCS 5/4-214                  73.999
625 ILCS 5/6-101                  70.031
625 ILCS 5/6-303                  70.030;
                                  70.031
625 ILCS 5/6-306.5                72.006
625 ILCS 5/11                     71.001
625 ILCS 5/11-203                 70.002
625 ILCS 5/11-204                 70.030
625 ILCS 5/11-204.1               70.030
625 ILCS 5/11-206                 74.001
625 ILCS 5/11-207                 71.001
625 ILCS 5/11-208                 71.016
625 ILCS 5/11-208.1               71.001
625 ILCS 5/11-208.2               71.001
625 ILCS 5/11-209.1               71.001
625 ILCS 5/11-301                 70.015
625 ILCS 5/11-302                 71.001;
                                  71.017
625 ILCS 5/11-303                 71.001;
                                  72.003
625 ILCS 5/11-304                 71.019
625 ILCS 5/11-310(f)              71.001
625 ILCS 5/11-313                 71.001
625 ILCS 5/11-401—11-416        71.001
625 ILCS 5/11-401                 70.030
625 ILCS 5/11-402                 70.030
625 ILCS 5/11-403                 70.030
625 ILCS 5/11-500—11-502        71.001;
                                  74.016
625 ILCS 5/11-501                 70.030;
                                  70.031
625 ILCS 5/11-502                 71.035
625 ILCS 5/11-503                 70.031
625 ILCS 5/11-504                 71.032
625 ILCS 5/11-505                 71.036
625 ILCS 5/11-602                 71.001
625 ILCS 5/11-603                 71.001
625 ILCS 5/11-606(b)              71.001
625 ILCS 5/11-604                 71.001;
                                  71.031
625 ILCS 5/11-605                 71.031
625 ILCS 5/11-608                 71.001;
                                  71.031
625 ILCS 5/11-904(a)              71.001
625 ILCS 5/11-1301.1 et seq.      72.004
625 ILCS 5/11-1301.2              72.004
625 ILCS 5/11-1302                72.999
625 ILCS 5/11-1416(a)             71.001
625 ILCS 5/11-1419                71.001
625 ILCS 5/11-1422                71.001
625 ILCS 5/11-1507                74.002;
                                  74.999
625 ILCS 5/12                     71.003
625 ILCS 5/12-602.1               71.003
625 ILCS 5/12-605                 71.003
625 ILCS 5/12-605.1               71.003
625 ILCS 5/12-605.2               71.003
625 ILCS 5/11-606(b)              71.001
625 ILCS 5/12-611                 71.003
625 ILCS 5/12-709                 74.016
625 ILCS 5/18c-7201               116.060
625 ILCS 18c-1101 et seq.         154.007
705 ILCS 405/1-1 et seq.          131.010
720 ILCS                          130.002
720 ILCS 2-1—2-11               130.001
720 ILCS 2-13—2-16              130.001
720 ILCS 2-19                     130.001
720 ILCS 2-20                     130.001
720 ILCS 5                        115.018
720 ILCS 5/16-1                   131.001;
                                  131.999
720 ILCS 5/17-2                   130.016
720 ILCS 5/21-1.01                131.004
720 ILCS 5/24-1                   70.030
720 ILCS 5/24-1.1                 70.030
720 ILCS 5/24-1.2                 70.030
720 ILCS 5/24-1.2-5               70.030
720 ILCS 5/24-1.5                 70.030
720 ILCS 5/24-1.6                 70.030
720 ILCS 5/24-2.1                 70.030
720 ILCS 5/24-2.2                 70.030
720 ILCS 5/24-3                   70.030
720 ILCS 5/24-3A                  70.030
720 ILCS 5/24-3.1                 70.030
720 ILCS 5/24-3.2                 70.030
720 ILCS 5/24-3.3                 70.030
720 ILCS 5/24-3.4                 70.030
720 ILCS 5/24-3.5                 70.030
720 ILCS 5/24-3.6                 70.030
720 ILCS 5/25-1                   132.020
720 ILCS 5/26-1                   132.001
720 ILCS 5/28-3                   115.018
720 ILCS 5/31-1                   132.002
720 ILCS 5/31-6(c)                130.017
720 ILCS 5/31-6(I.C.)             130.017
720 ILCS 5/31-7                   130.017
720 ILCS 5/31-8                   132.003
720 ILCS 5/32-9                   131.007
720 ILCS 5/33A-1                  132.093
720 ILCS 5/36-1                   70.031
720 ILCS 5/47-5                   Ch. 91;
                                  91.002
720 ILCS 5/47-10                  Ch. 91;
                                  91.037
720 ILCS 5/47-15                  Ch. 91
720 ILCS 505/1                    132.007
720 ILCS 550 et seq.              33.041
                                  32.116;
720 ILCS 550/1 et seq.            32.117,
                                  70.030;
                                  132.093
720 ILCS 550/2                    70.031
720 ILCS 550/3                    70.031
720 ILCS 550/12                   132.095
                                  32.116;
                                  33.041;
720 ILCS 570/100 et seq.          132.090;
                                  132.096;
                                  32.117;
                                  132.999
720 ILCS 570/101                  70.031
720 ILCS 570/102                  70.031;
                                  132.093
720 ILCS 570/102 et seq           132.096
720 ILCS 570/120 et seq.          132.096
720 ILCS 570/201 et seq.          70.030
720 ILCS 600/2                    70.030
720 ILCS 646/1—646/9999 et seq. 70.030
720 ILCS 675/1                    132.098
740 ILCS 55/221—55/222          91.002
740 ILCS 174/15(a)                33.078
740 ILCS 174/15(b)                33.078
745 ILCS 10/1-101                 154.005;
                                  153.006
745 ILCS 10/2-201 et seq.         30.071
745 ILCS 10/9-107                 35.056
765 ILCS 165                      154.222
765 ILCS 205/0.01 et seq.         152.008
765 ILCS 205/1                    153.131
765 ILCS 205/1(b)                 153.041;
                                  153.096
765 ILCS 205/1 et seq.            153.002;
                                  153.130
765 ILCS 205/2                    152.008;
                                  153.098
765 ILCS 205/6                    153.118
765 ILCS 205/7                    153.118
765 ILCS 205/8                    153.118
775 ILCS 5/1-101 et seq.          33.076
775 ILCS 5/6-101                  33.078
805 ILCS 5/1.01 et seq.           115.018
805 ILCS 105/101.01 et seq.       115.096
805 ILCS 110/0.01 et seq.         154.201
815 ILCS 333/2(8)                 10.002
820 ILCS 130/0.01 et seq.         32.059
820 ILCS 305 et al.               34.030
820 ILCS 305/1 et seq.            93.067
820 ILCS 305/1 et seq.            32.070
820 ILCS 310 et at.               34.030
820 ILCS 405/100 et seq.          33.021
                                  
 
REFERENCES TO PRIOR CODE
Prior Code 2022 Code
Prior Code           2022 Code
Ch. 1                Ch. 30, App. B
Ch. 1, Adm. A        Ch. 30, App. A
1-1-1                10.001
1-1-2                10.001
1-1-3                10.009
1-1-4                10.009
1-1-5                11.001
1-1-8                10.013;
                     10.014
1-1-9                10.018
1-1-10               10.019
1-1-11               10.010
1-1-12               10.020
1-1-15               10.004
1-1-16               10.002
1-1-17               10.017
1-1-20               10.999
1-1-21               10.999
1-1-22               10.999
1-1-23               10.999
1-1-24               10.999
1-2-1                30.045
1-2-2                30.046
1-2-3                30.047
1-2-4                30.048
1-2-5                30.048
1-2-6                30.049
1-2-7                30.050
1-2-11               30.051
1-2-12               30.052
1-2-13               30.053
1-2-14               30.054
1-2-15               30.054
1-2-16               30.054
1-2-18               11.002
1-2-19               30.065
1-2-20               30.066
1-2-21               30.067
1-2-22               30.068
1-2-23               30.069
1-2-24               30.070
1-2-25               30.071
1-2-26               30.001
1-2-27               30.072
1-2-28               30.002
1-2-30               30.003
1-2-31               30.004
1-2-32               30.005
1-2-33               30.006
1-2-34               30.007
1-2-35               30.008
1-2-37               30.085
1-2-38               30.086
1-2-40               30.087
1-2-41               30.088
1-2-42               30.089
1-2-43               30.090
1-2-50               30.020
1-2-51               30.021
1-2-52               30.022
1-2-53               30.023
1-2-54               30.023
1-2-55               30.023
1-2-56               30.023
1-2-57               30.025
1-2-58               30.026
1-2-59               30.027
1-2-60               30.028
1-2-61               30.029
1-2-62               30.030
1-2-66               30.105
1-2-67               30.106
1-2-68               30.107
1-2-69               30.108
1-2-70               30.109
1-2-71               30.109
1-2-72               30.109
1-2-73               30.110
1-2-74               30.111
1-2-75               30.109
1-2-76               30.112
1-2-77               30.113
1-2-78               30.114
1-2-79               30.115
1-2-80               30.116
1-2-82               30.130
1-2-83               30.130
1-2-84               30.131
1-2-85               30.132
1-2-86               30.132
1-2-87               30.133
1-2-88               30.134
1-2-89               30.135
1-2-90               30.136
1-2-91               30.137
1-2-92               30.138
1-2-93               30.139
1-2-94               30.140
1-2-95               30.141
1-2-97               30.155
1-2-98               30.155
1-2-99               30.155
1-2-101              30.156
1-2-102              30.156
1-2-105              30.157
1-2-106              30.157
1-2-107              30.157
1-2-110              30.157
1-2-111              30.157
1-2-112              30.159
1-2-113              30.159
1-2-114              30.160
1-2-115              30.160
1-2-116              30.160
1-2-117              30.161
1-3-1                30.009
1-3-2                30.009
1-3-3                30.009
1-3-4                30.009
1-4-1                31.001
1-4-2                31.002
1-5-1                30.175
1-5-2                30.175
1-5-3                30.175
1-5-4                30.175
1-5-5                30.175
1-5-6                30.175
1-5-7                30.175
1-5-8                30.175
1-5-11               30.175
1-5-12               30.175
1-5-13               30.175
1-5-14               30.175
2-7-10               73.007
2-7-12               73.007
3-1-1                90.001
3-1-2                90.002
3-1-3                90.015
3-1-4                90.016
3-1-5                90.017
3-1-6                90.018
3-1-7                90.019
3-1-8                90.020
3-1-9                90.021
3-1-10               90.022
3-2-1                90.002
3-2-2                90.035
3-2-3                90.036
3-2-4                90.037
3-2-5                90.038
3-2-6                90.036
3-2-7                90.023
3-2-8                90.053
3-2-9                90.053
3-2-10               90.051
3-2-11               90.054
3-2-12               90.052
3-2-13               90.052
3-2-14               90.052
3-2-15               90.055
3-2-16               90.056
3-2-17               90.056
3-3-1                90.050
3-3-2                90.057
3-3-3                90.059
3-3-4                90.058
3-3-5                90.059
3-3-6                90.060
3-5-1                90.003
3-5-2                90.003
3-5-5                90.003
3-5-15               54.023
3-6-1                90.075
3-6-2                90.076
4-1-1                31.015
4-1-2                31.016
4-1-3                31.017
4-1-4                31.018
4-1-5                31.019
4-1-6                31.020
4-1-7                31.021
4-1-8                31.022
4-1-9                31.023
6-1-1                156.001
6-1-2                156.001
6-1-3                156.002
6-1-4                156.003
6-1-5                156.004
6-1-6                156.005
6-1-7                156.020
6-1-8                156.021
6-1-9                156.022
6-1-10               156.023
6-1-11               156.024
6-1-12               156.025
6-1-13               156.040
6-1-14               156.040
6-1-15               156.040
6-1-16               156.041
6-1-17               156.042
6-1-18               156.043
6-1-19               156.044
6-1-20               156.045
6-1-21               156.046
6-1-22               156.047
6-1-23               156.048
6-1-24               156.049
6-1-25               156.049
6-1-26               156.049
6-1-27               156.060
6-1-28               156.061
6-1-29               156.062
6-1-30               156.063
6-1-31               156.064
6-1-32               156.065
6-1-33               156.066
6-1-34               156.080
6-1-35               156.081
6-1-36               156.082
6-1-37               156.083
6-1-38               156.084
6-1-39               156.067
6-1-40               156.067
6-1-41               156.067
6-1-42               156.067
6-1-43               156.095
6-1-44               156.096
6-1-45               156.097
6-1-46               156.098
6-1-47               156.098
6-1-49               156.098
6-1-50               156.098
6-1-51               156.099
6-1-52               156.100
6-1-53               156.115
6-1-54               156.116
6-1-55               156.117
6-1-56               156.118
6-1-57               156.119
6-1-58               156.120
6-1-59               156.135
6-1-60               156.136
6-1-61               156.137
6-1-62               156.138
6-1-63               156.150
6-1-64               156.151
6-1-65               156.152
6-1-66               156.165
6-1-67               156.166
6-1-68               156.167
6-1-69               156.168
6-1-70               156.169
6-1-71               156.169
6-1-72               156.006
6-1-73               156.006
6-1-74               156.006
6-1-75               156.999
6-1-76               156.180
6-1-77               156.181
6-1-78               156.182
6-1-79               156.195
6-1-80               156.196
6-1-81               156.197
6-1-82               156.198
6-1-83               156.199
6-1-84               156.007
6-1-85               156.008
6-2-1                157.001
6-2-2                157.001
6-2-3                157.002
6-2-4                157.003
6-2-5                157.004
6-2-6                157.020
6-2-7                157.021
6-2-8                157.022
6-2-9                157.023
6-2-10               157.024
6-2-11               157.025
6-2-12               157.026
6-2-13               157.027
6-2-14               157.028
6-2-15               157.029
6-2-16               157.040
6-2-17               157.041
6-2-18               157.042
6-2-19               157.043
6-2-20               157.044
6-2-21               157.045
6-2-22               157.046
6-2-23               157.047
6-2-24               157.048
6-2-25               157.048
6-2-26               157.048
6-2-27               157.060
6-2-28               157.061
6-2-29               157.062
6-2-30               157.063
6-2-31               157.064
6-2-32               157.065
6-2-33               157.066
6-2-34               157.067
6-2-35               157.080
6-2-36               157.081
6-2-37               157.082
6-2-38               157.083
6-2-39               157.084
6-2-40               157.068
6-2-41               157.068
6-2-42               157.068
6-2-43               157.068
6-2-44               157.095
6-2-45               157.096
6-2-46               157.097
6-2-47               157.098
6-2-48               157.099
6-2-49               157.110
6-2-50               157.111
6-2-51               157.112
6-2-62               157.005
6-2-63               157.005
6-2-64               157.005
6-2-65               157.999
6-2-66               157.125
6-2-67               157.126
6-2-68               157.127
6-2-69               157.128
6-2-70               157.006
6-3-1                158.001
6-3-2                158.001
6-3-3                158.002
6-3-4                158.003
6-3-5                158.004
6-3-7                158.020
6-3-8                158.021
6-3-9                158.022
6-3-10               158.023
6-3-11               158.024
6-3-12               158.025
6-3-13               158.026
6-3-14               158.027
6-3-15               158.028
6-3-16               158.040
6-3-17               158.040
6-3-18               158.041
6-3-19               158.042
6-3-20               158.043
6-3-21               158.044
6-3-22               158.045
6-3-23               158.046
6-3-24               158.047
6-3-25               158.048
6-3-26               158.049
6-3-27               158.050
6-3-28               158.051
6-3-29               158.051
6-3-30               158.051
6-3-31               158.051
6-3-32               158.065
6-3-33               158.065
6-3-34               158.066
6-3-35               158.067
6-3-36               158.068
6-3-37               158.080
6-3-38               158.081
6-3-39               158.082
6-3-40               158.083
6-3-41               158.005
6-3-42               158.005
6-3-43               158.005
6-3-44               158.999
6-3-45               158.095;
                     158.999
6-3-46               158.096
6-3-47               158.097
6-3-48               158.098
6-3-49               158.006
6-4-1                159.001
6-4-2                159.001
6-4-3                159.002
6-4-4                159.003
6-4-5                159.004
6-4-6                159.005
6-4-8                159.020
6-4-9                159.021
6-4-10               159.022
6-4-11               159.023
6-4-12               159.024
6-4-13               159.025
6-4-14               159.026
6-4-15               159.027
6-4-16               159.028
6-4-17               159.040
6-4-18               159.040
6-4-19               159.041
6-4-20               159.042
6-4-21               159.043
6-4-22               159.044
6-4-23               159.045
6-4-24               159.046
6-4-25               159.047
6-4-26               159.048
6-4-27               159.049
6-4-28               159.050
6-4-29               159.051
6-4-30               159.051
6-4-31               159.051
6-4-32               159.051
6-4-33               159.065
6-4-34               159.065
6-4-35               159.066
6-4-36               159.067
6-4-37               159.068
6-4-38               159.080
6-4-39               159.081
6-4-40               159.082
6-4-41               159.083
6-4-42               159.006
6-4-43               159.006
6-4-44               159.006
6-4-45               159.999
6-4-46               159.095;
                     159.999
6-4-47               159.096
6-4-48               159.097
6-4-49               159.098
6-4-50               159.007
6-5-1                160.001
6-5-2                160.001
6-5-3                160.002
6-5-4                160.003
6-5-5                160.004
6-5-6                160.005
6-5-7                160.006
6-5-8                160.020
6-5-9                160.021
6-5-10               160.022
6-5-11               160.023
6-5-12               160.035
6-5-13               160.035
6-5-14               160.036
6-5-15               160.035
6-5-16               160.036
6-5-17               160.036
6-5-18               160.037
6-5-19               160.038
6-5-20               160.039
6-6-1                161.001
6-6-2                161.001
6-6-3                161.002
6-6-6                161.006
6-6-7                161.006
6-6-8                161.006
6-6-9                161.007
6-6-10               161.008
6-6-11               161.009
6-6-12               161.999
6-6-13               161.005
6-7-1                161.020
6-7-2                161.020
6-7-3                161.021
6-7-4                161.022
6-7-5                161.023
6-7-6                161.024
6-7-7                161.024
6-7-8                161.024
6-7-9                161.024
6-7-10               161.024
6-7-11               161.024
6-7-12               161.024
6-7-13               161.024
6-8-1                162.001
6-8-2                162.001
6-8-3                162.002
6-8-4                162.003
6-8-5                162.004
6-8-6                162.005
6-8-7                162.006
6-8-8                162.007
6-8-9                162.008
6-8-10               162.009
6-8-11               162.010
6-9-1                163.001
6-9-2                163.001
6-9-3                163.002
                     Ch. 110, App. A;
Ch. 7                Ch. 110, App. B;
                     Ch. 110, App. C
7-1-1                110.002
7-1-2                110.001
7-1-3                110.002
7-1-4                110.004
7-1-5                110.005
7-1-6                110.002
7-1-7                110.006
7-1-8                110.006
7-1-9                110.006
7-1-10               110.020
7-1-11.1             110.021
7-1-11.2             110.022
7-1-11.3             110.023
7-1-11.4             110.024
7-1-12               110.024
7-1-13               110.007
7-1-15               110.008
7-1-16               110.009
7-2-1                111.001
7-2-2                111.002
7-2-3                111.003
7-2-4                111.004
7-2-5                111.005
7-2-6                111.006
7-2-7                111.007
7-2-8                111.008
7-2-9                111.009
7-2-10               111.010
7-2-11               111.002
7-3-1                111.026
7-3-2                111.025
7-3-3                111.027
7-3-4                111.028
7-3-5                111.029
7-3-6                111.030
7-3-7                111.027
7-3-8                111.030
7-3-9                111.030
7-3-10               111.032
7-3-11               111.033
7-3-12               111.026
7-4-1                112.001
7-4-2                112.002
7-4-3                112.003
7-4-4                112.004
7-4-5                112.004
7-4-6                112.006
7-4-7                112.007
7-4-8                112.008
7-4-9                112.005
7-5-1                113.020
7-5-2                113.021
7-5-3                113.022
7-5-4                113.023
7-5-5                113.024
7-5-6                113.022
7-5-7                113.023
7-5-8                113.025
7-6-1                114.001
7-6-2                114.002
7-6-3                114.003
7-6-4                114.004
7-6-5                114.005
7-6-6                114.003
7-6-7                114.006
7-6-8                114.007
7-6-9                114.007
7-6-10               114.007
7-6-11               114.007
7-6-12               114.008
7-6-13               114.005
7-6-14               114.009
7-6-15               114.010
7-6-16               114.011
7-6-17               114.006
7-7-1                113.001
7-7-2                113.001
7-7-3                113.001
7-7-4                113.003
7-7-5                113.004
7-7-6                113.005
7-7-7                113.006
7-7-8                113.007
7-7-9                113.008
7-7-10               113.999
                     Ch. 116, App. A;
Ch. 9                Ch. 116, App. B;
                     Ch. 116, App. C;
                     Ch. 116, App. D
Ch. 9-1              TSO Table I
9-2-1                116.001
9-2-2                116.002
9-2-3                116.003
9-2-4                116.004
9-2-5                116.005
9-2-6                116.006
9-2-7                116.007
9-3-1                116.020
9-3-2                116.021
9-3-3                116.022
9-3-4                116.023
9-3-5                116.024
9-3-6                116.025
9-3-7                116.026
9-4-1                116.040
9-4-2                116.041
9-4-3                116.042;
                     116.999
9-4-4                116.043
9-4-5                116.044
Ch. 9-5              TSO Table I
9-6-1                116.055
9-6-2                116.056
9-6-3                116.057—
                     116.060
9-6-4                116.061
9-6-5                116.062
9-6-6                116.063
Ch. 10               TSO Table I
Ch. 11, App. A       Ch. 32, App. A
Ch. 11, App. B       Ch. 32, App. B
Ch. 11, App. C       Ch. 32, App. C
Ch. 11, App. D       Ch. 32, App. D
Ch. 11, App. E       Ch. 32, App. E
11-1-1               32.001
11-2-1               32.002
11-2-2               32.003
11-3-1               32.015
11-3-2               32.015
11-3-3               32.016
11-3-4               32.017
11-4-1               32.030
11-4-2               32.031
11-4-3               32.032
11-4-4               32.033
11-4-5               32.034
11-5-1               32.045
11-5-2               32.045
11-5-3               32.045
11-5-4               32.045
11-6-1               32.046
11-6-2               32.047
11-6-3               32.048
11-6-4               32.049
11-7-1               32.050
11-7-2               32.051
11-7-3               32.052
11-7-4               32.053
11-7-5               32.054
11-7-6               32.055
11-7-7               32.056
11-7-8               32.057
11-8-1               32.070
11-8-2               32.071
11-8-3               32.072
11-8-4               32.073
11-8-5               32.074
11-8-6               32.075
11-9-1               32.090
11-9-2               32.091
11-9-3               32.092
11-9-4               32.093
11-9-5               32.094
11-9-7               32.095
11-9-8               32.096
11-9-9               32.097
11-9-10              32.098
11-9-11              32.099
11-9-12              32.100
11-9-13              32.101
11-9-14              32.102
11-9-15              32.103
11-9-20              32.115
11-9-21              32.115
11-9-22              32.117
11-9-23              32.119
11-9-24              32.120
11-9-25              32.121
11-9-30              32.104
11-9-35              32.135
11-9-36              32.136
11-9-37              32.137
11-9-38              32.138
11-9-39              32.139
11-9-40              32.140
11-9-41              32.141
11-9-42              32.142
11-9-43              32.143
11-9-44              32.144
11-9-45              32.144
11-9-46              32.144
11-9-47              32.146
11-9-50              32.147
11-9-51              32.148
11-9-52              32.149
11-9-53              32.146
11-9-54              32.150
11-9-55              32.151
11-9-56              32.152
11-9-57              32.135
11-10-1              32.165
11-10-2              32.166
11-10-3              32.167
11-11-1              32.168
11-11-2              32.169
11-11-3              32.170
11-11-4              32.171
11-11-5              32.172
11-13-1              32.185
11-13-2              32.186
11-13-3              32.187
11-14-1              32.200
11-14-2              32.201
11-14-3              32.201
11-14-4              32.202
11-14-5              32.203
11-14-6              32.204
11-14-7              32.205
11-14-8              32.206
11-14-9              32.207
11-15-1              32.004
11-15-2              32.058
11-15-3              32.058
13-1-1               35.001
13-1-2               35.002
13-1-3               35.003
13-1-4               35.004
13-1-5               35.005
13-1-6               35.006
13-1-7               35.007
13-1-8               35.008
13-1-9               35.009
13-1-10              35.010
13-1-11              35.011
13-1-12              35.012
14-1-1               152.001
14-1-2               152.002
14-1-3               152.003
14-1-4               152.004
14-1-5               152.005
14-1-6               152.006
14-1-7               152.007
14-1-8               152.008
14-1-9               152.009
14-1-10              152.010
14-1-11              152.011
14-1-12              152.999
14-1-13              152.012
15-1-1               33.096
15-1-2               33.095
15-1-3               33.095
15-1-4               33.097
15-1-5               33.097
15-1-6               33.097
15-1-7               33.098
15-1-8               33.098
15-1-9               33.099
15-1-10              33.100
15-1-11              33.101
15-1-12              33.102
15-1-13              33.097
15-1-14              33.103
15-1-15              33.104
16-1-1               51.001
16-1-2               51.020
16-1-3               51.021
16-1-4               51.022
16-1-5               51.002
16-1-6               51.003
16-1-7               51.004
16-1-8               51.005
16-1-9               51.006
16-1-10              51.023
16-1-11              51.007
16-1-12              51.024
16-2-1               51.035
16-2-2               51.036
16-2-3               51.037
16-2-4               51.037
16-2-5               51.037
16-3-1               51.008
Ch. 20, Exhibit A    Ch. 52, App. A
20-1-1               52.003
20-1-2               52.001
20-1-3               52.002
20-1-4               52.003
20-1-5               52.004
20-1-6               52.003
20-1-7               52.003
20-1-8               52.004
20-1-9               52.005
20-1-10              52.005
20-1-11              52.005
20-1-12              52.005
21-1-1               115.001
21-2-1               115.015
21-2-2               115.016
21-2-3               115.017
21-2-4               115.018
21-2-5               115.019
21-2-6               115.020
21-2-7               115.021
21-2-8               115.022
21-2-9               115.023
21-2-10              115.024
21-2-11              115.025
21-3-1               115.040
21-3-2               115.040
21-3-3               115.041
21-3-4               115.042
21-3-5               115.041
21-3-6               115.043
21-3-7               115.044
21-3-8               115.043
21-3-9               115.041
21-3-10              115.045
21-3-11              115.046
21-3-12              115.047
21-3-13              115.048
21-3-14              115.049
21-3-15              115.048
21-3-16              115.050
21-3-17              115.051
21-3-18              115.052
21-3-19              115.053
21-3-20              115.054
21-3-21              115.054
21-3-22              115.070
21-3-23              115.071
21-3-24              115.072
21-3-25              115.055
21-3-26              115.054
21-3-27              115.056
21-3-28              115.057
21-3-29              115.058
21-3-30              115.073
21-3-31              115.073
21-3-32              115.074
21-3-33              115.075
21-3-34              115.076
21-4-1               115.090
21-4-2               115.091
21-4-3               115.092
21-4-4               115.092
21-4-5               115.093
21-4-6               115.094
21-4-7               115.095
21-4-8               115.096
21-4-9               115.097
21-4-10              115.096;
                     115.999
21-4-11              115.098
21-4-12              115.099
21-4-13              115.099
Ch. 22               Ch. 33, App. A
22-1-1               33.001
22-1-2               33.001
22-1-3               33.002
22-1-4               33.003
22-1-5               33.004
22-1-6               33.005
22-1-8               33.020
22-1-9               33.021
22-1-10              33.022
22-1-11              33.023
22-1-12              33.024
22-1-13              33.025
22-1-14              33.026
22-1-15              33.999
22-1-16              33.027
22-1-17              33.024
22-2-1               32.116
22-3-1               33.040
22-3-2               33.041
22-3-3               33.042
22-3-4               33.043
22-3-5               33.044
22-3-6               33.045
22-3-7               33.046
22-3-8               33.047
22-4-1               35.165
22-4-2               35.165
22-4-3               35.166
22-4-4               35.167
22-4-5               35.168
22-4-6               35.169
22-4-7               35.170
22-4-8               35.171
22-4-9               35.172
22-4-10              35.173
22-4-11              35.174
22-4-12              35.175
22-4-13              35.176
22-4-14              35.177
22-4-15              35.178
22-4-16              35.165
22-5-1               33.060
22-6-1               94.001
22-6-2               94.002
22-6-3               94.003
22-6-4               94.999
22-7-1               33.075
22-7-2               33.076
22-7-3               33.077
22-7-4               33.078
22-7-5               33.079;
                     33.999
22-7-6               33.080;
                     33.999
22-7-7               33.081
23-1-1               151.001
23-1-2               151.002
23-1-3               151.003
23-1-4               151.004
23-1-5               151.005
23-1-7               151.021
23-1-8               151.022
23-1-9               151.023
23-1-10              151.024
23-2-1               151.035
23-2-2               151.036
23-2-3               151.037
23-2-4               151.038
23-2-5               151.039
23-2-6               151.040
23-3-1               151.055
23-3-2               151.056
23-3-3               151.057
23-3-4               151.058
23-3-5               151.059
23-3-6               151.060
23-3-7               151.058
23-3-8               151.061
23-3-10              151.075
23-3-11              151.076
23-3-12              151.077
23-3-13              151.078
23-3-17              151.079
23-3-18              151.080
23-3-21              151.062
Ch. 24               Ch. 72, App. A
Ch. 24, Schd. A      Ch. 75, Schd. I
Ch. 24, Schd. B      Ch. 75, Schd. II
Ch. 24, Schd. C      Ch. 75, Schd. I
Ch. 24, Schd. F      Ch. 76, Schd. I
Ch. 24, Schd. H      Ch. 76, Schd. II
Ch. 24, Schd. I      Ch. 76, Schd. III
Ch. 24, Schd. J      Ch. 75, Schd. IV
Ch. 24, Schd. L      Ch. 75, Schd. V
Ch. 24, Schd. O      Ch. 76, Schd. IV
Ch. 24, Schd. P      Ch. 75, Schd. VI
24-1-1               70.001
24-2-1               70.002
24-2-2               70.003
24-2-3               70.015
24-2-4               70.016
24-2-5               70.017
24-2-6               70.018
24-2-7               74.001
24-2-8               74.002;
                     74.999
24-3-1               71.015
24-3-2               71.016
24-3-3               71.017
24-3-4               71.018
24-3-5               71.019
24-4-1               71.001
                     71.002;
24-4-2               71.030—
                     71.034
24-4-4               71.035
24-4-5               71.036
24-4-6               71.036
24-4-7               71.036
24-4-8               71.030
24-4-9               71.036
24-5-1               71.003
24-5-2               71.003
24-5-3               71.003
24-5-4               71.003
24-6-1               72.001
24-6-2               72.002
24-6-3               72.003
24-6-4               72.004;
                     72.006
24-6-5               Ch. 75, Schd. V
24-6-6               72.005
24-6-7               72.006
24-6-8               72.006
24-6-9               72.006
24-6-10              Ch. 75, Schd. VI
24-7-1               73.001
24-7-2               73.002
24-7-3               73.003
24-7-4               73.003
24-7-5               73.004
24-7-6               73.005
24-7-7               73.006
24-7-8               73.007
24-7-9               73.007
24-7-11              73.008
24-7-13              73.009
24-7-14              73.010
24-7-15              73.999
24-8-1               70.030
24-8-2               70.031
24-8-4               70.032
24-8-5               70.033
24-8-6               70.034
24-8-7               70.034
24-8-8               70.035
24-8-9               70.036
24-9-1               74.015
24-9-2               74.015
24-9-3               74.016
24-9-4               74.017
24-9-5               74.999
24-9-6               74.018
24-10-1              Ch. 75, Schd. III
Ch. 25, App. A       91.050—
                     91.055
25-1-1               91.001
25-1-2               91.002
25-1-3               91.035
25-1-4               91.015
25-1-5               91.016
25-1-6               91.017
25-1-7               91.018
25-1-8               91.019
25-2-1               91.036
25-2-2               91.036
25-2-3               91.036
25-2-4               91.036
25-2-5               91.036;
                     91.999
25-2-6               91.036
25-2-7               91.036
25-2-8               91.036
25-3-1               91.037
25-3-2               91.037
25-3-3               91.037
25-3-4               91.037
25-3-5               91.037
25-3-6               91.037
25-3-7               91.037
25-4-1               91.050
25-4-2               91.051
25-4-3               91.052
25-4-4               91.053
25-4-5               91.053
25-4-6               91.054
25-4-7               91.055
25-5-1               91.020
25-5-2               91.070
25-5-3               91.071
25-5-4               91.072
25-5-5               91.073
27-1-1               130.001
27-1-2               130.002
27-2-1               130.015
27-2-2               130.016
27-2-3               132.022
27-2-4               132.020
27-2-5               131.016
27-2-6               130.050
27-2-7               130.057
27-2-8               132.098
27-2-9               132.098
27-2-10              131.013
27-2-11              130.017
27-2-12              130.017
27-2-13              130.051
27-2-14              131.014
27-2-15              130.018
27-2-16              132.097
27-2-18              132.004
27-2-19              132.004
27-2-20              132.005
27-2-21              132.006
27-2-22              130.053
27-2-23              131.015
27-2-24              130.054
27-2-25              132.007
27-2-26              130.036
27-2-27              130.036
27-2-28              131.002
27-2-29              130.055
27-2-31              132.096
27-2-32              131.011
27-2-33              131.012
27-2-34              132.023
27-2-35              130.056
27-3-1               131.001;
                     131.999
27-3-2               131.003
27-3-3               131.004
27-3-4               131.005
27-3-5               131.006
27-3-6               131.007
27-3-7               131.008
27-4-1               132.001
27-4-2               132.002
27-4-3               132.003
27-4-4               132.021
27-5-1               132.035
27-5-2               132.036
27-5-3               132.037
27-5-4               132.038
27-5-5               132.039
27-5-6               132.040
27-5-7               132.041
27-5-8               132.041
27-5-9               132.042
27-5-10              132.043
27-5-11              132.043
27-5-12              132.044
27-5-13              132.045
27-5-14              132.046
27-5-15              132.047
27-6-1               131.009
27-6-2               131.009
27-7-1               131.010
27-7-2               131.010
27-8-1               132.060
27-8-2               132.061
27-8-3               132.062
27-9-1               132.075
27-9-2               132.076
27-9-3               132.077
27-10-1              132.090
27-10-2              132.091
27-10-3              132.999
27-10-4              132.092
27-10-5              132.093
27-10-6              132.094
27-10-7              132.095
27-10-7              132.999
27-11-1              130.030
27-11-2              130.031
27-11-3              130.032
27-11-4              130.033
27-11-5              130.034
27-11-6              130.999
27-11-7              130.034
27-12-1              130.003
Ch. 28               Ch. 92, App. A; Ch. 94, App. B
28-1-1               92.001
28-1-2               92.002
28-1-3               92.003
28-1-4               92.004
28-1-5               92.005
28-1-6               92.006
28-1-7               92.007
28-1-8               92.008
28-1-9               92.009
28-1-10              92.010
28-1-11              92.012
28-1-12              92.013
29-1-1               150.001
29-1-2               150.002
29-1-3               150.003
29-1-4               150.002
29-1-5               150.004
29-1-6               150.004
29-1-7               150.004
29-1-8               150.004
29-1-9               150.004
29-1-10              150.004
29-1-11              150.004
29-1-12              150.004
29-1-14              150.040
29-1-15              150.041
29-1-16              150.042
29-1-17              150.043
29-1-18              150.044
29-1-19              150.044
29-1-21              150.006
29-1-22              150.006
29-1-23              150.006
29-1-24              150.006
29-1-25              150.006
29-1-26              150.006
29-1-27              150.006
29-1-28              150.006
29-1-30              150.020
29-1-31              150.020
29-1-32              150.020
29-1-33              150.020
29-1-35              150.008
29-1-36              150.008
29-1-37              150.008
29-1-38              150.008
29-1-39              150.008
29-1-40              150.008
29-1-41              150.021
29-1-42              150.021
29-1-43              150.021
29-1-44              150.021
29-1-45              150.021
29-1-47              150.022
29-1-48              150.022
29-1-49              150.022
29-1-50              150.022
29-1-51              150.022
29-1-60              150.023
29-1-61              150.023
29-1-62              150.023
29-1-63              150.023
29-1-64              150.023
29-1-65              150.023
29-1-67              150.024
29-1-68              150.024
29-1-69              150.024
29-1-70              150.024
29-1-72              150.025
29-1-73              150.025
29-1-74              150.025
29-1-75              150.025
29-1-76              150.025
29-1-77              150.025
29-1-78              150.025
29-1-79              150.025
29-2-1               150.007
29-2-2               150.007
29-2-3               150.007
29-2-4               150.007
29-2-5               150.007
29-2-6               150.007
29-3-1               150.026
29-3-2               150.026
29-3-3               150.026
29-3-5               150.055
29-3-6               150.056
29-3-7               150.057
29-3-8               150.058
29-3-9               150.059
29-3-10              150.060
29-3-11              150.061
29-3-12              150.062
29-3-13              150.063
29-3-15              150.075
29-3-18              150.090
29-3-19              150.091
29-3-20              150.092
29-3-21              150.093
29-3-22              150.094
29-3-23              150.094
29-3-24              150.095
29-3-25              150.096
29-3-26              150.097
29-3-27              150.098
29-3-28              150.099
29-3-29              150.100
29-3-30              150.101
29-3-31              150.102
29-3-32              150.103
29-3-33              150.104
29-3-34              150.104
29-3-35              150.105
29-3-37              150.120
29-3-38              150.121
29-3-39              150.122
29-3-40              150.123
29-3-41              150.124
29-3-42              150.125
29-3-44              150.100;
                     150.124
29-3-46              150.140
29-3-47              150.141
29-3-48              150.141
29-3-50              150.142
29-3-51              150.143
29-3-52              150.143
29-3-53              150.143
29-3-54              150.143
29-4-1               150.155
29-4-2               150.156
29-4-3               150.157
29-4-5               150.158
29-4-6               150.158
29-4-7               150.158
29-4-9               150.159
29-4-10              150.159
29-4-11              150.159
29-4-12              150.159
29-4-13              150.159
29-4-15              150.160
29-4-16              150.160
29-4-17              150.160
29-4-18              150.160
29-4-19              150.160
29-4-20              150.160
29-4-21              150.160
29-5-1               150.175
29-5-2               150.176
29-5-4               150.177
29-5-5               150.177
29-5-6               150.177
29-5-7               150.177
29-5-9               150.178
29-5-10              150.178
29-5-11              150.178
29-5-12              150.178
29-5-14              150.179
29-5-15              150.179
29-5-16              150.179
29-5-18              150.180
29-5-19              150.180
29-5-20              150.180
29-5-21              150.180
29-5-23              150.181
29-5-24              150.181
29-5-26              150.182
29-6-1               150.195
29-6-2               150.196
29-6-4               150.197
29-6-5               150.197
29-6-6               150.197
29-6-7               150.197
29-6-8               150.197
29-6-10              150.198
29-6-11              150.198
29-6-12              150.198
29-6-13              150.198
29-6-14              150.198
29-6-15              150.198
29-6-17              150.199
29-6-18              150.199
29-6-19              150.199
29-6-21              150.200
29-6-22              150.200
29-6-23              150.200
29-6-25              150.201
29-6-26              150.201
29-6-28              150.202
29-7-1               150.215
29-7-2               150.216
29-7-4               150.217
29-7-5               150.217
29-7-6               150.217
29-7-7               150.217
29-7-9               150.218
29-7-10              150.218
29-7-12              150.219
29-7-13              150.219
29-7-14              150.219
29-7-15              150.219
29-8-1               150.005
29-9-1               150.230
29-9-2               150.231
29-9-3               150.232
29-9-4               150.233
29-9-5               150.234
29-9-6               150.235
29-9-7               150.235
30-1-1               34.001
30-1-2               34.002
30-1-3               34.003
30-1-4               34.004
30-1-5               34.005
30-1-6               34.006
30-2-1               34.050
30-2-2               34.051
30-2-3               34.051
30-2-4               34.052
30-2-5               34.050
30-2-6               34.052
30-2-7               34.054
30-2-8               34.055
30-2-9               34.056
30-3-1               34.021
30-3-2               34.022
30-3-3               34.020
30-3-4               34.023
30-3-5               34.024
30-3-6               34.025
30-3-7               34.026
30-3-8               34.027
30-3-9               34.028
Ch. 33, Ch. 25       Ch. 93, App. A;
                     Ch. 93, App. B
33-1-1               93.001
33-1-2               93.001
33-2-1               93.002
33-2-2               93.013
33-2-3               93.003
33-2-4               93.004
33-2-5               93.005
33-2-6               93.006
33-2-7               93.025
33-2-8               93.026
33-2-9               93.027
33-3-1               93.040
33-3-2               93.041
33-3-3               93.042
33-3-4               93.042
33-3-5               93.043
33-3-6               93.044
33-3-7               93.045
33-3-8               93.046
33-3-9               93.044
33-4-1               93.060
33-4-2               93.061
33-4-3               93.062
33-4-4               93.063
33-4-5               93.064
33-4-6               93.065
33-4-7               93.066
33-4-8               93.067
33-4-9               93.068
33-5-1               93.095
33-5-2               93.096
33-5-3               93.097
33-6-1               93.110
33-6-2               93.111
33-6-3               93.111
33-6-4               93.111
33-6-5               93.112
33-6-6               93.113
33-6-7               93.113
33-6-8               93.113
33-7-1               93.125
33-7-2               93.125
33-7-3               93.126
33-7-4               93.127
33-7-5               93.128
33-7-6               93.129
33-8-1               93.140
33-8-2               93.141
33-8-3               93.142
33-8-4               93.143
33-9-1               155.001
33-9-2               155.001
33-9-3               155.001
33-9-4               155.001
33-9-5               155.002
33-9-6               155.004
33-9-7               155.005
33-9-8               155.006
33-9-9               155.007
Ch. 34, Schd. P      Ch. 76, Schd. I
Ch. 34, Table 5-A    153.137
34-1-1               153.001
34-1-2               153.002
34-1-3               153.003
34-1-4               153.004
34-1-5               153.005
34-1-6               153.006
34-2-1               153.007
34-2-2               153.007
34-3-1               153.040
34-3-2               153.041
34-3-3               153.042
34-3-4               153.043
34-3-5               153.044
34-3-6               153.045
34-4-1               153.020
34-4-2               153.021
34-4-3               153.022
34-4-4               153.023
34-4-5               153.024
34-4-6               153.025
34-4-7               153.025;
                     153.999
34-4-8               153.999
34-5-1               153.130
34-5-2               153.130
34-5-4               153.131
34-5-6               153.131
34-5-7               153.132
34-5-8               153.133
34-5-9               153.134
35-4-7               35.999
35-5-5               153.131
36-1-1               35.025
36-1-2               35.026
36-1-3               35.027
36-1-4               35.028
36-1-5               35.029
36-1-6               35.029
36-1-7               35.030
36-1-8               35.031
36-1-9               35.032
36-2-1               35.056
36-2-2               35.056
36-2-3               35.056
36-2-4               35.056
36-2-5               35.055
36-2-6               35.056
36-2-7               35.056
36-2-8               35.056
36-2-9               35.056
36-3-1               35.070
36-3-2               35.071
36-3-3               35.072
36-3-4               35.073
36-3-5               35.074
36-3-6               35.075
36-3-7               35.076
36-3-8               35.077
36-3-9               35.078
36-4-1               35.090
36-4-2               35.091
36-4-3               35.092
36-4-4               35.093
36-4-5               35.094
36-4-6               35.095
36-5-1               35.110
36-5-2               35.111
36-5-3               35.112
36-5-4               35.113
36-5-5               35.114
36-5-6               35.115
36-6-1               35.130
36-6-2               35.131
36-6-3               35.132
36-6-4               35.133
36-6-5               35.134
Ch. 38, App. A       Ch. 54, App. A
Ch. 38, App. B       Ch. 54, App. B
Ch. 38, App. A and B Ch. 54, App. I
Ch. 38, App. C       Ch. 54, App. C
Ch. 38, App. C1      Ch. 54, App. C1
Ch. 38, App. C2      Ch. 54, App. C2
Ch. 38, App. D       Ch. 54, App. D
Ch. 38, App. E       Ch. 54, App. E
Ch. 38, App. F       Ch. 54, App. F
Ch. 38., App. G      Ch. 54, App. G
Ch. 38., App. H      Ch. 54, App. H
38-1-1               50.001
38-1-2               50.002
38-2-1               50.015
38-2-1               50.999
38-2-2               50.016
38-2-3               50.017
38-2-4               50.018
38-2-5               50.019
38-2-6               50.020
38-2-7               53.035
38-3-1               53.001
38-3-2               53.002
38-3-3               53.015
38-3-4               53.016
38-3-5               53.019
38-3-6               53.020
38-3-7               53.017
38-3-8               53.045
38-3-9               53.036
38-3-11              53.038
38-3-12              53.039
38-3-13              53.040
38-3-14              53.041
38-3-15              53.042
38-3-16              53.043
38-3-18              53.044
38-3-20              53.045
38-3-21              53.046
38-3-22              53.047
38-3-23              53.048
38-3-31              53.060
38-3-32              53.061
38-3-33              53.062
38-3-34              53.063
38-3-35              53.064
38-3-36              53.065
38-3-41              53.080
38-3-42              53.081
38-3-43              53.082
38-3-44              53.083
38-3-45              53.084
38-3-46              53.085
38-3-47              53.086
38-3-48              53.087
38-3-49              53.087
38-3-50              53.088
38-3-51              53.089
38-3-52              53.090
38-3-53              53.091
38-3-61              53.106
38-3-62              53.107
38-3-63              53.108
38-3-64              53.105
38-3-65              53.109
38-3-70              53.120
38-3-71              53.121
38-3-72              53.122
38-3-73              53.123
38-3-74              53.124
38-3-75              53.125
38-3-76              53.126
38-3-77              53.127
38-3-78              53.128
38-3-80, Exhibit A   TSO Table II
38-3-81              53.129
38-5-1               54.001
38-5-5               54.066
38-5-6               54.066
38-5-7               54.002;
                     54.020
38-5-8               54.002
39-1-1               70.050
39-1-4               70.052
39-1-5               70.053
39-1-7               70.054
39-1-8               70.055
39-1-9               70.055
Ch. 40               Ch.40, App. A; Ch. 40, App. B; Ch. 40, App. C; Ch. 40,
                     App. D; Ch. 40, App. E
40-1-1               154.001
40-1-2               154.002
40-1-3               154.003
40-1-4               154.004
40-1-5               154.005
40-1-7               154.006
40-2-1               154.007
40-2-2               154.007
40-3-1               154.020
40-3-2               154.021
40-3-3               154.021
40-3-4               154.022
40-3-5               154.023
40-3-6               154.024
40-3-7               154.024
40-3-8               154.025
40-3-9               154.026
40-4-1               154.065
40-4-2               154.066
40-4-3               154.067
40-4-4               154.068
40-4-5               154.069
40-4-7               154.080
40-4-8               154.081
40-4-9               154.082
40-5-1               154.190
40-5-2               154.191
40-5-3               154.192
40-5-4               154.193
40-5-5               154.194
40-5-6               154.195
40-5-7               154.196
40-5-8               154.197
40-5-9               154.198
40-6-1               154.245
40-6-2               154.246
40-6-2.1             154.246
40-6-2.2             154.246
40-6-3               154.247
40-6-4               154.248
40-6-5               154.249
40-6-6               154.250
40-6-7               154.251
40-6-8               154.252
40-6-9               154.253
40-7-1               154.270
40-7-2               154.271
40-7-3               154.272
40-7-4               154.273
40-7-5               154.274
40-7-6               154.275
40-7-7               154.276
40-8-1               154.290
40-8-2               154.291
40-8-2.1             154.291
40-8-3               154.292
40-8-4               154.293
40-8-5               154.294
40-8-6               154.295
40-9-1               154.310
40-9-2               154.311
40-9-3               154.312
40-9-4               154.313
40-9-5               154.314
40-9-6               154.315
40-9-7               154.316
40-9-8               154.317
40-9-9               154.318
                     
 
REFERENCES TO ORDINANCES
Ord. No. Date Passed Code Section
Ord. No. Date Passed Code Section
94-1     - -         Ch. 75, Schd. I
94-6     - -         Ch. 75, Schd. I
94-7     - -         Ch. 75, Schd. I
94-15    - -         Ch. 75, Schd. I;
                     Ch. 75, Schd. II
95-1     - -         Ch. 76, Schd. II
95-7     - -         Ch. 76, Schd. I
97-      - -         Ch. 76, Schd. I
97-2     - -         Ch. 76, Schd. I
02-01    - -         Ch. 75, Schd. V
04-06    - -         Ch. 75, Schd. I;
                     Ch. 76, Schd. II
06-03    - -         Ch. 76, Schd. I
08-10    - -         Ch. 76, Schd. IV
                     Ch. 75, Schd. II;
10-06    - -         Ch. 76, Schd. I;
                     Ch. 76, Schd. IV
361      - -         Ch. 76, Schd. I
366      - -         Ch. 76, Schd. III
385      - -         Ch. 75, Schd. II
423      - -         Ch. 75, Schd. II
456      - -         Ch. 75, Schd. II
526      - -         Ch. 75, Schd. IV
564      - -         Ch. 76, Schd. I
587      - -         Ch. 75, Schd. IV
600      - -         Ch. 76, Schd. I
625      - -         Ch. 75, Schd. IV
635      - -         Ch. 75, Schd. I
2016-07  - -         Ch. 75, Schd. I
10       5-13-1960   10.017
                     31.015;
414      5-3-1966    31.017—
                     31.023
15       1-1-1970    10.017
20       1-1-1980    10.017
25       1-1-1985    10.017
579      2-11-1985   115.020
570      5-2-1985    115.040
592      6-16-1986   115.043
327      - -1987     91.037
618      8-6-1990    50.002;
                     53.128
624      9-14-1990   32.031
93-2     3-15-1993   30.007
93-3     5-12-1993   30.160
                     35.070—
94-2     3-7-1994    35.078;
                     35.999
94-12    9-7-1994    52.001—
                     52.005
96-4     1-15-1996   54.105—
                     54.112
                     35.999;
96-5     1-15-1996   115.055;
                     153.999;
                     154.999
96-9     2-5-1996    30.006
96-11    3-5-1996    TSO Table I
97-3     3-17-1997   30.009
00-06    10-2-2000   30.009
01-09    9-4-2001    130.036
03-10    4-21-2003   31.016
03-21    11-17-2003  154.198;
                     154.337
                     35.110—
04-10    7-19-2004   35.115;
                     35.999
04-15    12-6-2004   130.034
05-02    5-16-2005   53.128;
                     54.152
05-08    10-17-2005  150.044;
                     150.075
05-09    11-07-2005  53.018
05-11    12-12-2005  30.161
                     150.004;
                     150.006;
06-01    1-3-2006    150.230—
                     150.235;
                     150.999
06-05    4-17-2006   35.001—
                     35.012
                     153.005;
                     153.007;
                     153.020;
                     153.021;
                     153.025;
                     153.041;
                     153.042;
                     153.045;
                     153.061—
                     153.063;
                     153.075—
                     153.077;
06-07    6-19-2006   153.079;
                     153.096;
                     153.097;
                     153.099;
                     153.116;
                     153.117;
                     153.130;
                     153.131;
                     153.138—
                     153.149;
                     153.151;
                     153.167;
                     153.187;
                     153.189
                     154.007;
                     154.020;
                     154.052;
06-08    6-19-2006   154.312;
                     154.376;
                     154.396;
                     154.421;
                     154.422
06-11    7-5-2006    150.027
06-17    9-18-2006   151.061
07-08    6-4-2007    50.020
07-10    6-18-2007   163.001;
                     163.002
07-09    7-16-2007   TSO Table I
                     54.001;
                     54.025;
                     54.040;
                     54.042;
08-01    2-4-2008    54.044;
                     54.047;
                     54.048;
                     54.050;
                     54.053
08-02    2-19-2008   150.008
                     116.001—
                     116.007;
08-03    3-3-2008    116.020—
                     116.026;
                     116.040—
                     116.044
08-07    7-7-2008    30.157
08-09    10-20-2008  33.006
09-04    8-3-2009    130.003
09-07    11-2-2009   54.148
                     32.116;
10-09    9-20-2010   32.118;
                     33.040—
                     33.047
11-211   5-17-2011   132.095;
                     132.999
11-06    7-18-2011   30.053
12-08    6-18-2012   91.073
2013-06  9-4-2013    154.203
14-08    10-6-2014   32.031
14-09    11-3-2014   154.201
                     113.001—
15-04    7-6-2015    113.008;
                     113.999
2016-04  2-1-2016    93.113
2016-06  4-4-2016    132.004
                     156.008;
16-05    6-6-2016    150.021;
                     156.135
16-08    6-6-2016    50.015;
                     50.999
17-01    2-6-2017    90.022
2017-01  2-6-2017    90.075;
                     90.076
2017-04  3-20-2017   132.004
2017-05  3-20-2017   Ch. 75, Schd. III
17-08    6-5-2017    50.021;
                     54.148
                     33.075—
2018-01  1-2-2018    33.081;
                     33.999
2018-02  2-5-2018    91.050—
                     91.055
18-03    5-7-2018    53.129
2018-03  5-7-2018    TSO Table II
2018-04  6-4-2018    32.059
2018-06  7-2-2018    TSO Table I
                     116.055—
                     116.063;
2018-08  8-6-2018    Ch. 116, App. A;
                     Ch. 116, App. B;
                     Ch. 116, App. C;
                     Ch. 116, App. D
2018-09  8-6-2018    TSO Table II
                     154.068;
                     154.083;
                     154.097;
                     154.112;
2018-10  8-20-2018   154.220—
                     154.230;
                     154.148;
                     154.163;
                     154.999
2018-12  11-5-2018   31.001;
                     31.002
2019-01  2-4-2019    35.130—
                     35.135
                     35.090—
2019-02  2-4-2019    35.095;
                     35.999
2019-03  2-4-2019    30.105
2019-04  3-4-2019    115.020;
                     115.077
2019-06  9-3-2019    TSO Table II
2019-08  10-21-2019  35.150—
                     35.152
                     74.015—
2019-10  10-21-2019  74.018;
                     74.999
2021-04  6-14-2021   TSO Table I
2021-05  9-13-2021   Ch. 76, Schd. I
2022-02  8-8-2022    115.020;
                     115.077
2023-02  7-10-2023   Ch. 75, Schd. I
23-03    9-7-2023    30.162
24-04    6-3-2024    90.076
2024-07  8-21-2024   30.046;
                     30.053
                     32.045;
2024-09  11-20-2024  32.049;
                     32.058
2024-10  11-20-2024  90.002
2024-11  11-20-2024  TSO Table I
2024-12  11-20-2024  35.003
                     72.006;
2024-13  11-20-2024  72.999;
                     74.002
2024-14  11-20-2024  91.050
2024-15  11-20-2024  130.054;
                     132.004
                     50.021;
2024-16  11-20-2024  53.016;
                     54.021
2024-17  11-20-2024  93.113
2024-18  11-20-2024  32.116
2024-19  12-2-2024   151.075
25-04    6-2-2025    30.046
25-06    7-21-2025   53.019;
                     54.004
25-08    8-18-2025   150.075
                    
 
 
